Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions; Construal of Provisions; General Penalty
[Adopted 12-12-1967 by Ord. No. 3-67; amended in its entirety
3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90 (Ch. 1, Art. I of the 1990 Code)]
§ 1-1. Definitions.
As used in this Code, and in the interpretation and application of all other
ordinances hereafter adopted, unless otherwise specifically defined or
unless the context clearly indicates a contrary intent, the following words
and terms shall include the meanings given herein:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Township Administrator as appointed by the
Township Committee.
CLERK — The Township Clerk appointed by the Township
Committee.[Amended 11-17-2010 by Ord. No. 15-10]
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — The Township Administrator and/or
his/her duly authorized designee, which may include the Township Zoning
Officer, who shall be responsible for enforcing those provisions of the
Code, where a Township official, employee, or department is not otherwise
designated in the Code or under state law as the person or entity
responsible for enforcement. The Code Enforcement Official's duties and
responsibilities shall include designating Township employees and/or
officials to conduct field investigations and to issue summonses to persons
found in violation of the Code.[Added 11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 12-14]
COMMITTEE — The Township Committee consisting of five members duly
elected pursuant to law.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the Township government
established or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department
together with any agency or instrumentality of the Township government
assigned to such organizational unit by the Township Committee.
MONTH — A calendar month.
N.J.S.A. (New Jersey Statutes Annotated), N.J.S. (New Jersey Statutes) OR
R.S. (Revised Statutes) — The Statutes of New Jersey.[Amended
11-17-2010 by Ord. No. 15-10]
ORDINANCE — An act of Township legislation, including this Code, so long
as it shall have been adopted by the procedure required for the adoption of
an ordinance and so long as it shall remain in force and effect pursuant to
law.
OWNER — As applied to a building or land, a part owner, corporation,
tenant in partnership, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON — Any corporation, company, firm, partnership, association,
society, organization, political body or other legal entity, as well as an
individual.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
PUBLIC PLACE — A road, as defined herein, or a public park, square, space,
ground, building or any other public property or place dedicated to the
public use, including but not limited to a schoolhouse, church, firehouse,
community house or store.
ROAD — The full width of the area dedicated to public use or subject to
public easement, extending from the lot line on one side to the lot line on
the other side, including the roadway of any public highway, avenue, street,
lane, alley, driveway, sidewalk, footpath, culvert, bridge or other public way.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Harding in the County of Morris and State
of New Jersey.
WRITING and WRITTEN — Include printing, typewriting and any other
mode of communication using paper or similar material, as well as legible
handwriting.
YEAR — A calendar year.
§ 1-2. Construal of provisions.
In the construction of this Code and of all other ordinances hereafter
adopted, the following rules of construction shall be observed unless the
context clearly indicates a contrary intent:
A. And and or. The words "and" and "or" may be interchanged if the sense
requires.
B. Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter
genders.
C. Number. The singular number includes the plural number, and the
plural includes the singular.
D. Shall and may. "Shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive.
E. Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future includes the present.
F. Time. The hours referred to shall be the prevailing time in the State of
New Jersey.
G. Computation of time. In computing any period of time within which an
act is to be done, the day of the act or event after which the designated
period begins to run is to be excluded. The last day of the period so
computed is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal
holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day
which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.
§ 1-1 HARDING CODE § 1-3
1:4
§ 1-3. General penalty. [Amended 9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 12-99;
8-13-2003 by Ord. No. 17-03; 3-1-2006 by Ord. No. 6-06; 11-17-2010
by Ord. No. 15-10]
The following penalty provisions apply to ordinances enacted by the
Township Committee:
A. Maximum penalty. Except as set forth in Subsection C below, the
maximum penalty for violation of any provisions of this chapter, any
other chapter of this Code or any other ordinance of the Township,
unless another penalty is included within the chapter, article or
ordinance, the maximum penalty, upon conviction, shall be one or more
of the following: imprisonment in the county jail or in any place
provided by the municipality for the detention of prisoners, for any term
not exceeding 90 days; or by a fine not exceeding $2,000; or by a period
of community service not exceeding 90 days.
B. A minimum penalty not exceeding $100 shall apply for any and all
violations of any section of the Code of the Township of Harding.
C. The violation of any ordinance or section of the Code pertaining to the
unlawful disposal of solid waste shall be subject to a minimum penalty
not exceeding $2,500 or a maximum penalty not exceeding $10,000.
D. The court shall have the power to impose any fine, term of
imprisonment, or period of community service not less than the
minimum and not exceeding the maximum set forth in this section upon
any person convicted of violating any section of the within Code or
ordinances of the Township of Harding.
E. Any person convicted of violating an ordinance and/or a section of this
Code within one year of the date of a previous violation of the same
ordinance and/or a section of this Code and who was fined for the
previous violation, shall be sentenced by the court to an additional fine
as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the court upon a
person for a repeated offense shall not be less than the minimum or
exceed the maximum fine established in this section, but shall be
calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of the
ordinance and/or section of this Code.
F. The Township of Harding may waive the additional fine by ordinance or
resolution for a repeated violation of any ordinance and/or section of
the Code. Any person convicted of the violation of any ordinance and/or
section of the Code in the discretion of the court and in default of the
payment of any fine imposed therefor, shall be imprisoned in the county
jail or place of detention provided by the municipality, for any term not
exceeding 90 days, or be required to perform community service for a
period not exceeding 90 days.
G. In the event the court wishes to impose a fine in an amount greater than
$1,250 upon an owner of real property for violations of housing or
zoning codes of the Township, then and in that event a thirty-day grace
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:5
period shall be provided to said owner in order to cure or abate the
violative condition, and said owner shall also be afforded an opportunity
for a hearing before a court of competent jurisdiction for an
independent determination concerning said violation. Subsequent to
the expiration of the thirty-day period, a fine greater than $1,250
may be imposed if a court has not determined otherwise or, upon
reinspection of the property the court determines that the abatement
has not been substantially completed.
H. Separate violations. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day
in which a violation of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance
of the Township exists shall constitute a separate violation.
I. The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to be an
appropriate penalty for every violation. Any lesser penalty, including a
nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular
case or a particular violation.
§ 1-3 HARDING CODE § 1-3
1:6
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code by Township Committee
[Adopted 11-17-2010 by Ord. No. 15-10]
§ 1-4. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Harding of
a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township Committee of the
Township of Harding, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 388,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as the "Code of the Township of Harding," hereinafter known and
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-5. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-6. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-7. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Harding by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-8. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Harding" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:7
§ 1-9. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Harding, pursuant to law, shall cause this
Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the
public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-10. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-11. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
authorized by the Township. The Clerk shall also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-12. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township
of Harding to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $1,250, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-13. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-9 HARDING CODE § 1-14
1:8
§ 1-14. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-15. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-16. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-15 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 6-18-2010.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9
§ 1-17. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Committee that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.1 (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)
C. The following nomenclature changes are executed:
(1) "Construction Code Official" is changed to "Construction Official."
(2) "Soil Conservation Service" is changed to "Natural Resources
Conservation Service."
(3) "Dog Warden" is changed to "Animal Control Officer."
(4) "Treasurer" is changed to "Chief Financial Officer."
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-17B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 11-17-2010 by Ord. No.
15-10." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 1-16 HARDING CODE § 1-17
1:10
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 38.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 140.
Land use and development — See Ch. 225.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:11

ARTICLE I
Township Committee
§ 7-1. Composition; election of members; terms of office.
The Township Committee shall consist of five members elected at large by a
plurality of the votes cast at the general election. (The general election shall
be held on the Tuesday next after the first Monday in November in each
year.) Each member shall hold office for a term of three years, commencing
at 12:00 noon on January 1 next succeeding his election.
§ 7-2. Powers.
The Township Committee shall exercise all legislative powers of the
Township pursuant to law.
§ 7-3. Meetings.
A. Annual meeting. The Township Committee shall hold an annual meeting
on January 1 of each year at 12:00 noon or during the first seven days of
January in any year, at which time it will organize for the ensuing year.
B. Regular meetings. The Committee shall meet regularly thereafter on
the first and second Mondays of each month at 8:00 p.m. at the
Municipal Building, except that the Committee may, by resolution,
dispense with or change the date or place of a regular meeting. When
the time for any regular meeting of the Committee falls on a legal
holiday as prescribed by law, such meeting shall be held at the same
hour on some other day of the week at the convenience of the
Committee. [Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90]
C. Special meetings. A special meeting may be called upon written request
of a majority of the members of the Committee or by the Mayor. The
request and call for a special meeting shall specify the purpose of the
meeting. The call for a special meeting shall be filed with the Clerk and
served upon each Committee member as hereinafter provided at least
48 hours prior to the time for which the meeting is called. Upon the
filing of any call for a special meeting, the Clerk shall forthwith give
notice thereof by telephone to each Committee member, at such place
as he shall have previously designated for that purpose, and shall also
serve or cause to be served a written copy of the call upon each
Committee member, by delivery of a copy to him personally or by
leaving a copy at his usual place of abode. The Police Department shall
cooperate with the Clerk in effectuating such service of notice.
Notwithstanding the above provisions of this subsection, upon waiver of
notice by all members of the Committee, a special meeting may be held
without prior notice. In addition, notwithstanding the above provisions,
the requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et
seq.) shall apply and, in the event of a conflict between those provisions
and those of this subsection, shall prevail. [Amended 3-12-1990 by
Ord. No. 1-902; 11-17-2010 by Ord. No. 15-10]
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-4
1:13
§ 7-4. Quorum required.
A majority of the entire number of members of the Township Committee
shall constitute a quorum, and no action shall be taken or ordinance
adopted by the Committee without the affirmative vote of a majority of the
entire Committee. If a quorum is not present 1/2 hour after the appointed
time for any meeting, the Mayor, Vice Chairman, presiding officer or the
Clerk may declare the meeting adjourned.
§ 7-5. Roll-call votes; minutes.
The vote upon every motion, resolution or ordinance shall, when requested,
be taken by roll call, and the yeas and nays shall be entered on the minutes.
The minutes of each meeting shall be signed by the Township Clerk.
§ 7-6. Agenda of regular meetings.
The following order of business may be observed during regular meetings:
§ 7-7. Mayor.
A. Calling the roll.
B. Approval of the minutes.
C. Greeting of the public and an invitation for discussion.
D. Reports of standing committees and department heads.
E. Presentation of communications, petitions, etc.
F. Advertised hearings.
G. Introduction of ordinances.
H. Ordinances on second and third readings and final passage.
I. Resolutions.
J. Unfinished business.
K. New business.
L. Approval of vouchers.
M. Adjournment.
A. Election. At the annual meeting, the Township Committee shall elect by
majority vote one of its members as Chairman of said Committee, who
shall be known as the "Mayor," and another of its members as Vice
Chairman.
2. Editor's Note: This ordinance also deleted original Section 2-1.3(d) of the 1967 Revised
General Ordinances, Caucuses, which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 7-4 HARDING CODE § 7-7
1:14
B. Powers and duties. The Mayor shall preside at all the meetings of the
Township Committee. He shall have the power to make proclamations
concerning holidays and events of interest to the Township. He may,
from time to time, appoint citizens' committees to inquire into matters
that are of interest to the Township, and he shall have such other
appointment powers as are conferred upon him by law or the Township
Committee. He shall have and exercise the ceremonial power of the
Township. In addition to the foregoing powers and duties, he shall
exercise every other power and duty usually exercised by Township
mayors or conferred upon him by law or the Township Committee. In
the absence of the Mayor, either the Vice Chairman or, in his absence, a
temporary presiding officer elected by the Committee from among its
members shall have all the powers and duties of the Mayor.
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:15

ARTICLE II
Standing Committees of the Township Committee
[Amended 12-30-1971 by Ord. No. 9-71; 12-12-1988 by Ord. No.
12-88; 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90; 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 15-92;
4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 3-97; 6-6-2001 by Ord. No. 12-01; 6-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 13-01; 6-4-2003 by Ord. No. 11-03; 12-17-2003 by Ord. No.
24-03; 3-5-2008 by Ord. No. 2-08; 11-17-2010 by Ord. No. 15-10;
11-16-2011 by Ord. No. 14-11]
§ 7-8. Purpose; appointment.
Standing committees are to expedite and facilitate the work of the Township
Committee, but the entire Committee is responsible for any and all of its
acts. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of a majority of the Township
Committee, shall appoint members of said Committee to chair standing
committees. Among the standing committees which may be proposed at the
annual meeting are the following:
§ 7-9. Planning and Zoning Committee.
The responsibilities of the Planning and Zoning Committee shall include:
§ 7-10. Finance and Insurance Committee.
The responsibilities of the Finance and Insurance Committee shall include:
A. The Planning and Zoning Committee.
B. The Finance and Insurance Committee.
C. The Public Safety Committee.
D. The Public Health Committee.
E. The Public Works Committee.
F. The Personnel Committee.
A. Observation of administration, practices, procedures and records of the
Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. Acting as liaison between the Township Committee and the Planning
Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment and all other organizations or
agencies concerned with planning and zoning matters.
A. Examination and approval of all vouchers prior to payment.
B. Review, revision of, and all other matters pertaining to, any insurance
coverage of the Township.
C. Coordination of departmental budgets and the final preparation,
explanation and continuing supervision of the entire Township budget.
§ 7-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-10
1:17
§ 7-11. Public Safety Committee.
The responsibilities of the Public Safety Committee shall include:
§ 7-12. Public Health Committee.
The responsibilities of the Public Health Committee shall include:
§ 7-13. Public Works Committee.
The responsibilities of the Public Works Committee shall include
supervision of the administration, practices, procedures and records of road
construction, improvement, maintenance and cleaning, snow removal and
street openings, and maintenance of Township buildings, parks, equipment
and vehicles.
§ 7-14. through § 7-16. (Reserved)3
D. Acting as liaison between the Township Committee and the registered
municipal accountants and all other bodies or organizations concerned
with municipal fiscal matters.
E. Supervision of the administration, practices, procedures and records of
the Tax Assessor, Tax Collector and Chief Financial Officer.
A. Observation of administration, practices, procedures and records of:
(1) Highway traffic and all matters relating to existing or proposed
street and off-street parking and the regulation thereof.
(2) Police activities.
(3) Fire activities.
(4) Licensing and the inspection of licensed premises.
(5) Civilian defense activities.
B. Acting as liaison between the Township Committee and the State and
County Highway Departments, the Municipal Judge, the Animal Control
Officer and all other organizations or agencies concerned with public
safety, traffic safety or juvenile delinquency.
A. Supervision of the administration, practices, procedures and records of:
(1) Sanitation activities, including construction and maintenance of
sanitary sewers or septic systems.
(2) Stormwater collection and disposal.
(3) Garbage, ash and refuse collection and disposal.
B. Acting as liaison between the Township Committee and all
organizations and agencies concerned with public health and welfare.
§ 7-10 HARDING CODE § 7-14
1:18
3. Editor's Note: Former §§ 7-14 through 7-16 were moved to Art. IV. See now §§ 7-37.1
through 7-37.3.
§ 7-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-14
1:19

ARTICLE III
Township Officials
§ 7-17. Township Clerk.4
§ 7-18. Tax Collector.
A. Appointment; term of office. There shall be a Township Clerk appointed
by the Township Committee for a term of three years as per N.J.S.A.
40A:9-133. [Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90; 11-17-2010 by
Ord. No. 15-10]
B. Powers and duties. The Township Clerk shall:
(1) Perform all of the functions required of municipal clerks by the
General Election Law,5 as amended and supplemented, and by any
other state law or Township ordinance and receive the fees
prescribed therefor for the use of the Township.
(2) Keep all records, resolutions, ordinances and minutes of the
meetings of the Township Committee.
(3) See to it that all ordinances and notices of the Township are
properly advertised.
(4) Take care of all of the correspondence of the Township and of the
Township Committee.
(5) Issue all licenses required by law or ordinance and faithfully make
all reports required by law or ordinance to the Township
Committee and account monthly for all fees received by him.
(6) Until such time as a separate Alcoholic Beverage Control Board
may be established pursuant to law, issue such licenses as may be
authorized by the Township Committee pursuant to the State
Alcoholic Beverage Control Law (N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 to 33:4-1), as
amended and supplemented, as well as the ordinances of the
Township.
(7) Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and
duties as may be prescribed by law or ordinance.
A. Appointment; term of office. The Tax Collector shall be appointed by the
Township Committee. The person shall hold office for a term of four
years commencing at 12:00 noon on January 1 of the year next
following his appointment. [Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90]6
4. Editor's Note: Original § 5-13, Mayor, which immediately preceded this section, is now
found at § 7-7.
5. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 19:1-1 et seq.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 7-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-18
1:21
§ 7-19. Tax Assessor.
§ 7-20. Township Attorney.
B. Powers and duties. The Tax Collector shall:
(1) Perform the functions of a Tax Collector under general law,
including, without limitation thereto, the preparation and mailing
of tax bills, enforcement of tax collections by tax sales and
otherwise and the maintenance of tax accounting records in such
manner as may be prescribed or approved pursuant to ordinance;
and, in furtherance thereof, install and administer tax bill forms
which include a bill for the first two quarters of each year with the
bill for the final half of the preceding year.
(2) Receive and collect all current and delinquent real and personal
property taxes and charge and receive penalties and interest
pursuant to law.
A. Appointment; term of office. The Tax Assessor shall be appointed by the
Township Committee. He shall hold office for a term of four years,
commencing at 12:00 noon on July 1 next following his appointment.
[Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90]7
B. Powers and duties. The Tax Assessor is charged with the duty of
assessing real and personal property for taxation.
A. Appointment. A Township Attorney may be appointed by resolution of
the Township Committee to hold office until the first day of January next
following his appointment and until his successor is appointed and
qualified.
B. Powers and duties. The Township Attorney shall be the legal advisor to
the Township Committee, and to all departments except as provided
otherwise by ordinance. He shall prosecute and defend actions and
proceedings by and against the Township. In furtherance of these
general powers, and without limitation thereto, he shall:
(1) Advise the Committee as to the form and sufficiency of all
ordinances and resolutions prior to their passage.
(2) Review and approve all contracts, deeds, documents and
instruments prior to the execution thereof by or on behalf of the
Township.
(3) Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest of the Township, as he may in his discretion determine to
be necessary or desirable, or as directed by the Committee.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 7-18 HARDING CODE § 7-20
1:22
§ 7-21. Prosecutor. [Added 3-11-1996 by Ord. No. 2-96]
The position of Prosecutor is hereby established in and for the Township of
Harding. The Harding Township Committee may, by resolution, appoint a
Township Prosecutor. The Municipal Prosecutor shall be licensed to practice
law in the State of New Jersey and shall serve for a one-year term and until
his successor is appointed and qualified. The Township Prosecutor shall
have the same qualifications required of the Township Attorney and the
appointee shall have the power and duty of conducting the prosecutions as
set forth in § 7-20B(7).
(4) Subject to the approval of the Committee, have the power to enter
into any agreement, compromise or settlement of any litigation in
which the Township is involved.
(5) Render opinions, in writing, upon any question of law submitted to
him by the Committee with respect to its official powers and duties,
or the power and duties of any official of the Township.
(6) Maintain a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters
which relate to the Township's interests, and report thereon from
time to time as the Committee may require.
(7) In addition to the above powers, conduct prosecutions for crimes
and offenses cognizable by the Municipal Court of the Township
except such crimes and offenses as it may be the duty of the County
Prosecutor to prosecute, including violations of ordinances of the
Township, complaints of any department under state law and for
violations of rules or regulations duly promulgated by any
department.
(8) Have such other and different functions, powers and duties as may
be provided by ordinance.
C. Special counsel. Whenever the Township Committee deems the
interests of the Township to so require, it may on its own or at the
recommendation of the Township Attorney appoint special counsel to do
such jobs as it shall assign to him. If the Township Attorney should be
disqualified with respect to any matter, the Committee, on its own or at
the recommendation of the Township Attorney, shall appoint special
counsel to represent the Township for and with respect to such matter.
D. Records and papers. All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and
all other materials relating to its legal affairs shall be and remain the
property of the Township. Upon the termination of his services with the
Township, the Township Attorney shall forthwith surrender to his
successor all such property, together with a written consent to
substitution of any successor in all legal actions and proceedings then
pending, to which the Township is a party.
§ 7-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-22
1:23
§ 7-22. Public Defender. [Added 3-11-1996 by Ord. No. 2-96]8
The position of Public Defender is hereby established in and for the
Township of Harding. The Harding Township Committee may, by resolution,
appoint a Public Defender. The Public Defender shall be licensed to practice
law in the State of New Jersey and shall serve for a one-year term and until
his successor is appointed and qualified. The Public Defender shall have the
same qualifications required of the Township Attorney.
§ 7-23. Township Engineer.
§ 7-24. Zoning Officer.
§ 7-25. Auditor.
A. Powers and duties. The duties of the Public Defender shall be to defend
all cases within the jurisdiction of the Court brought against indigent
defendants in the Municipal Court of the Township of Harding,
whenever such defendants are entitled to such representation by law or
whenever such representation is deemed necessary or desirable in the
interest of justice and in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal
Court. In every instance, the Public Defender shall be assigned to each
case by order of the Court.
A. Appointment. A Township Engineer may be appointed by resolution of
the Township Committee to hold office for a term not exceeding three
years from the first day of January in the year in which he is appointed,
and until the appointment and qualification of his successor.
B. Powers and duties. The Township Engineer shall give advice to the
Committee and various other departments of the Township with respect
to all engineering matters.9
A. Appointment. A Zoning Officer may be appointed by resolution of the
Township Committee to hold office until the first day of January next
following his appointment and until his successor is appointed and
qualified.
B. Powers and duties. The Zoning Officer is charged with the enforcement
of the zoning regulations. (See Chapter 225.) [Amended 2-4-1985 by
Ord. No. 2-85]10
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
9. Editor's Note: Original Section 2-3.7 of the 1967 Revised General Ordinances, Building
Inspector, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 12-30-1976 by Ord. No.
12-76.
10.Editor's Note: Original Section 2-3.9 of the 1967 Revised General Ordinances, Plumbing
Inspector, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 12-30-1976 by Ord. No.
12-76. Original § 5-20, Treasurer, which immediately followed this section, was deleted at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 7-22 HARDING CODE § 7-25
1:24
§ 7-26. Deputy Township officials. [Added 10-14-1969 by Ord. No.
3-69; amended 12-30-1971 by Ord. No. 9-71]
§ 7-27. Administrators of Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment. [Added 2-4-1985 by Ord. No. 2-85; amended 9-5-2001
by Ord. No. 17-01]
§ 7-28. Township Administrator. [Added 7-7-1986 by Ord. No. 6-86]
A. Appointment. An Auditor who holds an uncanceled license as a
registered municipal accountant of New Jersey shall be authorized by
the Township Committee to make an annual audit of the Township's
books, accounts and financial transactions, such audit to be completed
within five months after the close of the Township's fiscal year and in
accordance with the Local Fiscal Affairs Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 to
40A:5A2), as amended and supplemented.
B. Scope of audit. Each audit shall embrace the books, accounts and
transactions of the Township and every board, body, officer or
commission supported and maintained wholly or in part by funds
appropriated by the local unit, unless otherwise provided by statute or
regulations of the Board. Each audit shall cover a complete fiscal year
and, in addition, shall include a verification of all cash and bank
balances as of the date of the audit thereof and an audit of the accounts
to such date.
A. Appointment. A Deputy Township Clerk, Deputy Tax Collector, Deputy
Tax Assessor, Deputy Zoning Officer and Deputy Plumbing Inspector
may be appointed by resolution of the Township Committee.
B. Powers and duties. In the event of the absence, sickness or other
disability of the official for whom each is deputy, each deputy official
shall have all the powers and perform all of the duties of said official.
Each deputy official shall also perform such other duties as may be
designated from time to time by resolution of the Township Committee.
A. Appointment of Board Administrators. The Township Committee may
appoint an Administrator to serve the Planning Board and an
Administrator to serve the Board of Adjustment, to hold office until the
first day of January next following his or her appointment and until his
or her successor is appointed and qualified.
B. Powers and duties. The Board Administrators are charged with the
responsibility of supervising and coordinating the administration of the
Planning Board and Board of Adjustment, respectively.
A. Preamble. The day-to-day demand of the administrative and
governmental affairs of the Township upon the time of the Township
Committee has grown to the extent that it has become increasingly
difficult to devote adequate time to the proper discharge of such duties;
and a proper regard for the public interest in economical and efficient
§ 7-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-28
1:25
administration of the Township business requires the creation of a
position which will furnish to the Township Committee necessary
assistance in the prompt day-to-day management of the administrative
affairs of the Township Committee, coordination of the activities of the
various departments within the municipality and assistance in planning
and supervising the execution of the Township Committee work in those
areas where a continuous and sustained effort is required.
B. Creation of positions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136 et seq., there is
hereby created the position of Township Administrator.
C. Appointment; compensation. The Township Administrator shall be
appointed by the majority vote of the Township Committee and shall
hold office at the pleasure of the governing body of the Township. The
compensation of the Township Administrator shall be fixed by
resolution of the Township Committee in accordance with the
applicable Salary Ordinance.11
D. Removal from office. The Township Administrator may be removed by a
4/5 vote of the entire Township Committee, the resolution of removal
ordinarily to become effective three months after its adoption. The
Township Committee may provide, however, that the resolution shall
have immediate effect, provided that there shall be paid to the
Administrator forthwith any unpaid balance of his salary and his salary
for the next three calendar months following the adoption of the
resolution, unless the cause of such removal is the result of the
conviction of said Administrator of an indictable offense of a subject
matter relating to his employment.
E. Participation in political campaigns within the Township. The Township
Administrator shall not engage in any organized political campaigns
within the Township, or any other political activity which might
interfere with his effectiveness in serving the Township.
F. Residency requirements. The Township prefers that the Administrator
become a resident of the Township within a reasonable period after his
appointment and remain a resident of the Township while so employed;
provided, however, that said Administrator shall not be required to
reside within the Township of Harding.
G. Qualifications required. The Township Administrator shall be chosen on
the basis of his executive and administrative abilities and qualifications
with special regard to education, training and previous experience.
H. Duties and responsibilities of the Township Administrator. The
Township Administrator shall, under the supervision and control of the
Township Committee, perform such duties as may be requested from
time to time other than those required by law to be exercised by the
Township Committee itself or by another officer or body, and to the
11.Editor's Note: A copy of the latest Salary Ordinance may be obtained at the Township
Clerk's office.
§ 7-28 HARDING CODE § 7-28
1:26
extent not prohibited by law. Such duties and responsibilities shall
include, but not be limited to, coordination of operations, activities
and administration of the departments, divisions, offices, boards and
agencies of the Township government; exchanging and disseminating
information; and generally advising and consulting with the Township
Committee without infringing upon the lawful powers and duties of
other officers, boards and departments. In addition, the Administrator
shall have the following specific duties and responsibilities:
(1) To serve as chief administrative officer of the Township.
(2) To attend all meetings of the Township Committee as required, with
the right to participate in all discussions, but without the right to
vote.
(3) To advise the Township Committee on policy decisions.
(4) To execute all laws of the State of New Jersey and execute
ordinances and resolutions of the Township, subject to the direction
of the Township Committee.
(5) To recommend appointment of, discipline of and dismissal of all
Township employees subject to confirmation or approval by the
Township Committee.
(6) To negotiate contracts subject to the approval of the Township
Committee.
(7) To make recommendations concerning the nature and location of
Township improvements determined by the Township Committee.
(8) To recommend to the Township Committee the adoption of such
measures as he, the Administrator, may deem necessary or
expedient.
(9) To represent the Township in its relations with the federal
government, state, county and other municipalities and assess the
Township's interest in contracts, franchises and other business
transactions.
(10) To make reports to the Township Committee, including a monthly
financial report and, at the close of the year, an annual report of the
Township's governmental activities.
(11) To investigate the affairs of any officer or department at the
initiation of the Township Committee and report to the Committee
on the work of all departments.
(12) To receive and reply to all inquiries and complaints concerning
Township business, provide information and assistance in respect
thereto and, in addition, review and suggest a method for handling
and following up on all requests for information.
§ 7-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-28
1:27
(13) To establish and maintain effective personnel practices and
maintain appropriate records of all employees.
(14) To carry out all policies established by the Township Committee.
(15) To prepare the annual operating and capital budgets, in
consultation with department heads, and submit them to the
Township Committee at a date and in accordance with procedures
established by the Committee.
(16) To provide for the custody and deposit of all moneys.
(17) To supervise the disbursement of all Township funds and approve
all vouchers and bills before submitting the same to the Township
Committee for final approval.
(18) To analyze the cash needs of the Township and recommend prudent
investment of such funds as temporarily may be in excess of the
amount needed to meet Township obligations, such duties to be
discharged in consultation with the Chief Financial Officer.
(19) To develop procedures for the purchase of materials, supplies and
equipment and purchase, store and distribute all supplies,
materials and equipment and control all storerooms and
stockrooms.
(20) To act as Township purchasing agent. In such capacity, he shall
purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the governing
statutes and generally accepted purchasing practices, all supplies
and equipment for the various agencies, boards, departments and
other offices of the Township.
(21) To maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations,
work programs and cost of municipal services.
(22) To delegate to any department head such of his powers as he may
deem necessary for efficient administration.
(23) To implement and enforce the policy of the Township Committee
with respect to the compiling and release of public information.
(24) To keep the Township Committee informed as to federal aid
projects and state aid projects and any other aid programs for
which the Township may qualify.
(25) To perform such other duties as may be required by ordinance,
resolution or direction of the Township Committee.
I. Position of Administrator to be full-time. The Township Administrator
shall devote full time to the interests of the Township.
§ 7-28 HARDING CODE § 7-28.1
1:28
§ 7-28.1. Assistant Township Administrator. [Added 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 02-15]
The position of Assistant Township Administrator is hereby established in
and for the Township of Harding. An Assistant Township Administrator shall
be appointed by resolution of the Township Committee to hold office at the
pleasure of the Township Committee. The compensation of the Assistant
Township Administrator shall be fixed by resolution of the Township
Committee in accordance with the applicable salary ordinance. The
Assistant Township Administrator shall perform such duties as may be
required by ordinance or resolution or by the direction of the Township
Committee or Township Administrator.
§ 7-29. Chief Financial Officer. [Added 9-11-1989 by Ord. No. 8-89]
The position of Chief Financial Officer is hereby established in and for
the Township of Harding. The Harding Township Committee shall, by
resolution, appoint as Chief Financial Officer a person who is qualified as a
certified municipal finance officer and who holds a municipal finance officer
certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1971, c. 39, and P.L.
1988, c. 110 (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq.). The Chief Financial Officer shall
receive such compensation as is established for that position by applicable
ordinance of the Township. The Chief Financial Officer shall carry out the
responsibilities set forth under P.L. 1947, c. 151 (N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26 et
seq.).12
§ 7-30. Tree Conservation Officer. [Added 5-16-2001 by Ord. No.
11-01]
There is hereby established the position of Tree Conservation Officer, to be
appointed by the Township Committee, whose duties shall be to:
A. Administer and enforce the provisions of Chapter 225, Land Use and
Development, Article XXI, Tree Conservation, and § 225-116M, Tree
conservation.
B. Provide periodic reports to the Shade Tree Advisory Committee and
Township Committee with respect to permits issued and other actions
taken to enforce the provisions of the aforementioned Code provisions.
C. Make recommendations with respect to the administration and
enforcement of the aforementioned Code provisions to the Shade Tree
Advisory Committee, the Planning Board and Township Committee.
D. The Township Committee may appoint and designate a Deputy Tree
Conservation Officer to perform some or all of the duties of the Tree
Conservation Officer when he or she is unavailable to perform the
duties and responsibilities described above.
12.Editor's Note: Former § 5-24.2, Assistant Township Administrator, added 4-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 7-04, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 5-17-2006 by Ord. No.
13-06.
§ 7-28.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-30
1:29

ARTICLE IV
Departments, Boards, Commissions and Committees
[Amended 12-10-1968 by Ord. No. 5-68; 10-14-1969 by Ord. No.
3-69; 5-11-1971 by Ord. No. 3-71; 12-30-1971 by Ord. No. 9-71;
12-12-1972 by Ord. No. 9-72; 2-6-1973 by Ord. No. 1-73; 1-8-1974
by Ord. No. 16-73; 8-24-1976 by Ord. No. 10-76; 11-14-1977 by Ord.
No. 7-77; 11-19-1979 by Ord. No. 13-79; 2-27-1979 by Ord. No.
17-79; 3-10-1980 by Ord. No. 3-80; 12-18-1986 by Ord. No. 13-86;
3-13-1989 by Ord. No. 3-89; 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90; 12-9-1991
by Ord. No. 8-91; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 8-92; 4-12-1993 by Ord.
No. 2-93; 10-3-1994 by Ord. No. 8-94; 3-11-1996 by Ord. No. 1-96;
4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 4-03; 8-11-2004 by Ord. No. 19-04; 11-17-2010
by Ord. No. 15-10; 11-16-2011 by Ord. No. 14-11]
§ 7-31. Police Department.
A. Department continued; responsibilities.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Harding Township Police
Department heretofore established is hereby continued under the
name "Harding Township Police Department," and the Department
shall be regulated by applicable law, the provisions of this section
and the rules and regulations established pursuant to Subsection
E.
(2) The Department shall:
(a) Preserve the public peace.
(b) Protect life and property.
(c) Detect, arrest and prosecute offenders of the laws of New
Jersey and the ordinances of the Township.
(d) Direct and control traffic.
(e) Provide attendance and protection during emergencies.
(f) Provide appearances in court.
(g) Cooperate with all other law enforcement agencies.
(h) Provide training for the efficiency of its members and officers.
B. Personnel; appointment; salary; oath. The Harding Township Police
Department shall consist of a Chief of Police, one Lieutenant, five
Sergeants, not fewer than seven nor more than 12 patrolmen and such
other employees as the Township Committee shall deem necessary. All
members, officers and personnel shall be appointed by resolution of the
Township Committee and shall receive such salaries as may be specified
in the Township's Salary Ordinance.13 Every person appointed to the
Police Department shall, prior to entering on his duties, take and
§ 7-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-31
1:31
subscribe to an oath or affirmation as required by New Jersey law.
[Amended 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 02-19]
C. Powers and duties of Police Chief; line of authority. The Chief of Police
shall be the head of the Police Department and shall be directly
responsible to the Township Administrator for its efficiency and day-today
operations. Pursuant to policies established by the Township
Administrator, the Chief of Police shall:
(1) Administer and enforce rules and regulations of the Police
Department and any special emergency directive for the
disposition and discipline of the Department and its members and
officers.
(2) Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the Police Department.
(3) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers.
(4) Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the
efficient operation of the Police Department to be exercised under
the Chief's direction and control.
(5) Report at least monthly to the Township Administrator, in such
form as shall be prescribed by the Township Administrator, on the
operation of the Police Department during the preceding month,
and make such other reports as may be requested by the Township
Administrator.
D. Detective Bureau. A Detective Bureau is hereby established under the
command of the Police Chief. The Bureau shall be responsible for the
investigation of crime, arrest and prosecution of perpetrators and the
recovery of stolen property. The Chief of Police is authorized to appoint
the Head of the Detective Bureau and, from time to time, to assign to
the Bureau, or to reassign to uniform duty, other members of the Police
Department. The Head of the Bureau shall inform the Chief of Police at
all times as to the Bureau's activities and shall submit to him a written
report of each case processed by the Bureau.
E. Appropriate authority; rules and regulations. The Township
Administrator shall be, and hereby is, designated as the appropriate
authority as provided in the New Jersey Statutes. The Township
Administrator shall be responsible for the overall performance of the
Police Department and shall adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations for the government of the Police Department and for the
discipline of its members. The members of the Police Department shall
be subject to said rules, regulations and penalties. Said rules and
regulations may include but not be limited to the following subjects:
13.Editor's Note: A copy of the latest Salary Ordinance may be obtained at the Township
Clerk's office.
§ 7-31 HARDING CODE § 7-31
1:32
(1) The duties of the Police Department.
(2) General rules for operation of the Police Department.
(3) Rules of discipline.
(4) The duties of the superior officers.
(5) The procedure on arrests.
(6) Uniforms and equipment requirements.
(7) Leave of absence procedures.
(8) Special duties.
(9) The procedure for the proper enforcement of this section.
(10) Probationary patrolmen requirements.
F. Qualifications. No person shall be appointed a member of the Police
Department unless he is:
(1) A citizen of the United States.
(2) Sound in body and of good health sufficient to satisfy the Board of
Trustees of the Police and Firemen's Retirement System of New
Jersey as to eligibility for membership in the retirement system.
(3) Able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently.
(4) Of good moral character and has not been convicted of any criminal
offense involving moral turpitude.
(5) Eighteen years of age or over.
(6) A resident of New Jersey.
G. Appointments and promotions. All appointments to and promotions
within the Police Department shall be made by the Mayor and Police
Committee Chairman upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police
subject to confirmation by the Township Committee. All promotions
shall be in accordance with applicable provisions of the laws of the
State of New Jersey.
H. Probationary patrolmen. Each person hereafter appointed to the Police
Department shall have first served a probationary term, the duration of
which shall be determined in the same manner as appointments and
promotions are determined under Subsection G and shall have
successfully completed a police training course at an approved school
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:17B-66 et seq. Upon the expiration of such term,
a probationary patrolman may be appointed as a regular patrolman by
resolution of the Township Committee, or upon completion of the
§ 7-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-31
1:33
probationary period, the appointment may be terminated by resolution
of the Township Committee.
I. Special law enforcement officers. The Township Committee may
appoint from time to time special law enforcement officers in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10 et seq. for terms not exceeding
one year. They shall possess and exercise all the powers and duties
provided by said statutes during their term in office, but shall not be
considered as regular members of the Police Department and shall not
be entitled to tenure.
J. School guards. The Township Committee may, from time to time,
appoint as school guards such persons as it shall deem to be qualified
for such position. The powers and duties of school guards shall be
limited to the protection of children while on public thoroughfares in
the Township in connection with their attendance at the Township
school, and to the discretion and regulation of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic at the various street intersections and crossings where they may
be stationed. While on active duty, school guards shall be under the
jurisdiction of and subject to the orders of the officers of the Police
Department.
K. Police Physician and physical examinations.
(1) Appointment; duties. A medical doctor, authorized to practice
medicine in New Jersey, shall be appointed by the Township
Committee as the Police Physician. The Police Physician shall
examine all members of the police force or appointees to the force
whenever required by this subsection or the rules and regulations
governing the Police Department and shall report in writing the
result of such examinations with his opinions as to physical fitness
for police work of the person examined. No person shall be
appointed to the Police Department unless he has satisfactorily
passed a physical examination by the Police Physician.
(2) Annual physical. Every member of the Police Department shall be
required to have at least one physical examination by the Police
Physician annually. Such examination shall be conducted at such
time as the Chief of Police may designate. Records of said physical
examinations shall be kept on file by the Chief of Police.
(3) Psychiatric examinations. Psychiatric examinations shall be
required prior to appointment, and the provisions of Subsection
K(4) shall apply also to psychiatric examinations.
(4) Physical condition. Every member of the Police Department must
maintain himself in proper physical condition and good appearance
at all times. The Police Committee Chairman or the Chief of Police
may require any member of the Police Department to be examined
by the Police Physician when, in the opinion of said Police
Committee Chairman or Chief of Police, such member gives
evidence that he is unable to perform properly the duties of his
§ 7-31 HARDING CODE § 7-31
1:34
§ 7-32. Planning Board.
position. Nothing herein contained shall prevent such a member
from submitting supplemental evidence of his condition to be
supplied by a physician of his own selection in addition to that
required by the Police Committee Chairman or Chief as above
mentioned.
(5) Recommendations of Police Physician. Recommendations of the
Police Physician for corrective measures of physical deficiencies
interfering with the duties of a member of the Police Department
shall be followed by such member, subject to the approval of the
member's personal physician.
L. Suspensions, removal, fines and reductions. No permanent member or
officer of the Police Department shall be suspended, removed, fined or
reduced in rank for any cause other than incapacity, misconduct or
disobedience as provided in the New Jersey Statutes and the Police
Department's Rules and Regulations.
M. Private service.
(1) Policy. Members of the Police Department shall be permitted to
accept employment as safety or security personnel for private
employers during off-duty hours and at such times as will not
interfere with the efficient performance of regularly scheduled or
emergency duty for the Township. The Township's needs for said
police officer shall always take priority over scheduled off-duty
work for a private employer.
(2) Rates. Private employers shall pay to the Township of Harding,
prior to the commencement of service pursuant to the executed
agreement between the private employers and the Township of
Harding, such hourly rates as are set forth by resolution by the
Township Committee. The Township shall remit to the member of
the Police Department performing such service a portion of said
hourly rate and the balance shall be retained by the Township for
administrative expenses, all as established by resolution of the
Township Committee.
(3) Procedure. Any person or entity wishing to employ a member of the
Police Department for private service shall first obtain the approval
of the Chief of Police or his designee, which approval shall be
granted if, in the opinion of the Chief of Police or his designee, such
employment would not be inconsistent with the efficient
functioning and good reputation of the Police Department and
would not unreasonably endanger or threaten the safety of the
officer or officers who perform the work. After approval has been
obtained, the person or entity shall enter into a written agreement
with the Township which is acceptable to the Mayor and the
Committee.
§ 7-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-32
1:35
A. Composition; terms of office; vacancies. The Planning Board shall
consist of nine regular members and two alternate members (if such
alternates are appointed), divided into the following classes:
(1) Class I. The Mayor, whose term shall correspond with his official
tenure as Mayor.
(2) Class II. Regular member: one of the officials of the Township
(other than a member of the Township Committee) to be appointed
by the Mayor, whose term shall be for one year or terminate at the
completion of his or her term of office, whichever occurs first,
except for a Class II member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission. If there are among the Class IV
members or alternate members both a member of the Board of
Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education, then the
member of the Environmental Commission who is also a member of
the Planning Board shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning
Board member. The term of a Class II member who is also a
member of the Environmental Commission shall be for three years
or terminate at the completion of his or her term of office as a
member of the Environmental Commission, whichever occurs first.
(3) Class III. Regular member: A member of the Township Committee
(other than the Mayor) to be appointed by it, whose term shall be
for one year or terminate at the completion of his or her term of
office as a member of the Committee, whichever occurs first.
(4) Class IV.
(a) Regular member.
[1] Six other citizens of the Township to be appointed by the
Mayor who shall hold no other Township office, except that
one may be a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
and one may be a member of the Board of Education. A
member of the Environmental Commission who is also a
member of the Planning Board shall be a Class IV member,
unless there are among the Class IV members or alternate
members both a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education, in
which case the member of the Environmental Commission
shall be deemed to be the Class II member of the Planning
Board.
[2] The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of
the Environmental Commission shall be for three years or
terminate at the completion of his term of office as a
member of the Environmental Commission, whichever
occurs first.
[3] The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of
the Board of Adjustment or the Board of Education shall
§ 7-32 HARDING CODE § 7-32
1:36
terminate whenever he is no longer a member of such
other body or at the completion of his Class IV term,
whichever occurs first.
[4] The term of all Class IV regular members first appointed
pursuant to this subsection shall be so determined that to
the greatest practicable extent the expiration of such
terms shall be distributed evenly over the first four years
after their appointment as determined by resolution of the
Township Committee; provided, however, that the term of
no regular member shall exceed four years, and further
provided that nothing herein shall affect the term of any
present member of the Planning Board, all of whom shall
continue in office until the completion of the term for
which they were appointed. Thereafter all Class IV regular
members shall be appointed for terms of four years, except
as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall run from
January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
(b) Alternate member. Two alternate members may be appointed
by the Mayor to serve during the absence or disqualification of
any regular member. Such alternate members shall meet the
same qualification of any regular member. Such alternate
members shall meet the same qualifications as Class IV regular
members and shall serve for terms of two years. In the event
that two alternate members are appointed, the initial terms of
such members shall be one and two years, respectively. At the
time of their appointment, such alternate members shall be
designated by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate
No. 2." Alternate members may participate in all matters but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a
regular member of any class. Participation of alternate
members shall not be deemed to increase the size of the
Planning Board. In the event that a choice must be made to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote. A
vacancy in any class occurring otherwise than by expiration of
a term of office shall be filled by appointment as above
provided for the unexpired term.
B. Organization. At the first meeting of the year, the Planning Board shall
elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from among the regular members
of Class IV and select a Secretary who may or may not be a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee. The Planning Board may
annually appoint and fix the compensation of the Planning Board
Attorney who shall be an attorney other than the Township Attorney.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for experts and other
staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the Township
Committee for its use. The Board may also establish subcommittees,
such as the Minor Development and Flood Hazard Review Committee,
§ 7-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-32
1:37
the Major Development Committee and the Advisory Review
Committee, to review applications, make recommendations and act on
behalf of the full Board in accordance with this Code.
C. Powers and duties. The Planning Board shall comply with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and have the following powers and duties:
(1) To amend the Master Plan in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
(2) To administer the provisions of the Land Subdivision Ordinance and
Site Development Ordinance of the Township in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 225 of this Code and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.
(3) To report on the Township Official Map pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32.
(4) To report on amendments to the Zoning Ordinance14 pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-64.
(5) To annually prepare a program of Township capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years, and amendments
thereto, and recommend the same to the Township Committee
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-29, 55D-30 and 55D-31, if authorized
to do so by the Township Committee.
(6) Ancillary powers.
(a) Whenever a proposed development requires approval,
pursuant to the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law, of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use, but not a variance
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, the Planning Board shall have
the power to grant to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
[1] Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
[2] Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for issuance of
permits for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped
street or public drainageway, flood control basin or public
area reserved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
[3] Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
(b) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection,
notice of hearing on the application for development shall
include reference to the request for a variance or direction for
issuance of a permit, as the case may be.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Land Use and Development.
§ 7-32 HARDING CODE § 7-32
1:38
(c) A developer may elect to submit a separate application
requesting approval of the variance or direction for the
issuance of a permit and a subsequent application for any
required approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use.
The separate approval of the variance or direction for the
issuance of a permit shall be conditioned upon grant of all
required subsequent approvals by the Planning Board. No such
subsequent approval shall be granted unless the approval can
be granted without substantial detriment to the public good
and without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose
of the zone plan and Chapter 225, Land Use and Development.
(7) To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
(8) To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process.
(9) To consider and make report to the Township Committee within 35
days after referral as to any proposed development regulation
submitted to it pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a,
and also to pass upon other matters specifically referred to the
Planning Board by the Township Committee, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
(10) To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of the Township Committee for the aid and
assistance of the Committee or other agencies or officers of the
Township.
D. Site Plan Review Subcommittee.
(1) Membership. The Planning Board may establish by resolution a
Site Plan Review Subcommittee consisting of three members of the
Planning Board and such other officials, representatives of other
governmental agencies, citizens of the Township, particularly
architects, or additional members of the Planning Board as the
Chairman of the Planning Board may appoint to sit on said
Subcommittee on a temporary basis or for a specific application.
(2) Function. The Site Plan Review Subcommittee shall:
(a) Review all sketch site plans.
(b) Review all site plan applications and supporting documents to
determine their completeness and compliance with applicable
development regulations.
(c) Meet with applicants and their representatives to discuss all
technical aspects of the proposed site plan.
(d) Recommend to the Planning Board appropriate action on any
site plan application.
§ 7-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-32
1:39
§ 7-33. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
E. Development Review Committee.
(1) Membership. The Planning Board may establish by resolution a
Development Review Committee consisting of three members of
the Planning Board and such other officials, representatives of
other governmental agencies, citizens of the Township or additional
members of the Planning Board (not to exceed an effective majority
of the Planning Board) as the Chairman of the Planning Board may
appoint to sit on said Committee on a temporary basis or for a
specific application.
(2) Function. The Development Review Committee shall:
(a) Review all concept plans submitted to it and all applications for
preliminary major subdivision or preliminary site plan
approval, together with supporting documents.
(b) At the request of the Board of Adjustment, review any
application for preliminary major subdivision or preliminary
site plan approval filed with the Board of Adjustment, together
with any supporting documents submitted therewith.
(c) Provide assistance to the Planning and Zoning Boards'
Administrator, as necessary, in determining the completeness
of an application for development.
(d) Meet on a regular basis as a Committee or meet with
applicants and/or their representatives to discuss all aspects of
a proposed development.
(e) Recommend to the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment,
appropriate action on any application for development
reviewed by the Subcommittee.
F. Environmental Commission. Since the Township Environmental
Commission has prepared and submitted to the Planning Board an
index of the natural resources of the Township, the Planning Board shall
make available to the Environmental Commission an informational copy
of every application for development to the Planning Board. Failure of
the Planning Board to make such informational copy available to the
Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceedings.
G. Historic Preservation Commission. Whenever an application is made for
development within an historic district or site designated as such on the
Zoning Map or any element of the Master Plan, the Planning Board
shall make available to the Historic Preservation Commission an
informational copy of such application. Failure of the Planning Board to
make such informational copy available to the Historic Preservation
Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
§ 7-32 HARDING CODE § 7-33
1:40
A. Composition; terms of office; vacancies. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall consist of seven regular members and two alternate
members (if such alternates are appointed), all of whom shall be
residents of the Township appointed by resolution of the Township
Committee. At the times of their appointment, alternate members
appointed shall be designated by the Township Committee as "Alternate
No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." Alternate members may participate in
discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence
or disqualification of a regular member. Participation of alternate
members shall not be deemed to increase the size of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote. Regular
members shall serve for terms of four years from January 1 of the year
of their appointment. Any alternate members appointed shall serve for
terms of two years from January 1 of the year of their appointment. No
member or alternate member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may
hold any elective office or position under the Township. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for the
unexpired term only. The terms of the regular members first appointed
shall be so determined that, to the greatest practicable extent, the
expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first four
years after their appointment, provided that the initial term of no
regular member shall exceed four years. Thereafter, the term of each
regular member shall be for four years. The terms of the alternate
members first appointed shall be determined so that the expiration of
such terms shall be evenly distributed over the first two years after
their appointment. Thereafter, the term of each alternate member shall
be two years. Nothing in this chapter shall, however, be construed to
affect the term of any present member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, all of whom shall continue in office until the completion of
the terms for which they were appointed.
B. Organization. At the first meeting of the year, the Board of Adjustment
shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from its regular members
and shall also select a Secretary who may or may not be a member of
the Board of Adjustment or a Township employee. The Board may
annually appoint and fix the compensation of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the Township
Attorney. The Board may also employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of such experts and other staff as it may deem necessary.
The Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed, exclusive of
gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the Township Committee
for its use.
C. Powers.
(1) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall comply with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and shall have the following powers:
(a) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant
that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
§ 7-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-33
1:41
refusal made by an administrative official or agency based on
or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.15
(b) To hear and decide requests for interpretation of the map or
Zoning Ordinance, or for decisions upon other special
questions upon which such Board is authorized by the Zoning
Ordinance to pass.
(c) Variances generally.
[1] Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness
or shape of a specific piece of property, or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions or physical features
uniquely affecting a specific piece of property, or by reason
of an extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely
affecting a specific piece of property or the structures
lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of any
regulation of the Zoning Ordinance would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or
exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of
such property, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have
the power to grant, upon an application or appeal relating
to such property, a variance from such strict application of
such regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or
hardship.
[2] Where in an application or appeal relating to a specific
piece of property the purposes of the Municipal Land Use
Law16 would be advanced by a deviation from the Zoning
Ordinance requirements and the benefits of the deviation
would substantially outweigh any detriment, the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant a
variance to allow departure from the regulations of the
Zoning Ordinance.
[3] Provided, however, that no variance from those departures
enumerated in Subsection C(1)(d) below shall be granted
under this subsection; and provided further that the
proposed development does not require approval by the
Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional
use in conjunction with which the Planning Board has
power to review a request for a variance pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60a.
(d) Variances from zoning regulations.
[1] In particular cases and for special reasons, to grant a
variance to allow departure from regulations of Chapter
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Land Use and Development.
16.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 7-33 HARDING CODE § 7-33
1:42
225, Land Use and Development, of the Code of the
Township of Harding to permit:
[a] A use or principal structure in a district restricted
against such use or principal structure;
[b] An expansion of a nonconforming use;
[c] Deviation from a specification or standard pertaining
solely to a conditional use;
[d] An increase in the permitted floor area ratio as
defined in § 225-5;
[e] An increase in the permitted density except as applied
to the required lot area for a lot or lots for detached
one- or two-dwelling-unit buildings, which lot or lots
are either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting
from a minor subdivision; or
[f] A height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10
feet or 10% the maximum height permitted in the
district for a principal structure.
[2] A variance under this subsection shall be granted only by
affirmative vote of at least five members.
[3] If an application for development requests one or more
variances but not a variance for a purpose enumerated in
Subsection C(1)(d) above, the decision on the requested
variance or variances shall be rendered under Subsection
C(1)(c) above. No variance or other relief may be granted
under the provisions of Subsection C(1)(a) through (d) of
this chapter unless such variance or other relief can be
granted without substantial detriment to the public good
and will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of
the zone plan and Zoning Ordinance.
(e) To direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34
for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or
public drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved
on the Official Map. The Board of Adjustment shall not exercise
the power otherwise granted by this subsection if the proposed
development requires approval by the Planning Board of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction with
which the Planning Board has power to direct the issuance of a
permit pursuant to § 7-32C(6)(a)[2] of this Code.
(f) To direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36
for a building or structure not related to a street. The Board of
Adjustment shall not exercise the power otherwise granted by
this subsection if the proposed development requires approval
§ 7-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-33
1:43
§ 7-34. Board of Health.
by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional
use in conjunction with which the Planning Board has power to
direct the issuance of a permit pursuant to § 7-32C(6)(a)[3] of
this Code.
(g) To grant to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Planning Board subdivision or site plan
approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28 through 55D-46 or
conditional use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67
whenever the Board is reviewing an application for approval of
a use variance pursuant to Subsection C(1)(d) of this section.
(2) Any application under any subsection of this section may be
referred to any appropriate person or agency, including the
Planning Board, for its report, provided that such reference shall
not extend the period of time within which the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall act.17
D. Reversal or modification on appeal. The Board of Adjustment may
reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the action, order,
requirement, decision, interpretation or determination appealed from
and make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought
to be made, and to that end have all the powers of the administrative
officer from whom the appeal was taken.
E. Environmental Commission. Since the Township Environmental
Commission has prepared an index of the natural resources of the
Township, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make available to the
Environmental Commission an informational copy of every application
for development to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Failure of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment to make such informational copy available
to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding.
F. Historic Preservation Commission. Whenever an application is made for
development within an historic district or site designated as such on the
Zoning Map or any element of the Master Plan, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall make available to the Historic Preservation
Commission an informational copy of such application. Failure of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment to make such informational copy available
to the Historic Preservation Commission shall not invalidate any
hearing or proceeding.
A. Composition.
(1) The Board of Health shall consist of five members who shall be
residents of the Township and at least one of whom shall be a
17.Editor's Note: Original Subsection D, Development Review Committee, which immediately
followed this subsection, may now be found at § 7-32E.
§ 7-33 HARDING CODE § 7-34
1:44
§ 7-35. Department of Public Works.
§ 7-36. Environmental Commission.
member of the Township Committee. Members shall be appointed
by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township
Committee, and shall hold office for a term of three years,
beginning the first day of January in the year in which each is
appointed, except that two of the five members first appointed shall
hold office until December 31, 1974; two of such members shall
hold office until December 31, 1975; and the fifth such member
shall hold office until December 31, 1976.
(2) Alternate member. Two alternate members may be appointed by
the Mayor to serve during the absence or disqualification of any
regular member. Such alternate members shall serve for terms of
two years. In the event that two alternate members are appointed,
the initial terms of such members shall be one and two years,
respectively. At the time of their appointment, such alternate
members shall be designated by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2." Alternate members may participate in
discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the
absence or disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote
instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be
made to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall
vote.
(3) A vacancy in any class occurring otherwise than by expiration of a
term of office shall be filled by appointment as above provided for
the unexpired term.
(4) Members shall serve without compensation but shall be
reimbursed for any expenses necessarily incurred in discharging
the duties of their office.
B. Powers and duties. The Board of Health shall have all the powers and
duties conferred upon it by N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 to 26:3-91, as amended and
supplemented.
A. Composition; appointment. The Department of Public Works shall
consist of an Assistant Commissioner, a Superintendent and such other
officers and employees as the Township Committee may deem proper,
all of whom shall be appointed by resolution of the Township
Committee.
B. Powers and duties. The Department of Public Works is charged with the
maintenance of the Township roads, buildings and parks and shall have
such other powers and duties as the Township Committee shall confer
upon it.
§ 7-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-36
1:45
A. Name. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq., there is hereby established
in and for the Township of Harding an Environmental Commission to be
known as "Harding Township Environmental Commission."
B. Composition.
(1) The Environmental Commission shall consist of seven members
and two alternate members (if such alternates are appointed) to be
appointed by the Mayor. One member shall also be a member of the
Harding Township Planning Board, and all members shall be
residents of the Township. The members shall serve without
compensation. The Mayor shall designate one of the members to
serve as Chairman and presiding officer of the Commission. All
appointments of members, except to fill vacancies, shall be for
terms of three years and until the appointment and qualification of
their successors, beginning the first day of January of the first year
of the term.
(2) Alternate member. Two alternate members may be appointed by
the Mayor to serve during the absence or disqualification of any
regular member. Such alternate members shall meet the same
qualification of any regular member. In the event that two alternate
members are appointed, the initial terms of such members shall be
one and two years, respectively. All subsequent appointments of
alternates, except to fill vacancies, shall be for periods of two years
and until the appointment and qualification of their successors,
beginning the first day of January of the first year of the term. At
the time of their appointment, such alternate members shall be
designated by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate
No. 1 shall vote.
(3) A vacancy of the Commission occurring otherwise than by
expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the
same manner as the original appointment.
C. Powers of Commission. The Environmental Commission shall have
power to conduct research into the use and possible use of the open
land areas of the Township and may coordinate the activities of
unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes, and may advertise,
prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets,
which in its judgment it deems necessary for its purposes. It shall keep
an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned, including open
marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order to obtain information
on the proper use of such areas, and may from time to time recommend
to the Harding Township Planning Board plans and programs for
inclusion in a Township Master Plan and the development and use of
such areas.
§ 7-36 HARDING CODE § 7-36
1:46
§ 7-37. Historic Preservation Commission.
D. Acquisitions by Commission. The Environmental Commission may,
subject to the approval of the Township Committee, acquire property,
both real and personal, in the name of the Township by gift, purchase,
grant, bequest, devise or lease for any of its purposes and shall
administer the same for such purposes subject to terms of the
conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire the fee or any
lesser interest, development right, easement, including conservation
easement, covenant or other contractual right, including a conveyance
on conditions or with limitations or reversions, as may be necessary to
acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of or otherwise
conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and water
areas in the Township.
E. Records and annual report. The Environmental Commission shall keep
records of its meetings and activities and shall make an annual report to
the Township Committee.
F. Studies and recommendations. The Environmental Commission shall
have the power to study and make recommendations concerning open
space preservation, water resources management, air pollution control,
solid waste management, noise control, soil and landscape protection,
environmental appearance, marine resources and protection of flora
and fauna.
A. Name. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107 et seq., there is hereby
established in and for the Township of Harding an Historic Preservation
Commission.
B. Composition.
(1) The Commission shall consist of seven members and two alternate
members (if alternates are appointed). The Mayor shall appoint all
members of the Commission and shall designate, at the time of
appointment, the regular members by class and the alternate
members as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The
Commission shall elect from its membership a Chairman and a Vice
Chairman and shall select a Secretary who may or may not be a
member of the Commission or a municipal employee.
(2) The regular members of the Commission shall be classified into one
of the following three classes:
(a) Class A: person(s) who are knowledgeable in building design
and construction or architectural history and who may reside
within or outside of the Township.
(b) Class B: person(s) who are knowledgeable or have a
demonstrated interest in Township history and who may reside
within or outside of the Township.
§ 7-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37
1:47
(c) Class C: person(s) who are citizens of the Township and who
hold no other municipal office, position or employment, except
for membership on the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
(3) The regular members of the Commission shall include at least one
person from Class A and at least one person from Class B, provided
that at least three of the regular members shall be from either
Class A or Class B. The alternate members of the Commission (if
any) shall at least meet the qualifications of Class C.
C. Terms. The term of a regular member shall be four years, and the term
of an alternate member shall be two years. A regular or alternate
member whose term has expired may be appointed to an additional
term. The terms of the members first appointed to the Commission
under this section shall be as follows to the extent practicable: one of
the regular members shall have a term of one year, two of the regular
members shall have a term of three years, two of the regular members
shall have a term of four years, one of the alternate members shall have
a term of one year and one of the alternate members shall have a term
of two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by the expiration of a
term shall be filled for the unexpired term only. The term of a member
who is also a member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment (if any) shall be coterminous with his/her term on the
respective Board.
D. Powers and duties of the Commission. The Commission shall have the
power and duty to:
(1) Prepare and maintain a survey of historic areas and locations
within the Township pursuant to criteria identified in the survey
report.
(2) Make recommendations to the Planning Board and Township
Committee for additions or modifications to historic districts and
sites within the Township.
(3) Make recommendations to the Planning Board on the Historic
Preservation Plan Element of the Master Plan, including proposed
amendments and updates thereto, and on the historic preservation
implications of any other element of the Master Plan which has
been or is proposed to be adopted.
(4) In connection with applications for development within a
designated historic district or site, advise and assist applicants the
Planning Board and/or the Zoning Board of Adjustment on the
historic significance of the district or site and ways of conserving,
protecting, enhancing and perpetuating the historic character and
significance of such district or site.
(5) Administer the demolition delay provisions in § 225-114 of Chapter
225, Land Use and Development.
§ 7-37 HARDING CODE § 7-37
1:48
§ 7-37.1. Open Space Trust Committee.
(6) Carry out such other advisory, educational and informational
functions as will promote historic preservation in the Township.
A. Establishment of Open Space Trust Committee. There is hereby
established an Open Space Trust Committee.
B. Membership. The Open Space Trust Committee shall consist of a
minimum of nine members as follows: [Amended 5-13-2019 by Ord.
No. 12-19]
(1) Township Administrative Officer.
(2) Two members of the Township Committee of the Township of
Harding, appointed by the Township Committee.
(3) One representative from each of the Planning Board, the
Environmental Commission and the Shade Tree Commission, to be
appointed by the Township Committee.
(4) A minimum of three citizens and no more than five citizens of the
Township to be appointed by the Township Committee to serve at
large.
C. Terms of office. [Amended 5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 12-19]
(1) The Administrative Officer shall serve as a member of the Open
Space Trust Committee as long as he or she is employed by the
Township in the capacity of Township Administrative Officer.
(2) The member of the Township Committee appointed to the Open
Space Trust Committee shall have a term of one year.
(3) The representatives of the Planning Board, Environmental
Commission and Shade Tree Commission shall serve for a term of
one year.
(4) The citizens of the Township appointed by the Township Committee
shall have a term of three years.
D. Powers and operating procedures.
(1) Officers. The Open Space Trust Committee shall select from among
its members a Chairman and a Vice Chairman to serve as the
presiding officer in the absence of the Chairman. The Committee
shall also select a Secretary whose function shall be to maintain
minutes of the Committee's meetings and records of its
proceedings.
(2) Initial organization meeting. The Open Space Trust Committee
shall hold its initial organization meeting within 60 days after the
final adoption of this section.
§ 7-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37.1
1:49
(3) Meetings. The Open Space Trust Committee shall hold public
meetings, which public meetings shall be held in accordance with
the Open Public Meetings Act.18
(4) Procedures. The Open Space Trust Committee shall determine the
criteria which are to be used in analyzing properties for possible
acquisition or receipt by gift by the Township, whether in fee, by
easement or by means of development rights. From time to time,
the Committee is to advise the Township Committee of properties
which it has determined meet the criteria and might be suitable for
acquisition. The Township Committee shall determine which
properties, easements or development rights should be acquired or
received by gift. After selection of the lands, easements or
development rights as hereinabove provided, the Township may
proceed to acquire by gift, purchase or by eminent domain
proceedings pursuant to N.J.S.A. 20:3-1 et seq. the identified lands,
easements or development rights within the financial constraints
established by the Township Committee. [Amended 5-13-2019 by
Ord. No. 12-19]
(5) The Open Space Trust Committee shall prepare or direct to be
prepared a management plan for each property owned by the
Township and identified on the Recreation and Open Space
Inventory. Such plan shall describe the management goal(s) for
each property and the method(s) to achieve each of the identified
goal(s). For properties jointly owned with another entity, the
management plan shall be prepared jointly by all owners. The
Township Committee shall review and approve each plan, including
making such amendments or revisions as the Township Committee
deems necessary at the time of approval. [Added 5-13-2019 by
Ord. No. 12-19]
(a) The Open Space Trust Committee shall prepare and submit to
the Township Committee, by October 15 of each year, the goals
and objectives for the following year beginning January 1. The
Township Committee shall review the proposed goals and
objectives and, if necessary, revise and then return the final
goals and objectives to the Open Space Trust Committee by
December 31 for implementation.
(b) The Open Space Trust Committee shall prepare and submit to
the Township Committee semiannual goal achievement
progress reports.
(c) The Open Space Trust Committee shall, before April 1 each
year, prepare and submit to the Township Committee the prior
year's goals and objectives achievement report.
18.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 7-37.1 HARDING CODE § 7-37.1
1:50
(d) For purposes of this § 7-37.1, maintenance of lands acquired
for conservation and recreation purposes is also intended to
include stewardship of lands acquired for conservation and
recreation purposes. In that regard, based on the approval of
the annual goals and objectives referenced herein, the
apportionment of the annual levy for such purposes as
provided in Subsection E(1) and (2) below, shall be determined
by the Township Committee.
E. Funding.
(1) There is hereby established a reserve in the Township's general
capital fund which shall be known and designated as the "Open
Space Trust Fund." A separate bank account shall be opened and
maintained for this purpose. The Open Space Trust Fund shall be
funded through the dedication to the fund of an amount not to
exceed $0.05 per $100 of assessed valuation of each annual tax
levy. The fund shall also be permitted to accept donations and
testamentary bequests. The monies accumulated within the fund
may be used for the following purposes, or any combination
thereof:
(a) Acquisition of lands for conservation and recreation purposes.
(b) Maintenance of lands acquired for conservation and recreation
purposes.
(c) Acquisition of farmland for farmland preservation purposes.
(d) Payment of debt service on indebtedness issued or incurred by
the Township of Harding for the acquisition of lands for
conservation and recreation purposes.
(e) Historic preservation and the acquisition of historic properties,
structures, facilities, sites or areas, to the extent of up to 10%
of annual open space tax levies. Such amounts may be
accumulated for this purpose or redirected to the other
purposes authorized by Subsection E(1)(a) through (d) above.
(2) The Township Committee shall determine the appropriate amount
to be allocated to each purpose after conducting at least one public
hearing thereon. Any and all interest or other income earned on
monies in the fund shall be credited to the fund to be used for the
above-described purposes.
F. Disposition of property or other interest in land. No property or interest
in land acquired with funds from the Open Space Trust Fund shall be
sold or otherwise disposed of by the Township until the disposition has
been authorized by the Township Committee in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.9 or any successor statute thereto. [Amended
5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 12-19]
§ 7-37.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37.1
1:51
§ 7-37.2. Recreation Advisory Committee.
§ 7-37.3. Shade Tree Advisory Committee.
G. Review. Every three years the Township Committee shall review the
activities of the Open Space Trust Committee and issue a report with
recommendations and conclusions relating to the achievement of the
goals and objectives identified. [Amended 5-13-2019 by Ord. No.
12-19]
A. Establishment. An advisory committee to be known as the "Recreation
Advisory Committee" is established to assist and advise the Township
Committee with respect to sports and recreational activities involving
the youth of the Township.
B. Membership. The Recreation Advisory Committee shall consist of the
following members:
(1) The President of the Harding Township Recreation Association,
who shall further serve as Chair of the Recreation Advisory
Committee.
(2) The Treasurer of the Harding Township Recreation Association.
(3) A member of the Township Committee to be appointed by the
Township Committee.
C. Terms. The terms of the members shall be fixed by the terms of their
office which entitles them to membership on the Recreation Advisory
Committee.
A. Establishment. An advisory committee to be known as the "Shade Tree
Advisory Committee" is established to assist and advise the Township
Committee and Township departments with respect to the planting,
care and control of trees and shrubbery in public places owned, leased
or managed by the Township. In addition, the Shade Tree Advisory
Committee shall assist and advise Township boards and commissions in
matters related to plantings on public and private property that may
come under the responsibilities of such Township boards and
commissions. The Shade Tree Advisory Committee shall also have the
duties and responsibilities set forth in Article XXI, entitled "Tree
Conservation," of Chapter 225 of this Code and such other duties and
responsibilities as shall be conferred by the Township Committee or
Township ordinance.
B. Membership.
(1) The voting membership of the Committee shall consist of one
representative from each of the following organizations:
(a) The New Vernon Garden Club.
(b) The Harding Township Historical Society.
§ 7-37.1 HARDING CODE § 7-37.3
1:52
(c) The Harding Township Environmental Commission.
(2) In addition, the following individuals shall serve as voting members
on the committee:
(a) The Township Administrator.
(b) The Superintendent of Public Works.
(c) One representative from the general population of the
Township.
(3) A member of the Morris County Shade Tree Commission and/or
other qualified experts may also serve as advisory members of the
Committee.
C. Appointments; terms. All of the above listed members shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Township
Committee. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township
Committee, shall have the authority to make such additional
appointments as are deemed necessary. The terms of the members first
appointed under this section shall be so determined that, to the
greatest practicable extent, the expiration of such terms shall be
distributed evenly over the first three years after their appointment,
provided that the initial term of no member shall exceed three years.
Thereafter, the term of each member shall be three years.
§ 7-37.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37.3
1:53

ARTICLE V
Municipal Court
§ 7-38. Court established.
There shall be a municipal court in the Township known as the "Municipal
Court of the Township of Harding in the County of Morris."
§ 7-39. Municipal Judge.
§ 7-40. Court sessions. [Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90]
The Municipal Judge shall sit on regularly scheduled dates at the Municipal
Building in New Vernon and at such times as the business of the Court may
require.
§ 7-41. Application fee for Public Defender representation.19 [Added
3-11-1996 by Ord. No. 2-96; amended 11-17-2010 by Ord. No.
15-10]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq., the Township
Committee hereby establishes the requirement that a person applying for
representation by the Municipal Public Defender shall pay an application
fee as provided in Chapter 171, Fees. The Municipal Court may waive any
required application fee, in whole or in part, if the Court determines, in its
discretion, that the application fee represents an immeasurable burden on
the person seeking representation.
§ 7-42. Court Administrator. [Amended 10-14-1969 by Ord. No.
3-69; 12-30-1991 by Ord. No. 5-91]
A. Appointment; term of office. The Municipal Court shall have a judge
known as the "Municipal Judge," who shall be appointed by resolution
of the Township Committee to serve for a term of three years from the
date of his appointment and until his successor is appointed and
qualified. [Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90]
B. Powers and duties. The Municipal Court shall possess and exercise all
the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred upon it by the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented, or
by any other law. [Amended 11-17-2010 by Ord. No. 15-10]
A. Appointment. There shall be a Court Administrator, and there may be a
Deputy Court Administrator, each of whom shall be appointed by
resolution of the Township Committee to hold office until the first day of
January next following their appointment and until their successors are
appointed and qualified. [Amended 11-17-2010 by Ord. No. 15-10]
19.Editor's Note: See also § 7-22.
§ 7-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-42
1:55
B. Duties. The Court Administrator and, in the event of the absence,
sickness or other disability of the Court Administrator, the Deputy
Court Clerk shall:
(1) Carry out the rules, regulations, policies and procedures relating to
the operation of the court.
(2) Interview and speak to prospective complainants; and receive
complaints and dispense information relating to court matters.
(3) Maintain the financial records of the court.
(4) Attend court, take minutes of the trials and enter them in the
docket; arrange trial calendars; sign court documents; and prepare
and issue warrants and commitments.
(5) Take and prepare bail bonds, making inquiry as to their sufficiency
and equity; and receive and account for fines and costs.
(6) Interview persons on informal police court matters to determine if
there is a basis for formal action and, if necessary, issue
summonses requiring court appearances in this regard; and
maintain and classify records and files.
§ 7-42 HARDING CODE § 7-42
1:56
ARTICLE VI
Payment of Bills, Claims and Vouchers
§ 7-43. Procedure for approval. [Amended 11-17-2010 by Ord. No.
15-10]
The following procedures shall be followed for the approval or disapproval
and payment of bills, claims and vouchers:
A. No payment out of Township funds shall be made unless:
(1) The person claiming or receiving the same shall first present to the
Chief Financial Officer a detailed voucher, specifying particularly
how the bill or demand is made up, with the certification of the
party claiming payment that it is correct. The Township Committee
may, by resolution, require an affidavit in lieu of said certification,
and the Chief Financial Officer of the Township may take such
affidavit without cost; and
(2) The voucher carries a certification of some official or duly
designated employee of the Township having knowledge of the
facts that the goods have been received by, or the services
rendered to, the Township.
B. All invoices shall be reviewed by Department Head, if satisfied,
Department Head shall attach invoice to payment voucher. Payment
voucher must be signed by both Department Head and vendor.
C. Department Head submits payment voucher to the Finance Department
who will create a bill list for Council approval.
D. The Administrator will review payment vouchers and bill list before
council approval. Bill list is presented to Council along with a resolution
for approval.
E. It shall be the duty of the Clerk to incorporate in the official minutes, by
signing the approving resolution or schedule of claims approved by the
Township Committee, that he has examined and officially approved the
same for payment. It shall be the duty of the Clerk to record all claims in
the official minutes indicating that the Township Committee has by
formal action approved the same, with appropriate record as to any
claims disapproved or rejected, and to indicate on said claims that they
have been approved for payment with the date of approval noted on the
claim.
F. After the Clerk has certified that the claims have been approved, he
shall turn the same over to the Finance Department who shall forthwith
prepare the necessary checks for the payment thereof, which checks
shall be signed by the Finance Committee Chair and the Chief Financial
Officer. After preparing checks for the payment of claims, he shall
record them in proper books of account and thereafter mail or
otherwise distribute the checks to the claimants.
§ 7-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-44
1:57
§ 7-44. Payroll account. [Amended 11-17-2010 by Ord. No. 15-10]
A. The payroll account shall consist of Township funds transferred by a
check signed by the Finance Committee Chair and the Chief Financial
Officer.
B. Payroll checks shall be drawn, signed by the Chief Financial Officer and
issued from time to time as provided by ordinance.
C. It shall be the duty of the appropriate department heads, or such official
or employee as may be designated by resolution of the Township
Committee, to prepare the necessary payrolls for all officials and
employees and to certify that the services have been rendered and that
the amount specified is in fact due and owing to the officials and
employees. Department heads must certify payroll timesheets.
D. Said payrolls shall be filed with the Clerk who shall present them to the
Township Committee for approval. After approval, the Clerk shall
certify to the Chief Financial Officer that the payrolls have been
approved, and the Chief Financial Officer shall issue checks in payment
thereof bimonthly on the 15th and 30th of each month.
§ 7-44 HARDING CODE § 7-44
1:58
ARTICLE VII
Budget
§ 7-45. Preparation.
The budget shall be prepared by the Township Committee in accordance
with the Local Budget Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 to 40A:4-87), as amended and
supplemented. During the months of December and January, the Committee
shall require all officials and departments to submit requests for
appropriations for the ensuing budget year. Officials and department heads
may be required to appear before the Committee at public hearings or
informal caucuses during the months of December and January. The budget
document shall be prepared in such form as is required by law. There shall
be appended to the budget a summary of all expenditures and revenues.
The Auditor, together with the assistance of the officials who receive such
revenue, shall prepare all estimates of nonproperty tax revenues
anticipated for the support of each annual budget.
§ 7-46. Operation.
§ 7-47. Purchasing agent designated; powers and duties. [Amended
11-17-2010 by Ord. No. 15-10; 5-15-2017 by Ord. No. 04-17]
A. The Chief Financial Officer, subject to the supervision of the Chairman
of the Finance Committee, shall administer each annual budget in
accordance with the Local Budget Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 to 40A:4-87),
as amended and supplemented. In consultation with officials and
department heads, the Chief Financial Officer shall establish quarterly
or such other periodic allotments of appropriations as he may deem
necessary. Each official and department shall plan and administer its
expenditure program within the limits of such allotments.
B. If, at any time during the budget year, the Chief Financial Officer shall
ascertain that the Township is faced with the probability of incurring a
cash deficit for the current year, he shall reconsider the work programs
and allotments of the several departments. Upon such reconsideration
and with the approval of the Township Committee, he may revise
budget allotments so as to forestall, so far as possible, the making of
commitments and expenditures in excess of the revenues to be realized
during the fiscal year.
A. There is hereby created the position of Purchasing Agent for the
Township of Harding.
B. The Purchasing Agent shall be appointed by the Township Committee.
C. The Purchasing Agent is required to possess a valid qualified
purchasing agent certificate, as issued by the New Jersey Division of
Local Government Services, Department of Community Affairs.
§ 7-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-47
1:59
D. The Purchasing Agent shall have, on behalf of the Township Committee
of the Township of Harding, the authority, responsibility and
accountability for the purchasing activity pursuant to Local Public
Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.); to prepare public advertising
for and to receive bids and requests for proposals for the provision or
performance of goods, services and construction contracts; to award
contracts pursuant to New Jersey law in accordance with the
regulations, forms and procedures promulgated by state regulatory
agencies and Harding Township; and conduct any activities as may be
necessary or appropriate to the purchasing function of the Township of
Harding, including, without limitation, the following:
(1) Purchase, store and distribute all supplies, materials and
equipment and contract for all services required by any
departments.
(2) Establish and enforce specifications with respect to such services,
supplies, materials and equipment.
(3) Inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies,
materials and equipment and the rendition of contractual services
and determine their quality, quantity and conformance with
specifications.
(4) Have charge of any and all central storerooms and warehouses
which may be established.
(5) Transfer to or between departments, offices and agencies and from
or to central stores such supplies, materials and equipment as need
appears and arrange for the sale of surplus or obsolete items
thereof, subject to applicable ordinances and resolutions.
(6) Administer any ordinance the Township Committee may enact
relating to purchasing.
§ 7-47 HARDING CODE § 7-47
1:60
ARTICLE VIII
Affordable Housing Administration
[Added 5-21-2008 by Ord. No. 6-08]
§ 7-48. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the Township's responsibility to assist in the
provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1985.20
§ 7-49. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the Township of Harding to ensure that the affordable units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the Township of Harding.
§ 7-50. Municipal Housing Liaison.
A. There is hereby established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison
for the Township of Harding.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by resolution of the
Township Committee and may be a full- or part-time municipal
employee with compensation to be fixed by the Township Committee at
the time of appointment.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Township of
Harding, including the following responsibilities, which shall not,
pursuant to state regulations, be contracted out:
(1) Serving as the Township's primary point of contact for all inquiries
from the state, affordable housing providers, Administrative
Agents, and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all affordable units in the Township's Fair
Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
20.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 7-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-50
1:61
§ 7-51. Administrative Agent.
Subject to approval by COAH, the Township of Harding may contract with
or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency, which
entity shall have the responsibility for administering specified affordable
units, projects or housing programs, to undertake the duties listed herein,
except for those responsibilities which may not be contracted out pursuant
to § 7-50C above. The Administrative Agent shall have the authority to
take all actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder, including the hiring of qualified staff, consultants and/or
professional management to assist in the implementation of these
responsibilities, and shall conduct all of its actions and duties in
conformance with the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80
26.1 et seq. (hereafter "UHAC" regulations), COAH regulations and
Township ordinances.
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
Administrative Agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(6) Supervising the Administrative Agent(s) contracted or authorized
by the Township Committee to administer some or all of the
affordable units in the Township.
(7) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for any of the
duties listed below that are not specifically delegated by the
Township Committee to an Administrative Agent.
A. Affirmative marketing.
(1) An affirmative marketing plan, in compliance with UHAC
regulations, shall be prepared by the Administrative Agent for each
housing project or program utilizing the sample form supplied by
COAH. The plan shall be maintained on file in the office of the
Municipal Housing Liaison. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall
include all of the information required by UHAC regulations and
Township ordinances, including but not limited to sample media
advertisements, a list of contacts for outreach to organizations
within the COAH-designated housing region of which the Township
is a part, and a description of the random selection method to be
employed in selecting prospective occupants for affordable units.
(2) Conducting an outreach process to ensure the affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
Affirmative Marketing Plan and UHAC regulations; and
(3) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services
to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
§ 7-50 HARDING CODE § 7-51
1:62
requirements, and landlord/tenant law, in accordance with UHAC
regulations.
B. Household certification.
(1) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews
with interested households;
(2) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of
gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of
income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(3) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(4) Requiring that all certified applicants for affordable units execute a
certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the
ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(5) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region where the
units are located; and
(6) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
Township's Affirmative Marketing Plan when referring households
for certification to affordable units.
C. Affordability controls.
(1) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions
and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of
each affordable unit that is for sale;
(2) Creating and maintaining a file on each affordable unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as applicable;
(3) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation
of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the
appropriate county's register of deeds or county Clerk's office after
the termination of the affordability controls for each affordable
unit;
(4) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures of affordable
units; and
(5) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or
certifications pursuant to UHAC regulations with respect to code
compliance upon the first transfer of title that follows the
expiration of the applicable minimum control period for affordable
units.
§ 7-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-51
1:63
D. Resale and rental.
(1) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information between owners and the Administrative Agent
regarding the availability of affordable units for resale or rental;
and
(2) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information to low- and moderate-income households regarding the
availability of affordable units for resale or re-rental.
E. Processing request from unit owners (non-rental units).
(1) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of affordable units
who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance during the
term of their ownership;
(2) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from
owners of affordable units who wish to make capital improvements
to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations
to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional
bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of central air-conditioning
systems; and
(3) Processing requests and making determinations on requests by
owners of affordable units for hardship waivers.
F. Enforcement.
(1) With respect to non-rental units, securing annually lists of all
affordable housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee
owners and notifying all such owners that they must either move
back to their unit or sell it to a qualified and certified household;
(2) Securing from all developers and sponsors of affordable units, at
the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or
development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no
affordable unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to
any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the
Administrative Agent;
(3) The posting annually in all rental properties, including two-family
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with
the telephone number of the Administrative Agent where
complaints of excess rent can be made;
(4) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable units,
reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(5) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the
municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other appropriate
municipal fund approved by the Department of Community Affairs;
§ 7-51 HARDING CODE § 7-51
1:64
(6) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as approved
by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering such
affordability controls; and
(7) Providing information to the Municipal Housing Liaison, in the
format required by COAH and certifying as to its accuracy, for the
submission of monitoring reports to COAH.
§ 7-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-51
1:65
Chapter 16
FIRE DEPARTMENTS, VOLUNTEER
§ 16-1. Fire Departments designated.
The New Vernon Volunteer Fire Department and the Green Village
Volunteer Fire Department are hereby designated as the Fire Departments
of the Township of Harding in the County of Morris, State of New Jersey.
Chapter 21
FIRST AID AND RESCUE SQUAD
§ 21-1. First aid and rescue squad designated.
The New Vernon First Aid Squad is hereby designated as the first aid and
rescue squad of the Township of Harding in the County of Morris, State of
New Jersey.
Chapter 38
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 7.
§ 7-51 HARDING CODE § 21-1
1:66
ARTICLE I
Indemnification of Officers and Employees
[Added 7-7-2004 by Ord. No. 14-04 (§ 5-50 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 38-1. Purpose.
The Harding Township Committee hereby finds that it is appropriate to
provide for the defense and indemnification of Township officials, employees
and appointees consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 59:10-1 et seq.,
which empowers local public entities to provide for such defense and
indemnification.
§ 38-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
TOWNSHIP OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE OR APPOINTEE — Each person
presently or formerly holding any Township office, position or employment,
elective or appointive, full-time or part-time, whether or not compensated
by fixed salary or hourly rate, and including members of the various boards,
commissions or agencies of the Township. The terms of this article and the
definition of official, employee and appointee are to be construed liberally
in order to effectuate the purposes of this article, except that these terms
shall not include any entity which is not a natural person; any person
while providing goods or services of any kind under any contract with
the Township except an employment contract; any person while providing
legal, engineering, professional or extraordinary unspecifiable services for
compensation, unless said person is a full-time employee of the Township;
and any person who as a condition of his or her appointment or contract is
required to indemnify and defend the Township and/or secure insurance.
§ 38-3. Defense of and indemnification for civil actions.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the Township of Harding shall,
upon the request of any present or former official, employee or appointee
of the Township, provide, out of public funds, for indemnification and legal
defense of any civil action brought against said person or persons arising
from an act or omission falling within the scope of their public duties.
The indemnification of such officials, employees and appointees shall be
for compensatory damages or any settlement approved by the Township
Committee. The defense and indemnification shall extend to a cross-action,
counterclaim or cross-complaint against a Township official, employee or
appointee. The Township shall provide for defense of and indemnify any
present or former official, employee or appointee of the Township who
becomes a defendant in a civil action if the person or persons involved acted
or failed to act in a matter in which the Township has or had an interest;
acted or failed to act in the discharge of a duty imposed or authorized by
law; and acted or failed to take action in good faith. The obligation of the
Township to defend and indemnify its officials, employees or appointees for
acts or omissions arising out of or in the course of the performance of their
§ 38-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-3
1:67
duties shall be limited to those circumstances under which the Township
itself would be liable for the acts of its employees under the doctrine of
respondeat superior.
§ 38-4. Indemnification for costs of defense for criminal or
disciplinary proceeding if found innocent.
If any criminal or disciplinary action is instituted against a Township official,
employee or appointee based upon the act or omission of that person arising
out of and directly related to the lawful exercise of his or her official duties
or under color of his or her authority, and that action is dismissed or results
in a final disposition in favor of that officer or employee, the Township
shall reimburse that person for the costs of defending the action, including
attorneys' fees and costs of trial and appeals which are determined by the
Township Committee to be reasonable.
§ 38-5. Other proceedings.
In any other action or proceeding, the Township may provide for the defense
of a present or former official, employee or appointee if the Township
Committee concludes that such representation is in the best interest of the
Township and that the person to be defended acted or failed to act in accord
with the standards set forth in this article.
§ 38-6. Exceptions.
Indemnification or the defense of any action shall not be provided or shall be
disclaimed if the Township Committee determines that any of the following
conditions shall exist or occur:
A. The act or omission was not within the scope of the official's or
employee's authority, duty to or employment by the Township, as
authorized or imposed by law.
B. The act or failure to act was a crime or was the result of an intentional
wrong or actual fraud, actual malice or willful misconduct of the person
requesting defense and indemnification.
C. The defense of the action or proceeding would create a conflict of
interest between the Township and the official, employee or appointee.
D. There exist policies of insurance, either obtained by the Township or by
another, by virtue of which the Township official, employee or appointee
is entitled to a defense of the action from the insurer. However, the
Township shall provide a defense and indemnification as provided by
this article to the extent the official, employee or appointee is not
covered by insurance.
E. The Township official, employee or appointee has failed to deliver to the
Township Administrator within 10 days of the time he or she is served
with the summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading, the
original or copy of such document; provided, however, that this time
§ 38-3 HARDING CODE § 38-6
1:68
§ 38-7. Reimbursement of Township.
If a Township official, employee or appointee is found guilty of a crime,
actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct or an intentional wrong, he
or she shall be obligated to reimburse the Township for the cost of the legal
defense (if any is provided by the Township).
§ 38-8. Procedures.
period may be extended by the Township Committee for good cause
shown.
F. The official, employee or appointee fails to request the defense of any
action.
G. The official, employee or appointee fails to cooperate fully with the
Township in the defense of the matter.
H. If the action or proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the Township.
A. Official's, employee's or appointee's duty to notify, request defense by
and cooperate with the Township. A Township official, employee or
appointee shall not be entitled to a defense or indemnification under
this article unless within 10 calendar days of the time he or she is
served with any summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or
pleading, he or she delivers the original or a copy thereof to the
Township Administrator, requests that the Township provide a defense
and fully cooperates with the Township during the defense; provided,
however, that this time period may be extended by the Township
Committee for good cause shown.
B. Township to control representation. Whenever the Township provides
for the defense of a Township official, employee or appointee pursuant
to this article, and as a condition of such defense, the Township may,
through its Attorney, assume exclusive control over the representation
of such Township official, employee or appointee, and such persons
shall cooperate fully with the Township.
C. Methods of providing defense. The Township may provide for a defense
pursuant to this article by authorizing an attorney representing the
Township to act on behalf of the person being defended or by employing
other counsel for this purpose or by asserting the Township's right
under any appropriate insurance policy which requires the insurer to
provide the defense.
D. Selection of attorney and approval of fees. If the Township Committee
decides not to select counsel to represent the official, employee or
appointee, the official, employee or appointee may propose his or her
own counsel, subject to the approval of the Township Committee, who
shall enter an agreement with the Township, setting forth the rate of
compensation and the estimated total cost of the defense.
§ 38-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-9
1:69
§ 38-9. Punitive damages, penalties or fines. [Amended 2-21-2012
by Ord. No. 02-12]
The Township shall not pay for or indemnify any person against the payment
of punitive or exemplary damages, penalties or fines resulting from the
commission of a crime, actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct or
an intentional wrong, but the Township shall provide for the legal defense
of such claims in accord with the standards set forth in this article.
Nevertheless, the Township Committee shall indemnify an official, employee
or appointee for punitive or exemplary damages, provided the Township
Committee determines that the acts complained of did not constitute a
crime, actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct, or an intentional
wrong. Such indemnification shall be accomplished by Township Committee
adoption of a resolution containing factual findings and conclusions and
authorizing indemnification for the damages arising out of the claim or
litigation at issue.
§ 38-10. Retroactivity.
The events giving rise to a cause of action or claim for which a defense or
indemnification is sought must have occurred after January 1, 2004, and
any claim based on an event prior to that date shall not be covered by this
article, unless the Township Committee determines for good cause shown
that indemnification should be provided for an event prior to that date.
§ 38-9 HARDING CODE § 38-10
1:70
ARTICLE II
Policies and Procedures
[Adopted 7-7-2004 by Ord. No. 15-04 (Ch. 23 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 38-11. Establishment of titles and salary ranges.
The Harding Township Committee shall, by ordinance, establish titles for
public employment by the Township and salary ranges for Township
employees.
§ 38-12. Policies and procedures.21
The Township Committee shall, by resolution, adopt and amend from time
to time personnel policies and procedures, including rules concerning the
hiring and termination of employees, terms and conditions of employment
and regulations required to comply with applicable federal and state
employment-related law. The personnel policies and procedures adopted
pursuant to said resolution(s) shall be applicable to all officials, appointees,
employees, prospective employees, volunteers and independent contractors
of the Township. Each employee shall receive a Personnel Policies
Handbook and sign receipt for same.
§ 38-13. Implementation and enforcement; conflicts.
The Township Administrator shall be responsible to implement and enforce
the personnel practices adopted by ordinance or resolution of the Township.
If there is a conflict between said personnel practices and any duly adopted
and lawful collective bargaining agreement, personnel services contract or
federal or state law, the terms and conditions of that contract or law shall
prevail. In all other cases, the practices adopted pursuant to this article
shall prevail.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 38-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-13
1:71

ARTICLE III
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 8-6-2008 by Ord. No. 14-08]
§ 38-14. Eligible positions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 38-15. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
§ 38-16. Exceptions.
If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in § 38-14 and
the individual is not serving in a position as described in § 38-15 above,
the Pension Certifying Officer of the municipality may determine that the
individual is not required to join the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program if that individual:
A. Township Administrator.
B. Health Administrator.
C. Municipal Court Administrator.
D. Chief Financial Officer.
E. Municipal Prosecutor.
F. Municipal Court Judge.
A. Tax Collector.
B. Chief Financial Officer.
C. Construction Official.
D. Qualified Purchasing Agent.
E. Tax Assessor.
F. Registered Municipal Clerk.
G. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector.
H. Public Works Superintendent.
A. Was an active participant in the Public Employee Retirement System on
July 1, 2007 and continuously since that time;
§ 38-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-16
1:73
§ 38-17. Implementation according to statute.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 38-18. Filing of article.
A copy of this article shall be filed with the Director of the Division of
Pensions and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
B. Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process;
C. Is appointed on a temporary, interim, or "acting" basis to a position
requiring state certification as set forth in § 38-15 herein, and is in
pursuit of the required certification; or
D. Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 38-16 HARDING CODE § 38-18
1:74
ARTICLE IV
General Employment Policies
[Adopted 12-12-1967 by Ord. No. 3-67 as Chapter 2 of the 1967
Revised General Ordinances (Ch. 5, Art. VIII, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 38-19. Statement of ethics.
A. The following statement of principles shall be a guide to the conduct of
Township officials and employees:
(1) Conflict of interest. No elected or appointed official or employee of
the Township shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he
has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest
which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his
official duties, unless full disclosure is made as to such interest, in
writing, to the Township Committee.
(2) Employment or investments affecting duties. No elected or
appointed official or employee of the Township shall accept
employment or engage in any business transaction or make any
investment which will be detrimental to the Township in the
exercise of his official duties or interfere in any manner whatsoever
with the discharge of his official duties.
(3) Representation of private interests before Township agencies,
departments or Municipal Court. No elected or appointed official or
employee of the Township shall represent any private interests to
the detriment of the Township or for the purpose of unwarranted
personal gain before any Township agency or department or the
Municipal Court or in any litigation in which the Township is a
party.
(4) Disclosure of interest in legislation. In the event that any elected or
appointed official has a direct or indirect financial or other private
interest in any proposed ordinance, he shall publicly disclose on the
official records of the Township the nature and extent of such
interest.
(5) Gifts and favors. No elected or appointed official, officer or
employee of the Township shall accept any gift or gratuity, whether
in the form of service loan or promise or in any other form, from
any person, firm, corporation or entity, which is given to him in his
capacity as an official, officer or employee, other than the salary,
fee or compensation to which he is entitled pursuant to law.
[Amended 2-4-1975 by Ord. No. 1-75]
(6) Improper use of official position. No elected or appointed official,
officer or employee of the Township shall improperly use his official
position in order to obtain any benefit from any person whatsoever.
§ 38-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-19
1:75
§ 38-20. Bonding of officials and employees.
§ 38-21. Tenure.
Township officials shall achieve tenure in office as provided by law.
§ 38-22. Removal from office.24
A Township official or employee may be removed from office or employment
as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-161, as amended and supplemented.
(7) Distribution of statement of ethics. The statement set forth in this
section shall be distributed to officials and employees of the
Township.
B. The Code of Ethics set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.5 shall apply to all local
government officers and employees.22
A. Every official or employee of the Township, by virtue of his office or
position, entrusted with the receipt, custody or expenditure of public
moneys or funds and any other official or employee who may be
required so to do by the Township Committee shall, before entering
upon the duties of his office or position, execute and deliver a surety
bond in such amount as may be fixed by the Committee binding him to
the Township in its corporate name and conditioned upon the true and
faithful performance of his duties. Each officer or employee required by
law to give bond shall execute such bond with sufficient surety and
deliver the same to the Clerk, except that the Clerk shall deliver his
bond to the Chief Financial Officer before he enters upon the discharge
of the duties of his office or employment.
B. If any officer or employee shall neglect to execute and deliver his bond
as herein required within 30 days after due notification of his election
or appointment, his office or position may be declared vacant.
C. In every case in which any official or employee is required by the laws of
the state or by any ordinance of the Township to give a bond for the
faithful performance of his duties, such bond shall be secured by a
corporate surety authorized to do business in this state, and the
premium therefor shall be paid by the Township. Each such bond shall
be approved by the Township Attorney as to form and sufficiency, and
nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the use of one or
more blanket bonds when so approved.23
22.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
23.Editor's Note: Original § 5-43, Salaries, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 38-19 HARDING CODE § 38-23
1:76
§ 38-23. Abolition or modification of offices.
The Township Committee may, by ordinance, abolish, decrease or modify
the terms and compensation of any office of the Township, unless such office
has been or is created by law or the official holding such office has lawful
tenure. Except where an office is abolished, no decrease or modification of
its term and compensation shall affect any incumbent holding such office
for the duration of the term for which he was appointed.
§ 38-24. Filling of vacancies.
Vacancies in elective offices shall be filled as provided by law. Vacancies
in appointive offices arising from or created by any other cause than
expiration of term of office shall be filled for the unexpired term only and
in the manner of the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by
law.
§ 38-25. Materials to be delivered upon expiration of term;
penalties for offenses.
§ 38-26. Public office hours. [Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90;
4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 6-04]
The municipal offices shall be open between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30
p.m. on Monday through Friday, except on legal holidays.
A. Whenever any official ceases to hold office in the Township, he shall
forthwith deliver, on the day of the expiration of his term of office, to the
Township Clerk, or other person who may be designated by the
Township Committee to receive the same, all moneys, papers, books,
memoranda, accounts and any data of any nature whatever pertaining
to his office.
B. On failure or refusal to carry out the provisions of this section within
five days after the expiration of his term, he shall, on notice in writing of
such delinquency from the Mayor, be subject to a penalty of $50 for
each day of refusal or neglect to comply therewith. The penalty shall be
collected by the Township Committee in an action at law.
§ 38-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-26
1:77
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 80
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Volunteer fire departments — See Ch. 16.
First Aid and Rescue Squad — See Ch. 21.
Fees — See Ch. 171.
Noise — See Ch. 258.
§ 80-1. Definitions. [Amended 5-14-1979 by Ord. No. 5-79]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth below:
CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM — A system which automatically alerts a
person, beyond the limits of the property served, who is engaged in the
business of relaying information by telephone to the Chatham Township
Police Department. 25
FALSE ALARM — Any sound by a warning device to which a response by
the Harding Township Police Department is initiated, which was directly
or indirectly caused or produced by a warning device in the absence of
any criminal activity or other emergency.[Added 12-27-1984 by Ord. No.
11-84]
PRIVATE ALARM SYSTEM — Any system installed to serve an improved
property, store, building or other facility and designed or used for detection
of fire, smoke or similar hazards, the detection of unauthorized entry, the
commission of an unlawful act or the detection of any one or more of the
foregoing, or for reporting any emergency, which system communicates
or causes the communication of information to a central station and
communicated to the Morris County Communications Center.[Amended
12-27-1984 by Ord. No. 11-84]26
WARNING DEVICE —
Any device installed to serve an improved property and designed to
sound an alarm by a bell, horn, siren or other noisemaking instrument
located upon the property where the device is installed and audible
beyond the limits of the property in the event of the presence of fire,
smoke or similar hazards, unauthorized entry, the commission of an
unlawful act or any one or more of the foregoing.
A.
25.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 38-26 HARDING CODE § 80-1
1:78
§ 80-2. Permit required.
§ 80-3. Application for permit.
Any person desiring to use a private alarm system upon improved property
owned or occupied by such person shall submit a written application to the
Chief of Police for a permit for such system. The application shall be on a
form to be furnished by the Chief of Police which shall require the following
information over the signature of the applicant:
§ 80-4. Fees. [Amended 5-14-1979 by Ord. No. 5-79; 12-27-1984 by
Ord. No. 11-84; 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90]27
Any equipment which combines the characteristics of a private alarm
system and a warning device shall be classified as a private system for
the purposes of this chapter.
B.
A. No person shall install, maintain, use or cause or permit to be used any
private alarm system within the Township unless a permit therefor has
been issued by the Chief of Police of the Township in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
B. No person shall use a private alarm system during any period when the
permit therefor has expired or is suspended.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. The location of the property to be served.
C. The name, address and telephone number of the company which will
furnish and maintain the private alarm system.
D. The name and telephone number of a person to be notified of a faulty
private alarm system at any time when no one is present on the
property served by the system.
E. The particular type of private alarm system as defined in § 80-1 for
which the permit is sought. [Added 5-14-1979 by Ord. No. 5-79]
A. At the time an application is submitted to the Chief of Police for a
permit, an initial fee as provided in Chapter 171, Fees, shall be paid to
Harding Township for the year in which the initial payment is issued for
each alarm.
B. The aforesaid fees shall not be prorated by reason of the date upon
which an application is filed, but said fee shall be refunded to the
applicant in the event that a permit is not issued.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:79
§ 80-5. Issuance of permit.
The Chief of Police shall issue a permit for a private alarm system unless he
finds that the system covered by the application does not meet applicable
standards. Whenever the Chief of Police shall refuse to issue a permit, he
shall advise the applicant in writing of the reason or reasons for refusal.28
§ 80-6. Terms and conditions of permit.
All permits for private alarm systems shall be issued upon the following
terms and conditions:
§ 80-7. Suspension of permit.
A. A permit shall be issued for each separate improved property, store,
building or other facility, and no permit shall be transferred or assigned
in manner.
B. All warning devices which are incorporated in a private alarm system
shall be equipped with a mechanism which will automatically reset the
device so as to limit the audible signal of the alarm to a period of no
more than 20 continuous minutes. [Added 12-27-1984 by Ord. No.
11-84]
C. If required, an applicant shall furnish complete information and
specifications for the system. Such information shall include specific
data relating to testing procedures and the prevention of false alarms.
D. Every private alarm system shall be maintained in proper working
condition and shall meet standards which may from time to time be
promulgated by the Chief of Police to prevent faulty systems.29
E. Every permit shall be subject to rules and standards which may be
promulgated by the Chief of Police with respect to private alarm
systems. Such rules shall be in writing and shall be given to each
permittee at the time of issuance or renewal of any permit or at the time
of promulgation or amendment.
A. Any permit issued for a private alarm system may be suspended by the
Chief of Police if it shall appear that:
(1) The permittee has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of
the permit or has failed to comply with rules and standards
28.Editor's Note: Original § 35-6, Expiration and renewal of permit; renewal fees, which
immediately followed this section, as amended 5-14-1979 by Ord. No. 5-79, 12-27-1984 by
Ord. No. 11-84, and 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90, was deleted at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
29.Editor's Note: Original Subsection E, regarding voltage compatibility, Subsection F,
regarding number to dial, Subsection G, regarding wording of prerecorded message, and
Subsection H, regarding number or message repeats, which immediately followed this
subsection, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 80-5 HARDING CODE § 80-7
1:80
§ 80-8. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police in the denial or
suspension of a permit for a private alarm system shall have the right of
appeal to the Township Committee. The appeal shall be taken by filing with
the Township Clerk, within 14 days after the notice of the action complained
of has been mailed to the person's last known address, a written statement
setting forth fully the grounds for appeal. The Township Committee shall set
a time and place for the hearing of the appeal, and notice of the hearing
shall be given to the appellant by certified mail to his last known address,
at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. The decision of
the Township Committee and the reasons therefor shall be set forth in the
minutes of the Township Committee.
§ 80-9. Notification of use of warning devices required.
Every person who installs, maintains or uses a warning device within the
Township shall notify the Chief of Police of the Township of such device by
completing and filing with the Chief of Police a form to be furnished by the
Chief of Police providing for the following information:
promulgated by the Chief of Police with respect to private alarm
systems;
(2) The permittee or his agents knowingly installed or maintained a
faulty private alarm system; or
(3) The permittee or his agents failed to comply with a request by the
Chief of Police to render necessary services to a faulty private
alarm system within 36 hours after such request was made or failed
to disconnect such system within such period and until such system
has been repaired.
B. Five false alarms within any calendar year shall constitute prima facie
evidence that a private alarm system is faulty.
C. In the event that the Chief of Police shall determine that a permit for a
private alarm system should be suspended by reason of the provisions
of this section, the Chief of Police shall notify the permittee of the
suspension in writing by certified mail to his last known address, setting
forth the reason or reasons for the suspension.
D. A suspension shall be terminated by the Chief of Police when he is
satisfied that the conditions stated in the notice of suspension have
been corrected.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the owner or occupant of
the property served by the warning device.
B. The location of the property served.
§ 80-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-9
1:81
§ 80-10. Proper maintenance of warning devices required.
Every person who installs, maintains or uses a warning device to serve an
improved property within the Township shall promptly correct or disconnect
any faulty device upon notice from the Chief of Police that the system is
sounding an inordinate number of false alarms.
§ 80-11. Disclaimer of responsibility. [Amended 5-14-1979 by Ord.
No. 5-79]30
Neither Harding nor Morris County Communications shall assume any
responsibility whatsoever with respect to the adequacy, operation or
maintenance of any private alarm system or warning device. No action
taken by either Township or either Township's Police Department pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter shall create any liability upon either
Township's Police Department by reason of any failure of any private alarm
system or warning device, any failure to respond to any emergency or any
act of omission or commission relating to any private system or warning
device. Every permittee who accepts a permit for a private alarm system
or warning device agrees to hold and save harmless both Townships, their
agents and employees from any liability whatsoever in connection with the
system or device covered by the permit or its operation.
§ 80-12. Violations and penalties.31
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
I.32
Chapter 82
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
§ 82-1. Purpose.
This chapter provides for the reimbursement to the Township of any and
all costs expended in connection with the remediation of a discharge of
C. The name, address and telephone number of any company maintaining
the warning device.
D. The name and telephone number of a person to be notified of a faulty
warning device at any time when no one is present on the property
served by the warning device.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
32.Editor's Note: Former Section 35-14, New tape dialer systems prohibited, as added
5-14-1979 by Ord. No. 5-79, which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 80-9 HARDING CODE § 82-1
1:82
hazardous substances, as those terms are defined by state environmental
laws and regulations, including petroleum and petroleum-based products.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to apply to any ongoing
remediation in compliance with state law.
§ 82-2. Authorization for remediation.
The New Vernon Fire Department, Police Department, Board of Health,
and Department of Public Works, as well as the Township Committee as
approved agents and/or contractors, are authorized, but not required, to
mitigate the effects of any hazardous substance unlawfully discharged upon
or into any property, waters, facility, building, structure, installation,
equipment, pipe or pipeline, well, pit, pond, impoundment, ditch, storage
container, or motor vehicle within the Township. In the event that the
Township undertakes any remediation or mitigative measures, it shall not
be a person responsible for conducting the remediation as that term is
defined by state environmental laws and regulations.
§ 82-3. Parties responsible for costs.
Any person who has discharged a hazardous substance or who has failed
to report a discharge or who "is in any way responsible for a discharged
hazardous substance" as that term is defined by state environmental laws
and regulations shall be liable, strictly, jointly, and severally, without regard
to fault, for all cleanup and removal costs incurred by the Township, fire
department, emergency squad, police, or public works.
§ 82-4. Township supervision.
§ 82-5. Costs.
Costs incurred by the Township shall include, but shall not necessarily be
limited to, the following: actual labor costs of Township personnel, including
benefits, and administrative overhead; costs of equipment operation,
maintenance and repair; costs to repair any Township equipment, vehicles,
tools, machines or other personal property; costs of any contract labor and
material; and attorney's fees and consultant's fees.
§ 82-6. Period for payment.
A. In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon
order of a Township official or other authority having jurisdiction, to
remediate the effects of any hazardous substance unlawfully
discharged upon or into any property, waters, facility, building,
structure, installation, equipment, pipe or pipeline, well, pit, pond,
impoundment, ditch, storage container, or motor vehicle within the
Township, the Township may take such action as is necessary to
supervise or verify the adequacy of the remediation.
B. All persons described above shall be strictly liable to the Township for
all costs incurred as a result of such supervision or verification.
§ 82-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-6
1:83
Chapter 84
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
A. Any person and/or entity responsible for any discharge of a hazardous
substance shall reimburse the Township the full price of expendable
items and costs used to address such discharge and for all costs and
expenses set forth in this chapter within 45 days after receipt of a
statement from the Township outlining said costs and expenses.
B. Whenever any person and/or entity responsible for any discharge of a
hazardous substance fails to remit payment within 45 days as
prescribed herein, the Township may bring an action in a court of
competent jurisdiction to recover such costs, including reasonable
attorney fees and costs.
C. The remedies provided in this article shall be in addition to any other
remedies provided by the law. The recovery of costs incurred under this
article does not limit the liability of responsible parties under local
ordinance or state or federal law, rule, or regulations.
§ 82-6 HARDING CODE § 82-6
1:84
ARTICLE I
Licenses; Hours of Sale
[Adopted 12-12-1967 by Ord. No. 3-67 as Subchapter 7-1 of the
1967 Revised General Ordinances (Ch. 39 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 84-1. Types of licenses; fees. [Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No.
16-79]
§ 84-2. Hours of sale. [Amended 7-13-1981 by Ord. No. 5-81]
§ 84-3. Suspension or revocation of license. [Amended 3-12-1990 by
Ord. No. 1-90]33
Any retail license in the Township may be suspended or revoked for
violation of the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the procedure
established by N.J.S.A. 33:1-31.
A. The fee for a plenary retail consumption license shall be as provided in
Chapter 171, Fees. [Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90]
B. The fee for a plenary retail distribution license shall be as provided in
Chapter 171, Fees. [Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90]
C. The fee for a club license shall be as provided in Chapter 171, Fees.
[Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90]
D. No seasonal retail consumption license or limited retail distribution
license shall be issued by the Township Committee.
A. On-premises consumption. No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver nor
allow, permit or suffer the sale, service or delivery of any alcoholic
beverage or permit the consumption of any alcoholic beverage on
licensed premises on any day of the week, including Sunday, from 2:00
am. until 9:00 am.
B. Off-premises consumption (package sales). No licensee shall sell or
deliver nor allow, permit or suffer the sale or delivery of any alcoholic
beverage on any day of the week, including Sunday, from 10:00 p.m.,
until 9:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that package
sales of malt alcoholic beverages and wine shall be allowed during any
hours in which on-premises open container (drink) consumption is
permitted pursuant to Subsection A of this section.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 84-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-3
1:85

ARTICLE II
Possession or Consumption by Underage Persons on Private
Property
[Added 10-15-2003 by Ord. No. 21-03 (§ 141-21 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 84-4. Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by
persons under legal age on private property prohibited; penalties;
suspension of driving privileges.
A. Any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who
knowingly possesses, without legal authority, or who knowingly
consumes any alcoholic beverages on private property shall be subject,
upon conviction, to a fine of $250 for the first offense and $350 for any
subsequent offense. [Amended 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 15-05]
B. The Municipal Judge may, in addition to any other sentence imposed for
the offense, suspend or postpone, for up to six months, the driving
privilege of the defendant. Upon the conviction of any person under this
article, the Municipal Judge shall forward a report to the Division of
Motor Vehicles (the "Division") stating the first and last day of the
suspension or postponement period imposed by the Municipal Judge
pursuant to this article. If a person is less than 17 years of age at the
time of the imposition of a sentence, the period of license
postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the privilege
of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the
sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after the
person reaches the age of 17 years.
C. If a person, at the time of the imposition of a sentence, has a valid New
Jersey driver's license, the Municipal Judge shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division, along with the report. If for
any reason the license cannot be collected, the Municipal Judge shall
include in the report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye
color and sex of the person, as well as the first and last date of the
license suspension period imposed by the Municipal Judge.
D. The Municipal Judge shall inform the person orally and in writing that,
if the person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period
of license suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of
written notice shall not be defense to a subsequent charge of violation
of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
E. If the person convicted under this article is not a New Jersey resident,
the Municipal Judge shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the
nonresident driving privilege of the person based on the age of the
person and submit the required report to the Division. The Municipal
Judge shall not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this
§ 84-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-4
1:87
article. Upon receipt of a report from the Municipal Judge, the Division
shall notify the appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the
suspension or postponement.
F. Exceptions.
(1) Religious observance; presence of a parent or guardian. Nothing in
this article shall prohibit an underage person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony or rite, or consuming or possessing an
alcoholic beverage in the presence of, and with the permission of a
parent, guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to
purchase or consume alcoholic beverages. As used in this article,
"guardian" means a person who has qualified as a guardian of the
underage person pursuant to testamentary court appointment, or
other applicable laws, as determined by the Municipal Judge; and
"relative" means an underage person's grandparent, aunt, uncle,
sibling or any other person related by blood or affinity.
(2) Performance of employment. Nothing in this article shall prohibit
possession of alcoholic beverages by any person while actually
engaged in the performance of employment by a person who is
licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, or while actively
engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts
or hotel management program at a county vocational school or post
secondary educational institution; however, nothing in this article
shall be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under
this section, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81 or any other section of law against a
person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on
or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 84-4 HARDING CODE § 84-4
1:88
Chapter 90
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 258. Parks — See Ch. 280.
§ 84-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-4
1:89

ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 12-12-1967 by Ord. No. 3-67 (Ch. 61, Art. I of the 1990
Code)]
§ 90-1. License required.
Every person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog which has obtained the
age of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth shall
obtain a license for each such dog from the Collector of Dog Licenses.
§ 90-2. Fees. [Amended 4-9-1974 by Ord. No. 1-74; 12-8-1980 by
Ord. No 9-80; 11-14-1983 by Ord. No. 8-83; 3-12-1990 by Ord. No.
1-90]
The annual license fee for each dog shall be as provided in Chapter 171,
Fees, together with any fees that may be required by the State of New
Jersey to be collected by the Township. The license shall be obtained on or
before January 31 of each year. Any dog owner or any person harboring a
dog or found to have an unlicensed dog by the Township Animal Control
Officer or any other Township official after March 1 shall be required to
pay an additional delinquent fee as provided in Chapter 171, Fees, plus the
required license fee, registration fee and fees required by the State of New
Jersey.
§ 90-3. Seizure of dogs.
Any person authorized by the Township Committee to seize dogs shall take
into custody and impound or cause to be taken into custody and impounded:
§ 90-4. Notice of seizure.
A. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog, which said official or his agent has reason to believe
is a stray dog.
B. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog without a current registration tag on his collar.
C. Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring said dog.
A. If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon
or attached thereto the name and address of any person, or a
registration tag of the owner or the person keeping or harboring said
dog is known, any authorized person shall forthwith serve on the person
whose address is given on the collar, or on the owner or the person
keeping or harboring said dog, if known, a notice in writing stating that
the dog has been seized and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed
if not claimed within seven days after the service of the notice.
§ 90-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-4
1:91
§ 90-5. Redemption or destruction of seized dogs. [Amended
3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90]
When any dog so seized has been detained for seven days after notice,
when notice can be given as above set forth, or has been detained for seven
days after seizure, when no notice has been given as above set forth, and
if the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog has not claimed said
dog and paid all expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including
maintenance not exceeding an amount as provided in Chapter 171, Fees,
and if the dog is unlicensed at the time of the seizure and the owner
or person keeping or harboring said dog has not produced a license and
registration tag for said dog, the aforesaid authorized person may cause the
dog to be destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible.
§ 90-6. Nuisances; vicious dogs. [Amended 1-8-1974 by Ord. No.
14-73]
B. A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served, or by leaving it at the person's usual
or last known place of abode, or at the address given on the collar, or by
forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode, or to the address given on the collar.
A. No person shall suffer or permit any dog which he owns, keeps or
harbors to annoy neighbors and other persons living within the
immediate vicinity in the Township by barking and howling, nor permit
his dog to run at large upon the property of any other persons in the
Township nor upon any road or public place in the Township, nor suffer
or permit his dog to damage shrubbery, flowers, gardens, poultry,
domestic animals or any other property of any kind or character
belonging to any neighbor or other person in the Township. Violators of
this section may be proceeded against by complaint before the Judge of
the Harding Township Municipal Court. [Amended 10-14-1986 by
Ord. No. 10-86]
B. Any dog which has on one or more occasions attacked or bitten any
person without provocation or which habitually attacks other dogs, or
domestic or wild animals, is hereby defined to be a "vicious dog," for the
purposes of this subsection. It shall be the duty of the Police
Department to receive and investigate complaints against dogs, and
when any dog complained against shall be deemed by the Chief of the
Police Department to be a vicious dog, as herein defined, said officer
shall cause the owner of or the persons harboring such dog to be
notified in writing of the complaint against such dog and to appear
before the Judge of the Harding Township Municipal Court at a stated
time and place and further advise the owner or person harboring such
dog to keep it under control at all times. The Judge, at the time set for
such hearing, shall inquire into the facts and give all interested persons
an opportunity to be heard under oath and to be represented by
counsel, and the Judge shall decide in accordance with the evidence
§ 90-4 HARDING CODE § 90-6
1:92
§ 90-7. Registration tag not to be removed without owner's consent;
tag nontransferable.
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 90-8. Interference with persons in performance of duty
prohibited.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
§ 90-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-16-2006 by Ord. No.
17-06]
Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of
this article shall be liable to a penalty as provided in § 1-3, General penalty,
of the Code of the Township of Harding.
before him. If the Judge shall decide that such dog complained of is a
vicious dog, as defined by this subsection, notice of such decision shall
be given to the owner or person harboring such dog. If the Judge shall
decide that such dog complained of is a vicious dog as defined by this
subsection, then the Judge may, in his discretion, order the Chief of
Police or any official, police officer or other person designated by him
to cause the dog to be destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as
possible. In exercising his discretion hereunder, the Judge shall take
into consideration the number and severity of a vicious dog's bites and
attacks. No dog which has been so determined to be a vicious dog shall
be permitted to be upon any road or public place in the Township except
while securely muzzled and under leash, as provided in this article, and
the owner or person harboring such vicious dog who shall suffer or
permit such dog to be upon any road or public place in said Township
while not securely muzzled and under leash shall be guilty of a violation
of this article.
§ 90-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-9
1:93

ARTICLE II
Livestock
[Adopted 2-8-1972 by Ord. No. 1-72 (Ch. 61, Art. II of the 1990
Code)]
§ 90-10. Nuisances prohibited. [Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No.
1-90]
No person shall suffer or permit any horse, cattle or other livestock, which
he owns, keeps, leases or shelters, to annoy other persons in the Township,
nor to trespass upon public property or the property of any other person
in the Township, nor to damage shrubbery, flowers, gardens, lawns, fields,
poultry, domestic animals or any other property of any kind or character
belonging to any other person in the Township. Violators of this section may
be proceeded against by complaint before the Township Judge.
§ 90-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-10
1:95

ARTICLE III
Cats
[Adopted 5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 5-90 (Ch. 61, Art. III of the 1990
Code)]
§ 90-11. Rabies vaccination required.
§ 90-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-13-2003 by Ord. No.
17-03]
Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of
this article shall be liable to a penalty as provided in § 1-3, General penalty,
of the Code of the Township of Harding.
§ 90-13. Effective date.
This article shall take effect on July 1, 1990.
A. Vaccination requirement. No person shall own, keep, harbor or
maintain any cat which has attained the age of seven months or which
possesses a set of permanent teeth within the Township of Harding,
unless such cat is vaccinated. The provisions of this section do not apply
to cats held by a state or federal licensed research facility or a
veterinary establishment where cats are received or kept for
diagnostic, medical, surgical or other treatments or licensed animal
shelters, pounds, kennels or pet shops.
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for immunization published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in Subsection D.
C. Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the
person owning, keeping or harboring each cat vaccinated on a form
recommended by the state. Such certificate shall be retained by the
person owning, keeping or harboring each cat for as long as the cat
remains in the possession of such person, and said certificate shall be
shown on the demand of the Harding Township Police Department or
Harding Township Board of Health.
D. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the animal control
authority, upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that,
because of an infirmity or other physical conditions or regimen of
therapy, the inoculation of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
§ 90-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-13
1:97

ARTICLE IV
Feeding Wildlife
[Adopted 10-5-2005 by Ord. No. 17-05 (Ch. 184 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 90-14. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by Harding
Township, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 90-15. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 90-16. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by Harding Township, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife
(for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 90-17. Enforcement.
§ 90-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-17-2010 by Ord. No.
15-10]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Harding Township Police
Department.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 90-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-18
1:99

ARTICLE V
Trapping of Foxes and Coyotes
[Adopted 12-10-2018 by Ord. No. 25-2018]
§ 90-19. Prohibited conduct.
§ 90-20. Applicability of Title 23.
New Jersey Statutes Annotated, Title 23, entitled "Fish and Game, Wild
Birds and Animals," shall remain in full force and effect, and if any provision
contained therein or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto are in
conflict with this article, said statutes and regulations shall be given
precedence. Further, any conditions contained in said Title 23 and any
and all regulations promulgated pursuant thereto must be complied with
whether set forth in this article or otherwise.
§ 90-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of
this article shall be liable to a penalty as provided in § 1-3, General penalty,
of the Code of the Township of Harding.
§ 90-22. Study and review.
This Article V shall be reviewed after a period of three years from the date
of adoption of this article to permit the Township to review the effectiveness
of this article and to determine whether it should continue to be in full force
and effect. Unless the Township acts to extend this article within three years
of the adoption of same, the article shall be null and void and of no further
effect.
A. Except as otherwise stated in Subsection B herein, the trapping of foxes
and coyotes is hereby strictly prohibited within the Township of
Harding.
B. To the extent that it is determined that a situation arises such that a fox
or coyote is a danger or nuisance or danger to any horse, cattle or other
livestock owned, kept or sheltered within the Township of Harding or
presents as a danger to persons or property within the Township
including crops, poultry or domestic animals, belonging to any other
person in the Township, the affected person shall notify the Township's
Environmental Health Specialist, who shall in turn contact the
Township's Animal Control Services, which shall be solely responsible
for assessing and remedying the situation in accordance with the
regulations/statutes governing the live trapping of foxes and coyotes as
established by the State of New Jersey and/or Department of
Environmental Protection Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife.
C. Any and all costs for the trapping and removal of any fox or coyote in
accordance with Subsection B above shall be the responsibility of the
person requesting the trapping and removal of such animal.
§ 90-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-22
1:101
Chapter 116
BUILDINGS, UNFIT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 140. Land use and development — See Ch. 225.
§ 116-1. Findings and declarations.
It is hereby found and declared that the existence or occupation of any
building or buildings, or parts thereof, in the Township of Harding
("Township") which are so old, dilapidated or have become so out of repair
as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use are inimical to the welfare, and dangerous and
injurious to the health and safety, of the residents of the Township and that a
public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such building
or buildings or part thereof. It is hereby found that there may exist in
the Township a building or buildings which are unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of
fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitation
facilities, or due to other conditions rendering such building or buildings,
or part thereof, unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous, or detrimental to the
health or safety or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the
Township, and as to which the Township has the power, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.3 et seq., to exercise its police powers to repair, close or demolish,
or cause or require the repairing, closing or demolition of such buildings, or
part thereof, in the manner herein provided.
§ 116-2. Damaged buildings.
Any building or buildings or parts thereof which have been damaged to such
an extent that nothing remains but the walls or parts of the walls and other
supports shall, regardless of the safety and sturdiness of those remaining
walls or parts thereof, be deemed inimical to the welfare of the residents
of the Township, and the Township may exercise its police powers to repair,
demolish or cause the repairing or demolishing of the building or buildings
or parts thereof pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq., and the procedure
set forth herein.
§ 116-3. Definitions.
The following, whenever used or referred to in this chapter, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context, shall mean:
BUILDING or DWELLING — Any building or structure or part thereof,
whether used for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any
outhouses, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed
therewith.
§ 90-22 HARDING CODE § 116-3
1:102
OWNER — The holder or holders of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a building and any who are in actual
possession thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any officer who is in charge of any department or
branch of the government of the Township relating to health, fire, building
regulations or to other activities concerning buildings in the Township.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The Zoning Officer or such other officer, board or body
that is or are appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Township
Committee to exercise the powers described herein.
§ 116-4. Determination of dangerous conditions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Public Officer may determine that
a building or dwelling is unsafe or unfit for human habitation or use if
the Public Officer finds that conditions exist in such building or dwelling
which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants
of such building or dwelling, the occupants of neighboring buildings or
dwellings or other residents of the Township; such conditions may include
the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects
therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack
of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair;
structural defects; and uncleanliness.
§ 116-5. Acceptance of statutes.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 et seq., the New Jersey State Housing Code
approved by the Department of Community Affairs (N.J.A.C. 5:28-1.1), the
State Uniform Construction Code (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) and the
State Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.), and any rules
or regulations adopted thereunder, are hereby accepted, adopted and
established as standards to be used as guides in determining the fitness of a
building for human habitation, occupancy or use. A copy of these codes are
made a part of this chapter, and three copies thereof have been placed on
file in the office of the Township Clerk and will remain on file there for the
use and examination of the public.
§ 116-6. Petitions for investigation; hearings.
Whenever a petition is filed with the Public Officer by a public authority,
or by at least five residents of the Township, charging that any building or
dwelling is unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use, or whenever it
appears to the Public Officer on his or her own motion that any building
or dwelling is unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use or that any
building or dwelling is dangerous or unsafe, the Public Officer shall, if his
or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue
and cause to be served upon the owner of, and parties in interest in, such
building or dwelling a complaint stating the charges in that respect and
containing a notice that hearing will be held before the Public Officer, or
§ 116-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-6
1:103
designated agent, at a place therein fixed not less than seven days nor more
than 30 days after the service of said complaint; that the owner and parties
in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and
to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time
fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts
shall not be controlling in hearings before the Public Officer.
§ 116-7. Actions upon determinations.
A. If, after such notice and hearing, the Public Officer determines that the
building or dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use, or is dangerous or unsafe, the Public Officer shall
state, in writing, his or her findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order requiring the repair, alteration
or improvement of said building or dwelling to be made by the owner
within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the order or, at
the option of the owner, to vacate or have the said building or dwelling
vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order.
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve said building within the time specified in the
order, then the owner may be required to remove or demolish said
building or dwelling within a reasonable time as specified in said order
of removal.
C. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building or dwelling,
the Public Officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or
improved or to be vacated and closed; the Public Officer may cause to
be posted, on the main entrance of any building or dwelling so closed, a
placard with the following words: "This building or dwelling is unfit for
human habitation, occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this
building or dwelling is prohibited and unlawful."
D. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building or dwelling, the Public Officer may cause such building or
dwelling to be removed or demolished or may contract for the removal
or demolition thereof after advertisement for, and receipt of, bids
therefor.
E. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve, the
Public Officer may appoint a custodian of such building or dwelling on
behalf of the Township, who may be either an official of the Township or
any other person specially designated to enter into and take charge of
the premises and supervise abatement of the nuisance, the correction
of the defective condition or the maintenance of the premises in a
proper condition so as to conform to the requirements of the Township
Code and state laws applicable thereto; compensation of the custodian,
which shall be part of the expenses provided for below, shall be at a rate
§ 116-6 HARDING CODE § 116-7
1:104
§ 116-8. Demolitions.
If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened collapse
of any fire-damaged or other structurally unsafe building or dwelling, the
Public Officer may, after taking such measures as may be necessary to make
such building or dwelling temporarily safe, seek a judgment in summary
proceedings for the demolition thereof. Nothing herein shall be construed
to impair or limit in any way the power of the Township to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary
proceedings or otherwise, nor is anything in this chapter intended to limit
to be established by resolution of the Mayor and Township Committee
but in no event more than $100 per day.
F. If the owner violates this chapter or fails to abate a condition harmful to
the health and safety of the occupants of the building or dwelling and
the general public in the Township after notice and opportunity so to do,
the Public Officer may, by and with the approval of the Mayor and
Township Committee, bring an action in the Superior Court to be
appointed receiver ex officio of the rents and income in the manner
described in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12h through 40:48-2.12k.
G. The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this chapter determined in favor of the
Township and the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or
vacating and closing, or removal or demolitions, if any, or the amount of
the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any,
realized from the sale of materials derived from such building or
dwelling or from any contract for removal or demolition thereof,
including the clearance and, if necessary, leveling of the site shall be a
municipal lien against the real property upon which such costs were
incurred. If the building or dwelling is removed or demolished by order
of the Public Officer, he or she shall sell the materials of such building
or dwelling. There shall be credited against the cost of the removal or
demolition thereof the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any
such derived from any contract for the removal or demolition of the
building. If there are no such credits or if the sum total of such costs
exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid
costs and the amount so due shall be filed with the Township Tax
Assessor and the Township Tax Collector, and a copy thereof shall be
forthwith forwarded to the owner by registered or certified mail. If the
total of the credits exceeds such costs, the balance remaining shall be
deposited in the Superior Court by the Public Officer and shall be
disbursed according to the order of judgment of the Court to the
persons found to be entitled thereto by final order of judgment of such
court; any owner or party in interest may, within 30 days from the date
of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed in summary manner in the
Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the
accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 116-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-8
1:105
the authority of the enforcing agency or Construction Official under the
State Uniform Construction Code, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., the State
Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq., or any rules or
regulations adopted thereunder.
§ 116-9. Determination to repair or demolish.
Any building or buildings, or parts thereof, which have come into a state
of disrepair through neglect, lack of maintenance or use, fire, accident
or other calamities, or through any other act rendering the building or
buildings, or parts thereof, in a state of disrepair, to the extent that the
building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, shall be deemed
inimical to the welfare of the residents of the Township wherein it is
located, and the Construction Official may exercise his/her powers to repair,
demolish, or cause the repairing or demolition of the building or buildings,
or parts thereof.
§ 116-10. Service of notice.
Complaints or orders issued by the Public Officer pursuant to this chapter
shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified
mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same
cannot be ascertained by the Public Officer in the exercise of reasonable
diligence, and the Public Officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then
the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made
by publishing the same once in a newspaper printed and published in the
County of Morris and circulating in the Township. A copy of such complaint
or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the
complaint or order, and a copy shall be recorded or lodged for record with
the Register of Morris County.
§ 116-11. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Public Officer under this
chapter may, within 30 days after the posting and service of such order,
bring an action for injunctive relief to restrain the Public Officer from
carrying out the provisions of the order and for any other appropriate relief.
The Court may proceed in the action in summary manner or otherwise.
The remedy herein provided shall be exclusive, and no person affected by
an order of the Public Officer shall be entitled to recover any damages for
action taken pursuant thereto or because of noncompliance by any person
with any order of the Public Officer.
§ 116-12. Powers and duties of Public Officer.
The Public Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to exercise such
powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the
purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the following powers in
addition to others herein granted:
§ 116-8 HARDING CODE § 116-12
1:106
§ 116-13. Costs.
The Mayor and Township Committee shall prepare an estimate of the annual
expenses or costs to provide the equipment, personnel and supplies
necessary for periodic examinations and investigations of the buildings or
dwellings in the Township for the purpose of determining the fitness of
such buildings or dwellings for human habitation, occupancy or use, and the
enforcement and administration of this chapter, and shall authorize such
appropriation from its revenues as it may deem necessary for this purpose
and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 116-14. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers
of the courts or any department of the Township to enforce any provisions
of its charter, ordinances, Code or regulations, nor to prevent or punish
violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in
addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law.
§ 116-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,200 or
to imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day the same shall continue
to be violated shall constitute a separate, distinct offense.
Chapter 117
RUNNING BAMBOO
A. To invest the building or dwelling conditions in the Township in order to
determine which buildings or dwellings therein are unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use.
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
the Public Officer deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this
chapter.
E. To delegate any of the Public Officer's functions and powers under this
chapter to such officers and agents as he or she may designate.
§ 116-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-1
1:107
§ 117-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the public health
through the control of the growth of running bamboo-type species.
§ 117-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RUNNING BAMBOO — All native and nonnative running-type bamboo.
§ 117-3. Prohibition.
No owner, tenant, or occupant of any property or person, corporation
or other entity, shall plant, install, or cause or permit the planting or
installation of any running bamboo upon any property located within the
Township of Harding.
§ 117-4. Control of growth and duty to confine.
All persons must control the growth of running bamboo. Failure to control
the spread of such vegetation beyond the boundaries of a resident's
property is a violation of this chapter. In the event any running bamboo
is located upon any property within the Township of Harding prior to the
effective date of this prohibition, the owner and occupant of said property
shall jointly and severally be required to confine such species to prevent the
encroachment, spread, invasion or intrusion of same onto any other private
or public property or public right-of-way. In lieu of confining the species, the
property owner or occupant may elect to totally remove the running bamboo
from the property, and all affected properties. Failure to properly confine
such running bamboo shall require removal as set forth below. The cost of
said removal shall be at the property owner's expense.
§ 117-5. Inspections.
All places and premises in the Township of Harding shall be subject to
inspection by the Township Zoning Officer or his or her designee. An
inspection shall only be made if that official has received a written
complaint from a neighboring property owner asserting that the provisions
of this chapter have been violated.
§ 117-6. Removal or abatement.
A. In the event running bamboo is present on and after the date of
adoption of this chapter and a complaint is received by the Township
regarding an encroachment of any running bamboo, and the Zoning
Officer of the Township or his or her designee, after observation and/or
inspection, determines that there is an encroachment or invasion on
any adjoining/neighboring private or public property or public right-ofway
(hereinafter "the affected property"), the Township shall serve
§ 117-1 HARDING CODE § 117-6
1:108
§ 117-7. Violations and penalties.
notice to the running bamboo property owner in writing that the
running bamboo has invaded other private or public property(ies) or
public right(s)-of-way and demand the removal of the running bamboo
from the affected property and demand approved confinement against
future encroachment or, in the alternative, the total removal from the
property owner's property. Notice shall be provided to the running
bamboo property owner, as well as to the owner of the affected
property, by certified, return receipt requested mail and regular mail.
Within 30 days of receipt of such notice, the running bamboo property
owner shall submit to the Zoning Officer of the Township or his or her
designee, with a copy to the owner of the affected property, a plan for
the removal of the running bamboo from the affected property, which
plan shall include restoration of the affected property after removal.
Within 90 days of receipt of the Zoning Officer's approval of the plan
of removal and restoration, the removal and restoration shall be
completed to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer.
B. The cost of abatement and/or removal shall be borne by the running
bamboo property owner.
C. If the running bamboo property owner fails to comply with such notice
within the time specified therein, the enforcing official may remove or
otherwise control the running bamboo species and the Township may
thereafter recover the cost of such removal from the property owner
and place a lien on the subject real property for purposes of recovering
the cost of the running bamboo removal.
A. Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other
entity who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the maximum fines and penalties
established under N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 and 40:69A-29, and as same shall be
amended from time to time. Each and every day a violation of this
chapter shall exist shall constitute a separate violation. In addition, the
Zoning Officer or his or her designee may request and the Municipal
Court may grant a specific performance remedy.
B. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as limiting the rights of a private
property owner to seek civil relief through a court of proper
jurisdiction, nor the institution of civil proceedings against the proper
parties.
§ 117-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-7
1:109
Chapter 123
CANVASSING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 171.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 285.
Walk-a-thons and bike-a-thons — See Ch. 383.
§ 123-1. Permit required.
No person shall canvass, solicit or distribute circulars or other printed
matter nor call from house to house in the Township without first having
reported to and received a written permit therefor signed by the Mayor or
his authorized representative. A copy of said permit must be carried by each
such person in the course of his or her business and must be presented at
the request of any citizen or member of the Police Department.
§ 123-2. Authority to grant permit. [Amended 9-21-2011 by Ord. No.
10-11]
The Township Clerk shall have the authority to grant permits to canvass,
which shall specify the number of hours or days the permit will be in effect.
§ 123-3. Permit application. [Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90]
Before the permit may be issued, each canvasser shall make a written and
signed application to canvass, submitting it to the Township Clerk at least
two weeks before canvassing is to commence and giving his or her full name
and address, social security number, age, height, weight, place of birth,
whether married or single, length and place of residence, whether or not
previously arrested or convicted of a crime, by whom employed, address
of employer, description of the project for which he or she is canvassing,
period of time for which permit is applied and make, model, year, color and
license plate number of any automobile to be used by the applicant. No
canvassing permit shall be issued until the payment of a fee as provided in
Chapter 171, Fees, except that no fee shall be charged when the canvassing
is on behalf of an eleemosynary or nonprofit organization.
§ 123-4. Refusal to issue permit. [Amended 9-21-2011 by Ord. No.
10-11]
The Township Clerk shall refuse to issue a permit in cases where the
application of the canvasser, on further investigation of the applicant’s
business or his or her criminal background check, reveals that the applicant
has been convicted of a violation of an ordinance from any New Jersey
municipality, disorderly persons' offense or crime involving violence, sexual
abuse, fraud or other dishonesty.
§ 117-7 HARDING CODE § 123-5
1:110
§ 123-5. Rules and regulations.
§ 123-6. Exceptions.
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 123-7. Suspension or revocation of permit; appeal. [Amended
9-21-2011 by Ord. No. 10-11]
A. No person shall canvass within the Township, except between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
B. The permittee shall exhibit his or her permit to any police officer or
other person upon request.
C. The permittee shall be courteous to all persons in canvassing and shall
not importune or annoy any of the inhabitants of the Township. No
person shall enter or attempt to enter onto the property or house of any
inhabitant of the Township if such inhabitant has posted a sign upon or
near the main door to the house or the entrance to the property
containing the words "No Solicitors" or words of like meaning.
D. Upon granting of the permit, the permittee shall deposit a sum as
provided in Chapter 171, Fees, for the loan of a badge or button to be
worn at all times while canvassing. On the expiration of the permit and
upon the return of the button or badge, the deposit shall be returned.
The Township Clerk shall be in charge of the badges or buttons, and he
shall issue the same upon the exhibition of a written permit issued by
the Mayor or his authorized representative. [Amended 3-12-1990 by
Ord. No. 1-90]
A. A charitable, religious or civic organization which has its principal
headquarters located in Harding Township.
B. School projects involving Harding Township students.
C. Candidates for political office or volunteers working on behalf of such
candidates.
A. Any permit granted under the provisions of this chapter may be
suspended or revoked by the Mayor or his authorized representative
upon satisfactory cause shown. Reasons for such suspension or
revocation shall include:
(1) Arrest or conviction of a violation of an ordinance from any New
Jersey municipality, disorderly persons' offense or crime involving
violence, sexual abuse, fraud or other dishonesty subsequent to the
issuance of the permit.
(2) Violation of rules and regulations set forth in § 123-5.
B. After revocation or during suspension, such permit shall be invalid. The
permittee may file an appeal of the revocation or suspension of the
§ 123-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-7
1:111
Chapter 140
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 116.
Fees — See Ch. 171.
Land use and development — See Ch. 225.
§ 140-1. Enforcing agency established.
§ 140-2. Fees. [Amended 12-27-1979 by Ord. No. 18-79]
permit with the Township Clerk not more than five days after the
suspension or revocation of the license. Unless the permittee consents
to a longer period, the Township Committee shall hear and determine
any appeal not more than 25 days following the date the appeal is filed.
A. There is hereby established in the Township of Harding a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "Township of
Harding Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency," consisting of a
Construction Official, building subcode official, plumbing subcode
official, electrical subcode official, fire protection subcode official and
such other subcode officials or assistants for such additional subcodes
as the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of
New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform
Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency. All subcode officials and
assistants shall be appointed by the Township Committee.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217,34 as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23; provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
A. The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees
listed in Subsection A(1) through (3) hereof and shall be paid before the
34.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 123-7 HARDING CODE § 140-2
1:112
permit is issued. [Amended 3-10-1980 by Ord. No. 4-80; 3-12-1990
by Ord. No. 1-90]
(1) The building subcode fee shall be as provided in Chapter 171, Fees.
(2) The plumbing subcode fee shall be as provided in Chapter 171,
Fees.
(3) The electrical subcode fee shall be as provided in Chapter 171,
Fees.
(4) The fee for plan review shall be as provided in Chapter 171, Fees,
and shall be paid before the plans are reviewed. The amount paid
for this fee shall be credited toward the amount of the fee to be
charged for the construction permit.
(5) The fee for a permit for demolition of a building or structure shall
be as provided in Chapter 171, Fees.
(6) The fee for a permit for the removal of a building or structure from
one lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be as
provided in Chapter 171, Fees.
(7) The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be as provided in
Chapter 171, Fees. In the case of double-faced signs, the area of the
surface of only one side of the sign shall be used for purposes of the
fee computation.
(8) Certificates of occupancy.
(a) The fee for certificate of occupancy shall be as provided in
Chapter 171, Fees.
(b) The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy shall be as
provided in Chapter 171, Fees.
(c) The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a
change of use shall be as provided in Chapter 171, Fees.
(d) The fee for a multiple certificate of occupancy shall be as
provided in Chapter 171, Fees.35
(9) The fee for a permit for installation of an elevator shall be as
provided in Chapter 171, Fees.
(10) The fee for inspection of an elevator shall be as provided in Chapter
171, Fees.
B. The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Township Committee biannually a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
35.Editor's Note: Original Subsection A(8)(e), regarding a fee for a certificate of occupancy
for the installation of a wood stove, which immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 140-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-2
1:113
§ 140-3. Location survey required.
All applications to the Construction Official for building permits shall be
accompanied by a location survey, in duplicate and drawn to a scale of not
less than one inch equals 50 feet, showing the actual dimensions of the lot
to be built upon, the size of the building to be erected, the location of the
building upon the lot, the dimensions of all open spaces, the established
building lines within the block and such information as may be necessary to
provide for the enforcement of Chapter 225, Land Use and Development.
§ 140-4. Environmental impact statement.
The Building Inspector shall not issue a building permit for any building to
be used otherwise than as a one-family private dwelling or as an accessory
building thereto, until an environmental impact statement shall have been
submitted to and approved by the Harding Township Planning Board, as
required by Chapter 225 of this Code.
§ 140-5. Location of land disturbance, accessory buildings and
structures to be approved. [Added 12-11-1978 by Ord. No. 20-78;
amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90]
agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to
the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.36
C. Surcharge fee.
(1) In order to provide for the training, certification and technical
support programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act
and the regulations, the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition
to the fees specified above, a surcharge fee as provided in Chapter
171, Fees. Said surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of
Housing Inspection, Department of Community Affairs, on a
quarterly basis for the fiscal quarter ending September 30,
December 31, March 31 and June 30 and not later than one month
next succeeding the end of the quarter for which it is due. In the
fiscal year in which the regulations first become effective, said fee
shall be collected and remitted for the third and fourth quarters
only. [Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90]
(2) The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal
year to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than July
31, the total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal year
in which the regulations first become effective, said report shall be
for the third and fourth quarters only.37
36.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
37.Editor's Note: Original § 55-3, Fire limits established; reevaluation, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 140-2 HARDING CODE § 140-5
1:114
§ 140-6. Underground installation of new utility service. [Added
12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 15-79]
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall submit to the
Building Inspector written statements from the serving utilities indicating
that all utilities have been advised that underground installation of new
utility service or repairs of or additions to existing underground service (but
not repairs of or additions to existing overhead electric or telephone lines)
is required and have received a plot plan of the premises.
A. Approval. No building permit for an accessory building or structure, no
soil erosion control permit and no grading permit shall be issued prior
to the approval by the Harding Township Board of Health, the Sanitary
Inspector or another authorized representative of the Board of the
location of the land disturbance or the accessory building or structure
with respect to the location on the same premises of the component
parts of the sewerage disposal system, including the reserve area. The
term "land disturbance," as used in this section, shall mean any activity
involving the clearing, excavating, storing, grading, filling or
transporting of soil or any other activity which causes soil to be exposed
to the danger of erosion. Upon the submission to the Board of Health of
a location survey as required by § 55-4, together with an application fee
in amounts determined by the Board of Health and set forth in Chapter
171, Fees, the Board of Health, the Sanitary Inspector or another
authorized representative of the Board shall approve, condition its
approval or disapprove of the location of the proposed land disturbance
or accessory building or structure within 15 days of the submission or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. In the
event that the Board or its representative fails to take action within the
fifteen-day period specified herein, then the Board of Health shall be
deemed to have granted approval of the location. Where records are
available to show that the proposed building or structure, excavation,
cut, grading or other land disturbance would be located in violation of
Chapter 422, Article I, or where on-site inspection so indicates, the
Board of Health, the Sanitary Inspector or the Board's other
representative may disapprove the proposed location. [Amended
7-10-1995 by Ord. No. 6-95]
B. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the representative of the Board
of Health shall have the right to appeal such decision to the Board. Such
appeal shall be by written notice stating the reasons upon which the
appeal is based and filed with the Board within 10 days of the decision,
together with a fee as provided in Chapter 171, Fees, for the appeal.
The Board of Health shall hear the matter, upon notice to the applicant,
within 35 days after the filing of said notice of appeal. The Board may, in
its discretion and upon complete review of the application and after
hearing relevant testimony, reverse, modify or affirm the aforesaid
decision. If the Board shall not act within 35 days of the filing of the
notice of appeal, the decision being appealed shall be deemed to have
been affirmed by the Board.
§ 140-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-7
1:115
§ 140-7. Notification of Historic Preservation Commission. [Added
3-10-1997 by Ord. No. 1-97; amended 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 4-03]
Chapter 154
DRUG-FREE ZONES
A. The Construction Official shall give notice to the Historic Preservation
Commission regarding an application for demolition, alteration or
relocation of any structure built prior to January 1, 1915, or of any
structure which is designated as historic or located within an historic
district as established in the then-current Master Plan of the Township
of Harding. Such notice shall advise the Historic Preservation
Commission of the pending application, including the address of the
applicant. The Construction Official shall maintain a file in the
Municipal Building where the application and materials relating thereto
may be examined by members of the Historic Preservation Commission
or its designated representatives. The Historic Preservation
Commission may, if it so elects, submit an advisory report to the
applicant relating to the historic aspects of the application.
B. The Construction Official shall not issue a demolition permit for
buildings subject to demolition delay pursuant to § 225-114 of Chapter
225 of this Code until the provisions in § 225-114 have been complied
with or permits with respect to all other applications subject to
Subsection A above until the earlier of the date the Construction
Official receives a copy of a written report from the Historic
Preservation Commission to the applicant or 20 business days from the
date that the notice required by Subsection A above is sent to the
Historic Preservation Commission by the Construction Official.
§ 140-7 HARDING CODE § 140-7
1:116
ARTICLE I
Drug-Free School Zones
[Adopted 10-11-1988 by Ord. No. 10-88 (Ch. 10 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 154-1. Adoption of Official Map. [Amended 12-6-1999 by Ord. No.
15-99]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7), the Drug-Free Public Facility Map produced on or about
November 5, 1999, by Robert H. Fox, Municipal Engineer, is hereby
approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the location and
areas within the municipality of property which is used for school purposes
and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school
or School Board and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school
property.
§ 154-2. Official finding and record.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 154-1
of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or School Board
which is used for school purposes until such time if any that this article shall
be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the location
and boundaries of school property and Drug-Free School Zones.
§ 154-3. Notification of school boundary changes.
The School Board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or School Board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 154-4. Filing of map; copies.
The Clerk of the municipality is hereby directed to receive and to keep on
file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 154-1 of
this article and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and of this article shall be provided without cost to the
County Clerk and to the office of the Morris County Prosecutor.
§ 154-5. Additional determinations.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
§ 154-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-5
1:117
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 154-1
of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state and that,
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a School Board.
(3) Such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map, all of the property was owned by or leased to a school or
School Board and was being used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987,
that being the effective date of P.L. 1987, c. 101 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 154-1 of this article. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or School Board, whether
the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or
the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such
property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved
map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such
property is not owned by or leased to a school or School Board or that
such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44, concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map,
have been complied with.
§ 154-5 HARDING CODE § 154-5
1:118
ARTICLE II
Drug-Free Public Facilities Zones
[Adopted 12-6-1999 by Ord. No. 15-99 (Ch. 9 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 154-6. Approval and adoption of map.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1997, c. 327
(N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1), the Drug-Free Public Facility Map produced on or
about November 5, 1999, by Robert H. Fox, Municipal Engineer for the
Township of Harding, is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding
and record of the location and boundaries of the area or areas on or within
500 feet of a public housing facility, a public park or a public building.
§ 154-7. Official finding and record.
The Drug-Free Public Facility Map approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 154-6 of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and
record as to the location and boundaries of those areas on or within 500 feet
of a public housing facility, public park or public building, until such time, if
any, that this article shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions
with respect to the location and boundaries of public properties.
§ 154-8. Filing of map; copies.
The Clerk of the Township of Harding is hereby directed to receive and
to keep on file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to
this article and to provide, at a reasonable cost, a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. The Clerk is hereby further directed to
provide a true copy of such map and certification without cost to the office
of the Morris County Prosecutor, upon request.
§ 154-9. Legislative determinations.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to this
article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state and that,
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the location and boundaries of the area or areas on or within 500 feet of
a public housing facility, a public park or a public building.
B. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1(e), a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying on any other evidence or
testimony to establish any element of an offense committed pursuant to
P.L. 1997, c. 327; nor shall this article be construed to preclude the use
or admissibility of any map or diagram other than one which has been
approved by the governing body of this municipality or county, provided
§ 154-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-9
1:119
that the map or diagram is otherwise admissible pursuant to the rules
of evidence.
§ 154-9 HARDING CODE § 154-9
1:120
Chapter 171
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 7.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 80.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 84.
Animals — See Ch. 90.
Canvassing and soliciting — See Ch. 123.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 140.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 189.
Land use and development — See Ch. 225.
Solid waste; recycling — See Ch. 338.
Streets and driveways — See Ch. 346.
Walk-a-thons and bike-a-thons — See Ch. 383.
Sewers and water — See Ch. 422.
§ 154-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-9
1:121

ARTICLE I
Purpose, Administration of Government
§ 171-1. Purpose; fee schedule established. [Amended 1-28-2019 by
Ord. No. 01-19]
The following schedule of fees is hereby established with respect to
licenses, permits and activities required or regulated under the provisions
of various chapters of the Code of the Township of Harding. The adjustment
of any fee set forth and required pursuant to Chapter 171, Articles III, IV, V
and VI, may be done by resolution of the Township Committee at such times
as the Township Committee deems it necessary and advisable to adjust
such fees. Applications for and the issuance of such licenses and permits
shall be subject to the provisions of the specific chapter of the Code which
is indicated for each type of license or permit. The business, activity or
operation for which the license or permit is required shall be subject to all
regulations set forth in the chapter to which reference is made.
§ 171-2. Administration of Government, Chapter 7.
Type of Application, License or Permit Fee
Municipal Court, Article V
For applying for representation by Municipal
Public Defender:
Not more than $200
§ 171-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-2
1:123

ARTICLE II
Affordable Housing
§ 171-3. Development fees. [Amended 8-6-2008 by Ord. No. 12-08;
6-10-2009 by Ord. No. 07-09; 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 03-19]
A. Purpose.
(1) In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985,
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the adoption of rules by the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH).
(2) Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, Section 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and
the Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7), COAH was authorized to adopt
and promulgate regulations necessary for the establishment,
implementation, review, monitoring and enforcement of municipal
affordable housing trust funds and corresponding spending plans.
Municipalities that were under the jurisdiction of COAH and that
are now before a court of competent jurisdiction and have a courtapproved
spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
(3) This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance,
and expenditure of development fees that are consistent with
COAH's regulations developed in response to P.L. 2008, c. 46,
Sections 8 and 32-38 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the Statewide
Non-Residential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through
40:55D-8.7). Fees collected pursuant to this article shall be used for
the sole purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing in
accordance with a court-approved spending plan.
B. Basic requirements.
(1) This article shall not be effective until approved by the Court.
(2) The Township of Harding shall not spend development fees until
the Court has approved a plan for spending such fees (spending
plan).
C. Definitions. The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the
following meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is
not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a 100-percent-affordable housing development.
COAH or THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing established under the Fair Housing Act.
§ 171-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-3
1:125
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The construction official or his/her
designee.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted at N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for
the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with Sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A.
54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health,
safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, lowmaintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of
existing infrastructure and community services.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Harding.
D. Residential development fees.
(1) Imposition of fees.
(a) Within the Township of Harding, all residential developers,
except for developers of the types of developments specifically
exempted below and developers of developments that include
affordable housing, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized
assessed value for all new residential development, provided
that no increased density is permitted. Development fees shall
also be imposed and collected when an additional dwelling unit
is added to an existing residential structure; in such cases, the
fee shall be calculated based on the increase in the equalized
assessed value of the property due to the additional dwelling
unit.
(b) When an increase in residential density is permitted pursuant
to a "d" variance granted under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5),
developers shall be required to pay a bonus development fee of
6% of the equalized assessed value for each additional unit that
may be realized, except that this provision shall not be
applicable to a development that will include affordable
housing. If the zoning on a site has changed during the twoyear
period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
§ 171-3 HARDING CODE § 171-3
1:126
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is
demolished and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is
not otherwise exempt from the development fee requirement.
The development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
residential developments.
(a) Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(b) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a
site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building
permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan
approval for this purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested
on the date that the building permit is issued.
(c) Owner-occupied residential structures demolished and
replaced as a result of a fire, flood, or natural disaster shall be
exempt from paying a development fee.
(d) Developers of houses of worship and other uses that are
entitled to exemption from New Jersey real property tax shall
be exempt from the payment of a development fee, provided
that such development does not result in the construction of
any additional housing or residential units, including assisted
living and continuing care retirement communities.
(e) A development shall be exempt from an increase in the
percentage of the development fee, provided that the building
permit was issued prior to the effective date of this article, or
prior to any subsequent ordinance increasing the fee
percentage. The developer shall have the right to pay the fee
based on the percentage in effect on the date the building
permit was issued.
(f) Additions, improvements and alterations resulting in increase
of equalized assessed value of less than $100,000.
[1] With the exception of the construction of an accessory
residence, additions, alterations or improvements made to
existing structures resulting in an increase in the
equalized assessed value totaling less than $100,000 shall
be exempt if:
§ 171-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-3
1:127
[a] The addition(s) increases the square footage of an
existing structure by less than 50%; or
[b] The improvements involve alterations to, or the
rebuilding and/or replacement of, less than 50% of the
square footage of an existing structure.
[2] For purposes of determining eligibility for exemption from
the imposition of development fees, all additions,
improvements, alterations and any replacement or
rebuilding of an existing structure shall be aggregated in
determining the total increase in equalized assessed value.
(g) Any development or improvement to structures of owneroccupied
property in which there is located an affordable
accessory residence. This exemption shall only apply to
development or improvements to the property during the
period of affordability controls.
(h) The construction of a new accessory building or other
structure on the same lot as the principal building shall be
exempt from the imposition of development fees if the assessed
value of the structure is determined to be less than $100,000.
E. Nonresidential development fees.
(1) Imposition of fees.
(a) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except
for developers of the types of developments specifically
exempted below, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized
assessed value of the land and improvements for all new
nonresidential construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
(b) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except
for developers of the types of developments specifically
exempted below, shall also pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the
increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure is demolished and replaced. The
development fee of 2.5% shall be calculated on the difference
between the equalized assessed value of the preexisting land
and improvements and the equalized assessed value of the
newly improved structure, i.e., land and improvements, and
such calculation shall be made at the time a final certificate of
occupancy is issued. If the calculation required under this
section results in a negative number, the nonresidential
development fee shall be zero.
§ 171-3 HARDING CODE § 171-3
1:128
(d) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or
market rate development shall be subject to the development
fee of 2.5% unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(a) The development fee of 2.5% shall not apply to an increase in
equalized assessed value resulting from alterations, change in
use within the existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations
and repairs.
(b) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the
payment of nonresidential development fees in accordance
with the exemptions required pursuant to the Statewide Non-
Residential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through
40:55D-8.7), as specified in Form N-RDF, State of New Jersey
Non-Residential Development Certification/Exemption. Any
exemption claimed by a developer shall be substantiated by
that developer.
(c) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from
the nonresidential development fee pursuant to the Statewide
Non-Residential Development Fee Act shall be subject to the
fee at such time as the basis for the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that
event or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy
for the nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(d) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit
the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
nonresidential development fees under these circumstances
may be enforceable by the Township of Harding as a lien
against the real property of the owner.
(e) Pursuant to P.L. 2009, c. 90 and P.L. 2011, c. 122, the
nonresidential statewide development fee of 2.5% for
nonresidential development is suspended for all nonresidential
projects that received preliminary or final site plan approval
subsequent to July 17, 2008, until July 1, 2013, provided that a
permit for the construction of the building has been issued
prior to January 1, 2015.
F. Collection procedures.
(1) Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval for a development, the approving authority or entity shall
§ 171-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-3
1:129
notify or direct its staff to notify the Construction Official
responsible for the issuance of a construction permit.
(2) For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF, State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption, to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify
exemptions and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the
instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
(3) The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a
construction permit shall notify the Township Tax Assessor of the
issuance of the first construction permit for a development which is
subject to a development fee.
(4) Within 90 days of receipt of such notification, the Township Tax
Assessor shall prepare an estimate of the equalized assessed value
of the development based on the plans filed.
(5) The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy shall notify the Township Tax Assessor of
any and all requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on a
property which is subject to a development fee.
(6) Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Township Tax Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements
associated with the development; calculate the development fee;
and thereafter notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
(7) Should the Township of Harding fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business
days of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate
the amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the
dispute process set forth in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008,
c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
(8) Except as provided in hereinabove, 50% of the initially calculated
development fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of the
construction permit. The remaining portion shall be collected at the
time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer shall
be responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated
at the time of issuance of the construction permit and that
determined at the time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
(9) Appeal of development fees.
§ 171-3 HARDING CODE § 171-3
1:130
(a) A developer may challenge residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the County Board of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Board,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow
account by the Township of Harding. Appeals from a
determination of the Board may be made to the tax court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1, et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(b) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division
of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the
Director, which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the
challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing
escrow account by the Township of Harding. Appeals from a
determination of the Director may be made to the tax court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1, et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
G. Affordable housing trust fund.
(1) There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing Affordable
Housing Trust Fund to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer
of the Township of Harding for the purpose of depositing
development fees collected from residential and nonresidential
developers and proceeds from the sale of units with extinguished
controls.
(2) The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source
and amount:
(a) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of a fraction of an
affordable unit, where permitted by ordinance or by agreement
with the Township of Harding;
(b) Funds contributed by developers to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
dwelling unit development accessible;
(c) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(d) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(e) Recapture funds;
(f) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
§ 171-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-3
1:131
(g) Any other funds collected in connection with Harding
Township's affordable housing program.
(3) In the event of a failure by the Township of Harding to comply with
trust fund monitoring and reporting requirements or to submit
accurate monitoring reports; or a failure to comply with the
conditions of the judgment of compliance or a revocation of the
judgment of compliance; or a failure to implement the approved
spending plan and to expend funds within the applicable required
time period as set forth in In re Tp. of Monroe, 442 N.J. Super. 565
(Law Div. 2015) (aff'd 442 N.J. Super. 563); or the expenditure of
funds on activities not approved by the Court; or for other good
cause demonstrating the unapproved use(s) of funds, the Court
may authorize the State of New Jersey, Department of Community
Affairs, Division of Local Government Services (LGS), to direct the
manner in which the funds in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund
shall be expended, provided that all such funds shall, to the extent
practicable, be utilized for affordable housing programs within the
Township of Harding, or, if not practicable, then within the county
or the Housing Region. Any party may bring a motion before the
Superior Court presenting evidence of such condition(s), and the
Court may, after considering the evidence and providing the
municipality a reasonable opportunity to respond and/or to remedy
the noncompliant condition(s), and upon a finding of continuing
and deliberate noncompliance, determine to authorize LGS to
direct the expenditure of funds in the Trust Fund. The Court may
also impose such other remedies as may be reasonable and
appropriate to the circumstances.
(4) Interest accrued in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall only be
used to fund eligible affordable housing activities approved by the
Court.
H. Use of funds.
(1) The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan
approved by the Court. Funds deposited in the Affordable Housing
Trust Fund may be used for any activity approved by the Court to
address the Township of Harding's fair share obligation and may be
set up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such activities include,
but are not limited to: preservation or purchase of housing for the
purpose of maintaining or implementing affordability controls;
housing rehabilitation; new construction of affordable housing
units and related costs; accessory apartments; a market to
affordable program; Regional Housing Partnership programs;
conversion of existing nonresidential buildings to create new
affordable units; green building strategies designed to be cost
saving and in accordance with accepted national or state
standards; purchase of land for affordable housing; improvement of
land to be used for affordable housing; extensions or improvements
of roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites; financial
§ 171-3 HARDING CODE § 171-3
1:132
assistance designed to increase affordability; administration
necessary for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan; and/or any other activity permitted by the Court and
specified in the approved spending plan.
(2) Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township of Harding
for past housing activities.
(3) At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned
on such fees shall be used to provide affordability assistance to lowand
moderate-income households in affordable units included in
the municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability
assistance portion of development fees collected shall be used to
provide affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or
less of the median income for Housing Region 2, in which Harding
Township is located.
(a) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans,
rental assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance
with emergency repairs. The specific programs to be used for
affordability assistance shall be identified and described within
the spending plan.
(b) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to
make them affordable to households earning 30% or less of
median income. The specific programs to be used for very-lowincome
affordability assistance shall be identified and
described within the spending plan.
(c) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable housing units on
site, if permitted by ordinance or by agreement with the
Township of Harding, and funds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls shall be exempt from the affordability
assistance requirement.
(4) The Township of Harding may contract with a private or public
entity to administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, including its programs for affordability assistance.
(5) No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultants' fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program,
prepare a Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or administer
an affirmative marketing program or a rehabilitation program.
(a) In the case of a rehabilitation program, the administrative
costs of the rehabilitation program shall be included as part of
§ 171-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-3
1:133
the 20% of collected development fees that may be expended
on administration.
(b) Administrative funds may be used for income qualification of
households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units,
and compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal
or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing
sites or related to securing or appealing a judgment from the
Court are not eligible uses of the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund.
I. Monitoring. The Township of Harding shall provide annual reporting of
Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity to the State of New Jersey,
Department of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing or
Local Government Services or other entity designated by the State of
New Jersey, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing Center and
posted on the municipal website, using forms developed for this
purpose by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Council
on Affordable Housing or Local Government Services. The reporting
shall include an accounting of all Affordable Housing Trust Fund
activity, including the sources and amounts of funds collected and the
amounts and purposes for which any funds have been expended. Such
reporting shall include an accounting of development fees collected
from residential and nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of
constructing affordable units on site (if permitted by ordinance or by
agreement with the Township), funds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income from
Township-owned affordable housing units, repayments from affordable
housing program loans, and any other funds collected in connection
with Harding Township's affordable housing programs, as well as an
accounting of the expenditures of revenues and implementation of the
spending plan approved by the Court.
J. Ongoing collection of fees.
(1) The ability for the Township of Harding to impose, collect and
expend development fees shall expire with the expiration of the
repose period covered by its judgment of compliance unless the
Township of Harding has first filed an adopted Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan with the Court or with a designated state
administrative agency, has petitioned for a judgment of compliance
from the Court or for substantive certification or its equivalent
from a state administrative agency authorized to approve and
administer municipal affordable housing compliance and has
received approval of its Development Fee Ordinance from the
entity that will be reviewing and approving the Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan.
(2) If the Township of Harding fails to renew its ability to impose and
collect development fees prior to the expiration of its judgment of
compliance, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds
§ 171-3 HARDING CODE § 171-3
1:134
remaining within its Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Any funds so
forfeited shall be deposited into the New Jersey Affordable Housing
Trust Fund established pursuant to Section 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320).
(3) The Township of Harding shall not impose a residential
development fee on a development that receives preliminary or
final site plan approval after the expiration of its judgment of
compliance, nor shall the Township of Harding retroactively impose
a development fee on such a development. The Township of
Harding also shall not expend any of its collected development fees
after the expiration of its judgment of compliance.
§ 171-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-3
1:135

ARTICLE III
Construction Code, Chapter 140
[Amended 2-17-2010 by Ord. No. 02-10; 3-31-2010 by Ord. No.
05-10; 11-17-2010 by Ord. No. 15-10; 12-15-2010 by Res. No.
10-205; 12-22-2011 by Res. No. 11-244; 12-10-2012 by Res. No.
12-198; 2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 01-14; 12-15-2014 by Res. No.
14-143; 2-9-2015 by Res. No. 15-053; 12-14-2015 by Res. No.
15-161; 8-22-2016 by Res. No. 16-107]
§ 171-4. Adjustment of fees.
§ 171-5. Building subcode fees.
A. These fees shall be adjusted by the municipality effective January 1 of
each year, commencing in 2011, in accordance with any percentage
increase in inflation in the twelve-month period prior to the effective
date as measured by the Consumer Price Index for All Urban
Consumers, Northeastern Region (CPI), determined and published by
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States Department of Labor. Said
adjustments will be rounded up to the nearest dollar. Notice of the
adjusted fee schedule shall be published by the Township Clerk in the
official newspaper of the Township within 10 days of such adjustment.
B. In the event this article does not cover a specific fee required per the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, we shall then defer to that
individual fee set forth in the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20.
A. New construction and additions. Fees for new construction and
additions shall be based upon the volume of the structure. Volume shall
be computed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The fee shall be:
Type Fee
All use groups except farm use buildings with a
new or added area of:
Per cubic foot of
volume
New volume 50,000 cubic feet or less $0.066
New volume 50,001 cubic feet and above $0.277
Commercial farm use buildings as defined by
N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d) exclusively used for storage of
food, grain or the sheltering of livestock
$0.043
The minimum permit fee for building shall be $82.
B. Renovations, alterations, repairs and pools. Fees for renovations,
alterations, repairs, and work associated with premanufactured
construction shall be based upon the estimated cost of work (with the
exception of those elements whose building subcode fee is set by flat
fee).
§ 171-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-5
1:137
Type Fee
Estimated cost up to and including $150,000 $34 per $1,000
$150,001 up to and including $500,000 Additional fee of
$20 per $1,000
Above $500,001 $19 per $1,000
additional fee
Fees for projects consisting of combinations of
renovations/alteration component and additions
Sum of these fees
computed
separately;
minimum fee of
$82
C. Fees for the following types of projects shall be established by flat fee:
Type Fee
Reroofing of a single-family dwelling R-3 or R-5 or
associated accessory structures
$123
Re-siding of a single-family dwelling R-3 or R-5 or
associated buildings
$123
Lead abatement $194
Radon remediation equipment $82
Asbestos removal $123
Pool enclosure $82
The fee for retaining walls shall be as follows:
(1)The fee for retaining walls with a surface area greater than 550
square feet and associated with a Class 3 structure shall be $475.
(2)The fee for retaining walls with a surface area less than 550 square
feet and associated with a Class 3 structure shall be $275.
(3)The fee for construction of any retaining wall associated with any
structure other than a Class 3 structure shall be based off the cost
of construction.
D. The fee for moving of a structure shall be $20 per $1,000 of the
estimated cost of moving the structure. The fee for the new foundation
and any renovation to the structure shall be treated as an alteration.
E. Demolition.
Type Fee
Single-family dwelling (R-4, R-5), each $479
Accessory buildings (R-4, R-5), each $85
Structures or accessory structures to all other
groups, each
$638
§ 171-5 HARDING CODE § 171-5
1:138
§ 171-6. Fire subcode fees.
F. Signs. The fee to construct a wall, pylon or post-style sign in all use
groups shall be $8 per square foot.
G. Installation of:
Type Fee
Satellite antenna receiver $90
Elevator subcode - administrative fee, each
elevator
$112
H. Temporary event fee - the permit fee for work done in conjunction with
a temporary event: 1/3 the regular fee.
A. Sprinklers and detectors. For installation or replacement of fire
protection systems, such as sprinkler systems, smoke or heat or other
types of automatic detection systems, or manual alarm systems, the
fees shall be calculated on the number of individual component devices
as follows:
Number of Sprinkler Heads Fee
1 to 20 $107
21 to 100 $195
101 to 200 $364
201 to 400 $934
401 to 1,000 $1,275
Over 1,000 $1,594
Number of Detectors Fee
1 to 5 $51
6 to 12 $107
13 to 20 $172
21 to 100 $260
101 to 200 $321
201 to 400 $821
401 to 1,000 $1,111
Over 1,000 $1,385
B. Systems:
Type Fee
Pre-engineered suppression $167
Standpipe $353
Per each fuel-fired appliance $74
§ 171-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-6
1:139
§ 171-7. Plumbing subcode fees.
Type Fee
Per each kitchen exhaust system, commercial $167
Per each kitchen exhaust system, noncommercial $74
For each incinerator or similar device $442
Chimney liner or chimney relining $74
Smoke control systems $277
Mechanical combustion air system $85
Fire pumps $222
Freestanding Fire Department connection $222
Change from conventional telephone line for fire
protection alarm signal to DACT
$36
Temporary event fee - the permit fee for work
done in conjunction with a temporary event
1/3 the regular fee
Minimum fee will be $74
A. Fixtures and appliances connected to the plumbing system, per fixture:
Type Fee
Water closet/bidet/urinal $27
Bathtub $27
Lavatory/sink $27
Shower/floor drain $27
Washing machine $27
Dishwasher $27
Hose bibs $27
Water cooler $27
Garbage disposal (where permitted) $27
Indirect connection $27
Vent stack $27
Anti-vortex drains - pools and spas (up to 6) $27
Residential boiler $77
B. Special devices.
Type Fee
Grease traps $107
Oil separators $107
Water-cooled air conditioners $107
§ 171-6 HARDING CODE § 171-7
1:140
§ 171-8. Electrical subcode fees.
Type Fee
Refrigeration units $107
Water heater $107
Water utility connection $102
Sewer utility connection $102
Backflow preventer $102
Steam boilers $102
Hot-water boilers (pool heaters) $102
Gas piping, ancillary $46
Active solar systems $102
Sewer pumps $102
Interceptors $102
Fuel oil piping $102
Fuel-fired appliances $102
Generators $102
Vacuum release system for pool $102
Yard hydrants $102
Water treatment $102
Special devices - other $102
Temporary event fee - the permit fee for work
done in conjunction with a temporary event
1/3 the regular
fee
Cross connection backflow preventers subject to
the annual retesting, per device
$65
Minimum fee for plumbing technical section $74
A. Electrical fixtures and devices.
Number of Receptacles Fee
From 1 to 50 receptacles, fixtures or devices $73
Increments of 25 additional items $30
For the purpose of computing this fee, the term "receptacles, fixtures
or devices" shall include lighting outlets, wall switches, convenience
receptacles, smoke detectors, heat detectors, alarm devices, motors 1
HP or less, thermostats, and light standards.
B. Motors.
§ 171-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-8
1:141
Number of HP Fee
Greater than 1 or less than or equal to 10 $27
Greater than 10 or less than or equal to 50 $73
Greater than 50 or less than or equal to 100 $151
Greater than 100 $732
C. Electrical devices (including transformers and generators).
Number of KW Fee
Greater than 1 or less than or equal to 10 $27
Greater than 10 or less than or equal to 45 $74
Greater than 45 or less than or equal to 112.5 $151
Greater than 112.5 $725
NOTE: No additional charge for up to 5 switches,
fixtures or receptacles installed with any of these
devices.
(1) The fee for electrical components associated with an aboveground
swimming pool shall be $185. These fees do not cover additional
fixtures or equipment such as subpanels and electric heaters.
(2) The fee for electrical components associated with an in-ground pool
shall be $295. These fees do not cover additional fixtures or
equipment such as subpanels and electric heaters.
D. Solar photovoltaic systems.
(1) For solar photovoltaic systems for any use group or accessory
thereof, the fee shall be based on the total number of solar
photovoltaic modules being installed as follows:
Number of Modules Fee
1 to 50 modules $125
51 to 100 modules $175
101 to 250 modules $375
251 to 500 modules $700
Greater than 500 modules: an
additional
An additional $1 per module
(2) All other electrical devices, other than solar photovoltaic modules,
shall be a separate fee based on the ampere or kilowatt rating of
the device.
E. Service equipment (term includes services, motor control centers,
disconnects).
§ 171-8 HARDING CODE § 171-8
1:142
§ 171-9. State surcharge.
The fee is as adopted by the New Jersey State DCA per the NJUCC
5:23-4.19.
§ 171-10. Surcharge for third-party inspection services.
The fee is $15 per application.
§ 171-11. Certificate of occupancy fees.
Type Fee
Certificate of occupancy for a new single-family
dwelling
$495
Certificate of occupancy for addition to a single-family
dwelling or accessory structure
$90
Certificate of occupancy for residential alterations $57
Certificate of continued occupancy $195
Certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a change
of use
$195
Certificate of occupancy for a new commercial
structure
$442
Certificate of occupancy for an addition to a
commercial structure
$332
Certificate of occupancy for an alteration to a
commercial structure
$222
Multiple certificates of occupancy $85
Lead and asbestos certificates $45
Number of Amps Fee
Greater than 0 or less than or equal to 225 $74
Greater than 225 or less than or equal to 1,000 $151
Greater than 1,000 $725
NOTE: No additional charge for up to 5 switches,
fixtures or receptacles installed with any of these
devices.
F. Temporary service and 1 to 10 receptacles: $165.
G. Annual pool inspection - commercial: $165.
H. Temporary event fee - the permit fee for work done in conjunction with
a temporary event: 1/3 the regular fee.
I. The minimum electrical permit fee shall be $74.
§ 171-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-11
1:143
Type Fee
First issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy
and the renewal thereafter. (Exception: There shall be
no fee for the first issuance of a temporary certificate
of occupancy so long as the initial certificate of
occupancy fee has been paid.)
$45
§ 171-12. Fees for variations.
Type Fee
Class 1 structures $821
Class 2 and 3 structures $168
§ 171-13. Plan review.
The plan review fee shall be established at 20% of the permit fee. There
shall be an additional fee of $64 per hour for review of any amendment or
change to plans that have already been released.
§ 171-14. Storage tanks.
Number of Gallons Fee
Removal/abandonment:
Removal or abandonment of tanks 1
gallon through 2,000 gallons (per
tank)
$156
Removal of tanks over 2,000 gallons Shall be priced per alteration
fee schedule
Installation of storage tanks:
Underground tanks 1 to 2,000
gallons
$156
Underground tanks over 2,000
gallons
Shall be priced per alteration
fees
Aboveground tanks (each) $123
§ 171-11 HARDING CODE § 171-14
1:144
ARTICLE IV
Land Use and Development
[Amended 12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09; 2-17-2010 by Ord. No.
02-10; 2-17-2010 by Ord. No. 03-10; 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 09-10;
12-15-2010 by Res. No. 10-205; 12-22-2011 by Res. No. 11-244;
12-10-2012 by Res. No. 12-198; 2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 01-14;
12-15-2014 by Res. No. 14-143; 2-9-2015 by Res. No. 15-053;
12-14-2015 by Res. No. 15-161; 8-22-2016 by Res. No. 16-107]
§ 171-15. Land use and development fees.
The following application fees and deposits for technical review shall be
paid by every applicant for development within the Township of Harding
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. These application fees shall be
adjusted by the municipality effective January 1 of each year, commencing
in 2012, in accordance with any percentage increase in inflation in the
twelve-month period prior to the effective date, as measured by the
Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, Northeastern Region (CPI),
determined and published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States
Department of Labor. Said adjustments will be rounded up to the nearest
dollar. Notice of the adjusted fee schedule shall be published by the
Township Clerk in the official newspaper of the Township within 10 days
of such adjustment. Every application for development that includes a
requirement for a deposit of funds to cover the cost of technical review
shall be accompanied by two separate checks payable to the Township of
Harding: one for the application charge and the other for technical review,
which shall be deposited into an escrow account, in accordance with the
following schedule.
§ 171-16. Land use procedures and variance applications.
[Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 10-16]
Application Fee
Plus Deposit for
Technical Review
Application for
certification by Tax
Assessor of list of
adjoining property owners
$0.25 per name or
$10, whichever is
greater
n/a, this fee is set by
state statute
Appeal pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(a) (appeal from
administrative official or
agency based on
enforcement of Zoning
Ordinance, including an
appeal from a decision of
the Tree Conservation
Officer; fee to be returned
if appeal successful)
Other official or
agency: $611;
Tree Conservation
Officer: $57
$850
§ 171-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-16
1:145
Application Fee
Plus Deposit for
Technical Review
Interpretation of map or
Zoning Ordinance or
decision of special
questions pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(b)
$611 $850
Application for variance
pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(c) not involving
a subdivision of land
$611 for the first
variance plus $112 for
each additional
variance
(See § 171-17 for
variance applications
involving a
subdivision of land.)
$850
Application for variance
pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(d)
$1,648; except in the
case of a (d)(3)
variance involving an
accessory residence:
$1,099
$2,500
Request to Board of
Adjustment for an
amendment of conditions
contained in a previously
adopted resolution of
approval
$550 $300
Request to Board of
Adjustment for extension
of variance
$153 n/a
Application for conditional
use permit:
For an accessory
residence
$442 $750
For any other
residential use
$222 per unit
§ 171-16 HARDING CODE § 171-16
1:146
Application Fee
Plus Deposit for
Technical Review
For any nonresidential
use
$277 per 1,000
square feet of gross
floor area, plus $277;
per 10,000 square
feet of lot area
affected or portion
thereof. The minimum
fee (except in
connection with an
accessory residence)
shall be $1,648.
Application pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or
appeal pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-36 (building lot to
abut street)
$611 $850
Special meeting (Planning
Board or Board of
Adjustment, if requested
by or with consent of
applicant)
$1,648 n/a
§ 171-17. Subdivision of land.
Application Fee
Plus Deposit for
Technical Review
Subdivision application: concept
plan
$550 $1,000
Minor subdivision application:
lot line realignment
$1,500
1. Where all affected lots
are developed
$550
2. Where any affected lot is
vacant
$3,294 per lot
Any other minor subdivision $3,294 per lot $3,000
Extension of minor subdivision
approval
$550
Major subdivision application:
Preliminary $3,294 per lot $2,000, plus $2,000
per lot
§ 171-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-17
1:147
Application Fee
Plus Deposit for
Technical Review
Final No fee if filed
simultaneously with
preliminary; $1,099
per lot if filed
separately
50% of the initial
deposit for
preliminary
Application for a variance in
conjunction with any
subdivision of land
$1,099 or $550 per
variance per lot,
whichever is
greater (no fee for
any lawful
preexisting
condition)
$1,000
Amended application 1/2 of the original
application fee if
within 3 years of
approval;
thereafter, 100% of
the original
application fee
50% of the initial
deposit
Extension of preliminary or final
major subdivision approval
$1,099 50% of the initial
deposit
§ 171-18. Site development.
Application Fee
Site plan application: concept plan $550
Minor site plan application $826
Major site plan application:
Preliminary residential $3,294
Nonresidential $3,294
Major site plan, final $2,197
Amended application 1/2 of the original application
fee
Extension of preliminary or final approval 1/2 of the original application
fee
§ 171-17 HARDING CODE § 171-19
1:148
§ 171-19. Soil erosion and sediment control.
Application
Fee
Initial Escrow
Deposit
Grading permit and inspection:
Construction of building or addition
with footprint greater than 400
square feet, but no more than 1,000
square feet
$550 $1,500
Construction of building or addition
with footprint greater than 1,000
square feet, but no more than 4,000
square feet
$550 $2,200
Construction of building or addition
with footprint greater than 4,000
square feet
$550 $3000
Construction of swimming pool $332 $800
Land disturbance or grading greater
than 5,000 square feet, but no more
than 10,000 square feet
$222 $500
Land disturbance or grading greater
than 10,000 square feet
$222 $500, plus $30 per
1,000 square feet
over 10,000
square feet
Grading plan with retaining wall greater
than 5 feet, but less than 8 feet high
$222 $600, plus $3 per
foot over 100 feet
in length
Grading plan with retaining wall greater
than 8 feet high
$222 $1,100, plus $5
per foot over 100
feet in length
Grading plan to comply with N.J.A.C. 7:8
or the Harding Township RSIS Special
Area Standard for Stormwater
$277 $2,000 escrow
deposit
Note: Fees for structure demolition will be based on
the fees for land disturbance or grading.
§ 171-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-20
1:149
§ 171-20. Tree conservation. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
09-16]
Application Fee Initial Escrow Deposit
Application for cutting
down or removing
trees, except that no
fees shall be charged to
cut down or remove in
connection with a
homeowner's existing
personal residence
$221
Tree replacement
performance escrow
deposit
$300 per tree*
*Following completion of replanting and inspection by Township, 75% of
the escrow will be returned to applicant if replanting is deemed
satisfactory. Remaining balance of escrow (25%) shall remain posted with
Township following the initial inspection for two-year period to guarantee
tree viability. After two-year period has elapsed, applicant shall contact
Township for final inspection and to obtain release of balance of escrow.
§ 171-21. Flood damage prevention.
Special flood hazard development permit:
Application
Fee
Plus Deposit
for Technical
Review
In connection with an application for a
construction permit for a new singlefamily
dwelling or construction permit
for alteration of an existing single-family
dwelling
$222 $500
In connection with a subdivision $550 $1,500
In connection with a site plan or
conditional use
$550 $1,500
In connection with any other land
disturbance or use for which a special
flood hazard development permit is
required
$550 $1,500
§ 171-22. Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) review.
Fee
Subdivision, 4 lots or less $550
Subdivision, 5+ lots $826
§ 171-20 HARDING CODE § 171-22
1:150
Fee
Site plan/conditional use or any other type of
application for development for which an EIS is
submitted or required
$826
§ 171-23. Technical review fees.
A. In addition to the filing fees required by § 171-1, an applicant shall pay
fees equal to the costs incurred for the technical review of the
application by the Township Engineer, planning and engineering
consultants to the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment, the
Attorney for the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment and any
other professional expert or consultant whose review, study, research
and reports and/or testimony is deemed necessary by the municipal
agency in order to assure compliance with state and Township laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations. However, inspection fees paid to the
municipal engineer for inspection of improvements required by Chapter
225 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Harding shall
not exceed: i) for bonded improvements that are subject to a
performance guarantee, except for extraordinary circumstances, the
greater of $500 or 5% of the cost of installation of said improvement
and ii) for private site improvements that are not subject to a
performance guarantee, 5% of the cost of installation of said
improvement. Calculations regarding the cost of improvements shall be
determined by the Township Engineer pursuant to § 225-51A(2).
[Amended 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18]
B. Technical review fees shall be calculated in accordance with the actual
time required for review at rates established by a schedule of
professional fees adopted and from time to time amended by resolution
of the Township Committee, which schedule shall be maintained in the
office of the Township Clerk for public inspection.
C. Each deposit for technical review fees shall be held in escrow by the
Township in an account separate from the general funds of the
Township. The account shall be in a banking institution or savings and
loan association in this state, insured by an agency of the federal
government, or in any other fund or depository approved for such
deposits by the state, in an account bearing interest at the minimum
rate currently paid by the institution or depository on time or savings
deposits. The Township Chief Financial Officer shall notify the applicant
in writing of the name and address of the institution or depository in
which the deposit is made and the amount of the deposit. For a given
subdivision or site plan application, there shall be separate accounts for
the concept, preliminary and final application stages.
D. All interest earned on any account shall be retained in the account until
paid over as hereinafter provided. The Township Administrator shall
from time to time certify to the Township Committee the costs of the
technical review of an application and costs of reports and/or testimony
§ 171-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-23
1:151
as determined in accordance with the aforementioned schedule of
professional fees. If the Township Committee determines the costs
as certified to be reasonable, then such amount shall be withdrawn
from the escrow account and paid over to the Township as an item of
miscellaneous revenue.
E. An applicant may at any time examine Township records with respect to
an escrow account and expenditures therefrom.
F. All deposits for technical review fees shall be made prior to the
performance of the professional services which the deposit is intended
to cover.
G. All payments charged to the deposit shall be pursuant to vouchers from
the professionals stating the hours spent, the hourly rate and the
expenses incurred.
H. In the event that the initial deposit made by an applicant is not
sufficient to cover all technical review, report and/or testimony costs
with respect to the application for which the deposit was made, upon
request by the Township, the applicant shall, upon written notice from
the Township, make such further deposit or deposits as may be
necessary to cover further technical review, report and/or testimony
costs.
I. Whenever the interest earned on any escrow account shall exceed $100
in any calendar year, the Township Chief Financial Officer shall pay to
the applicant 66 2/3% of the interest earned during the calendar year
on such account, with the remaining 33 1/3% of such interest being
paid over to the Township for administrative expenses. Such payments
shall be made within 30 days after the termination of the calendar year
in which the interest was earned or within 30 days after the termination
of the account in the event that the account shall be terminated prior to
the end of the calendar year.
J. Whenever the interest earned on any escrow account is no more than
$100 in any calendar year, all of such interest shall remain in the
account until the termination of the account, at which time all of such
interest shall be paid over by the Township Chief Financial Officer to
the Township for administrative expenses.
K. After the completion of the review of an application for development by
the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment, or upon the withdrawal
of an application, and after all technical review and/or testimony costs
have been paid from the escrow account for such application, the
Township Chief Financial Officer shall refund to the applicant all
deposit moneys remaining in the escrow account, together with the
interest, if any, which the applicant is entitled to receive. A written final
accounting shall be provided to the applicant on the uses to which the
deposit was put. Thereafter, copies of the vouchers submitted pursuant
to Subsection F of this section shall be provided to the applicant, upon
written request. After the interest which the Township is entitled to
§ 171-23 HARDING CODE § 171-23
1:152
§ 171-24. Zoning fees.
New construction Fee
Single-family dwelling $442
Accessory dwelling $442
Additions to existing structures
Principal residence $222
Accessory building structures $222
New construction of accessory structures
Swimming pool $167
Pool house $167
Patio $167
Deck $167
Shed $167
Detached garage $167
Play equipment/house $167
Lighting plans $167
Solar arrays (ground-mounted) $167
Telecommunications equipment $167
Fence $85
Entry pier/gate $85
Pergola/gate $85
Pool equipment $85
Air-conditioning unit $85
Generator $85
Walkway/wall $85
Business signs (located in B-1/B-2 Zones), per sign $57
Survey/engineering plans/architectural plan reviews
Foundation location survey $57
Final survey $57
Revised plans 1/2 original plan
review fee
Concept plan review $440
Driveway - new construction $86
receive is paid over to the Township, the escrow account shall be
terminated.
§ 171-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-24
1:153

ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous
§ 171-25. Alarm Systems, Chapter 80. [Amended 11-17-2010 by
Ord. No. 15-10]
Type Fee
Central station $35
On premises (outside audible, bell, horn, whistle, etc.) $25
§ 171-26. Alcoholic Beverages, Chapter 84.
Type of Application, License or Permit Fee
Plenary retail consumption license $2,500
Plenary retail distribution license $2,500
Club license $63
§ 171-27. Canvassing and Soliciting, Chapter 123.
Type of Application, License or Permit Fee
Canvassing permit $10 per week
Badge or button deposit $10
§ 171-28. Gasoline Stations, Chapter 199.
Number of Pumps Fee
Not more than 2 pumps $100 annually
Each pump in excess of 2 $25 annually
§ 171-29. Streets and Driveways, Chapter 346. [Amended 2-17-2010
by Ord. No. 02-10]
Type of Application, License or Permit Fee
Application for a driveway permit $250
Appeal of denial by the Zoning Officer of a driveway
permit
$250
Application for a road opening permit $250
Application for deviation from the terms of Chapter
346
$250
§ 171-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-30
1:155
§ 171-30. Walk-A-Thons and Bike-A-Thons, Chapter 383.
Type of Application, License or Permit Fee
Permit for walk-a-thon or bike-a-thon $25 (qualified
nonprofit
organizations
exempt)
§ 171-30 HARDING CODE § 171-30
1:156
ARTICLE VI
Public Records and Documents
§ 171-31. Public records. [Amended 2-17-2010 by Ord. No. 02-10]
Copies shall be made available for purchase upon the payment of fees in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq. as follows:
A. Copies of records.
(1) Black and white copies:
(a) Eight-and-one-half-inch-by-eleven-inch ("letter") paper $0.10.
(b) Eight-and-one-half-inch-by-fourteen-inch ("legal") paper $0.15.
(c) Eleven-inch-by-seventeen-inch ("ledger") paper $0.20.
(2) Color copies: actual cost of duplicating plus pickup/delivery fee
when applicable.
(3) Large format (larger than 11 inches by 17 inches) or unusual size
prints: actual cost of duplicating plus pickup/delivery fee when
applicable
(4) Geographic Information Systems parcel printouts (black and
white): $0.10
B. Publications.
Publication In Person By Mail
Land Use Ordinance $30 $35
Master Plan $30 $35
Harding Township Code $150 $156
C. Maps.
(1) Paper: in accordance with § 171-31A with the following exception:
(a) Color Zoning Map (11 inches by 17 inches): $1.
(2) Digital map copies (per CD): $1.
(3) By mail: plus actual postage.
D. Finance Department records/documents/service:
(1) Duplicate tax bills, first: $5; each subsequent tax bill: $25.
(2) Tax search, initial: $10; continuation: $2.
(3) Internet e-check payment: $1.
(4) Internet credit card payment: 0% to 4% (equivalent to charge by
bank).
§ 171-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-31
1:157
(5) Return check fee: $20 in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:5-18.
E. Police records/documents/service:
(1) Motor vehicle accident reports shall be provided in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 39:4-131 or amendments thereto.
(2) Incident verification letter: $5.
(3) Letter of good conduct: $20.
(4) Duplicate photographs: actual cost of duplicating plus pickup/
delivery fees when applicable.
(5) Videotapes: actual cost of reproduction plus handling and shipping.
F. Electronic records:
(1) Audio record of meeting (per CD): $1.
G. Vital records:
(1) Certified copies of vital record: $10 per page (includes marriage,
civil union, domestic partnership, birth, death).
H. Special service charges:
(1) If a request is for a record in a medium not routinely used by the
Township; not routinely developed or maintained by the Township;
or requiring a substantial amount of manipulation or programming
of information technology, the Records Custodian may charge, in
addition to the actual cost of duplication, a special service charge
that shall be reasonable and based on the cost of any extensive use
of information technology or for the labor cost of personnel
providing the service, that is actually incurred by the Township or
attributable to the Township for programming, clerical, and
supervisory assistance required, or both. In such cases, the
requestor shall have the opportunity to review and object to the
charge prior to its being incurred in accordance with N.J.S.A.
47:1A-5.c.
(2) The administrative fee for supervisory and/or clerical personnel
necessary to search the requested public record which cannot be
readily searched by members of the public, or which requires
extraordinary staff time to reproduce shall be the hourly salary rate
of the appropriate employee. The public record search shall be
performed by the appropriate employee with the lowest pay grade.
I. Items not otherwise identified above:
(1) The fee for a request for a record, report, document, publication
and/or any other information not identified above will be the actual
cost of duplication plus handling, service, and shipping fees when
appropriate.
§ 171-31 HARDING CODE § 171-31
1:158
Chapter 174
FERTILIZER APPLICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use and development — See Ch. 225.
§ 174-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to comply with a State of New Jersey
requirement that Harding Township manage the outdoor application of
fertilizer to reduce the overall amount of excess nutrients entering
waterways. These restrictions will help protect and improve surface water
quality in the Township, the Great Swamp Watershed, and the Passaic River
Basin.
§ 174-2. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the application of fertilizer on a commercial
farm, provided that this exemption shall not apply to residential lawn areas
located on farm property.
§ 174-3. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this chapter clearly indicates a contrary intent:
BUFFER — The land area, 25 feet in width, adjacent to any water body.
COMMERCIAL FARM — Pursuant to P.L. 1998, c. 48 ("Right to Farm"),38
a commercial farm is a farm management unit of no less than five acres
producing agricultural or horticultural products worth $2,500 or more
annually and satisfying the eligibility criteria for differential property
taxation pursuant to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, P.L. 1964, c.
48,39 or a farm management unit less than five acres, producing agricultural
or horticultural products worth $50,000 or more annually and otherwise
satisfying the eligibility criteria for differential property taxation pursuant
to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, P.L. 1964, c. 48.
FERTILIZER — Any material, substance or mixture containing one or more
recognized plant nutrients, which is used for its plant nutrient content,
which is designed for use or claimed to have value in promoting plant
growth, and which is sold, offered for sale, or intended for sale.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water, including
38.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
39.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.
§ 171-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-3
1:159
any highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot, driveway, or other material that
prevents the infiltration of water into the soil.
PHOSPHORUS FERTILIZER — Any fertilizer that contains phosphorus,
expressed as P2O5, with a guaranteed analysis of greater than zero, except
that it shall not be considered to include animal, human or vegetable
manures, agricultural liming materials, or wood ashes that have not been
amended to increase their nutrient content.
SOILS TEST — A technical analysis of soil conducted by an accredited
soil testing laboratory following the protocol for such a test established by
Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
WATER BODY — A surface water feature, such as a lake, river, stream,
creek, pond, and any NJDEP-designated wetland.
§ 174-4. Restrictions on application of fertilizer.
The application of all fertilizer shall be restricted as follows:
§ 174-5. Additional restrictions on application of phosphorus
fertilizer.
In addition to the above restrictions, no phosphorus fertilizer may be
applied in any outdoor area except as follows:
A. No fertilizer shall be applied within the twenty-five-foot buffer of any
water body.
B. No fertilizer shall be applied when a runoff-producing rainfall is
occurring or predicted and/or when soils are saturated and a potential
for fertilizer movement off site exists.
C. No fertilizer shall be applied more than 15 days prior to the start of or
at any time after the end of the recognized growing season or when the
ground is frozen. The growing season for Harding Township is from
March 15 through October 31 according to The Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, July 1999.
D. No fertilizer shall be applied to an impervious surface. Fertilizer
inadvertently applied to an impervious surface shall be swept or blown
back into the target surface or returned to either its original or another
appropriate container.
A. Where demonstrated to be necessary for the specific soils and target
vegetation in accordance with a soils test and the associated annual
fertilizer recommendation issued by Rutgers Cooperative Research and
Extension.
B. Where needed for the initial establishment or repair of vegetation or
turf (e.g., after land disturbance) provided the application is in
accordance with the requirements of the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
§ 174-3 HARDING CODE § 174-5
1:160
§ 174-6. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
This chapter shall be enforced by a Township official(s) designated by
resolution of the Township Committee. Any person or other entity found to
be in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, for the first offense,
receive a warning and, for any subsequent offense, shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed $500 for each offense.
Chapter 177
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 258. Peace and good order — See Ch. 285.
§ 177-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall include
the meanings given herein:
FIREARM — Any gun, shotgun, rifle, pistol, revolver or other device from
which a bullet, shot, ball, slug, pellet, solid projectile or other missile, or
any gas, vapor or other noxious thing, is propelled by means of a cartridge
or shell or by the action of an explosive or the igniting of flammable or
explosive substances.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, assembled or erected on, above or
under the ground, except a fence.
WEAPON — Any firearm, air rifle, bow of 35 pounds or more pull, slingshot,
spring gun or similar device or instrument in the nature of a weapon
in which the propelling force is a spring, elastic band, carbon dioxide,
compressed or other gas, or vapor or compassed air, or is discharged by
compressed air, and ejecting a bullet or missile with sufficient force to injure
a person.
WRITTEN PERMISSION — Includes written permission granted by a
landowner to a game protective association or a gun club, provided that the
person using, discharging or possessing the firearm has in his possession
valid evidence of his membership in good standing in such association or
club.[Added 1-14-1975 by Ord. No. 8-74]
C. Where the application delivers liquid or granular fertilizer under the
soils surface, directly to the feeder roots.
D. Where needed for the application of fertilizer to residential container
plantings, flowerbeds, shrubbery, vegetable gardens, specimen trees,
and fruit trees.
§ 174-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-2
1:161
§ 177-2. Use restricted.
Except as provided in § 177-3 of this chapter, no person shall, at any time:
A. Use, discharge or fire any firearm or weapon or carry, transport or
possess any loaded firearm or weapon within 450 feet of a structure
unless the structure is owned or leased by said person or a member of
his immediate family (i.e., within two degrees of consanguinity) or
unless the person has in his possession written permission of the owner,
which permission states the duration of its effectiveness.
B. Use, discharge or fire any firearm or weapon or carry, transport or
possess any loaded firearm or weapon within 100 feet of a public
highway, street or road.
C. Use, discharge or fire any firearm or weapon in the direction of any
public highway, street or road unless the person is more than 450 feet
from such public highway, street or road.
D. Use, discharge or fire any firearm or weapon in the direction of any
driveway or private road unless the person is more than 450 feet from
such driveway or private road or unless the driveway is owned or leased
by said person or a member of his immediate family (i.e., within two
degrees of consanguinity) or unless the person has in his possession
written permission of the owner, which permission states the duration
of its effectiveness.
E. Use, discharge or fire any firearm or weapon or carry, transport or
possess any loaded firearm or weapon for the purpose of practice,
match, target, trap or skeet shooting or shooting exhibitions with
firearms or weapons, unless he has the written approval of the Harding
Township Police Department. Such approval shall be requested in
writing to the Police Department, which shall inspect the premises and
advise the applicant of the decision on the application within two weeks
of receipt of such request. Permission shall be granted or denied on the
basis of safety. Where permission is denied, the Police Department shall
furnish the applicant with a written statement of the reasons for the
denial. Where permitted, shooting shall be confined to an area shown
on a sketch, a copy of which shall be given to the applicant. The sketch
shall indicate the location of the person shooting, the direction and
angle of the permissible shooting and the location of the target area.
The sketch shall also indicate all structures and unusual topographic
features within 450 feet of the approved shooting site. Permission shall
be limited to designated types of shooting and designated types of
firearms or weapons. Permission may be denied where the Police
Department determines that the applicant does not possess sufficient
property of his own so that projectiles discharged in the use of the
target range will fall in a safe location or where the applicant does not
possess written permission of a neighbor whose safety may be
jeopardized by the use of the target range. The Police Department shall
have the right to investigate the knowledge and skill of the applicant in
§ 177-2 HARDING CODE § 177-2
1:162
§ 177-3. Exceptions.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit the use,
discharge or possession of firearms or weapons by:
the use of firearms or weapons and to impose reasonable conditions
on the approval, such as requiring backstops and other safety features
and requiring that the range not be used except under the supervision
of one of the named applicants. Permission shall remain in effect until
such time as conditions change so as to make use of the target range
unsafe; for example, (but not limited to) when a structure owned by
someone other than the applicant is built in a location which makes
shooting on the approved shooting site unsafe. Approval may be
revoked by the Harding Township Police Department upon the
Department's finding a misuse of the approval or noncompliance with
conditions of the approval. Any person or entity aggrieved by a decision
of the Police Department may appeal such decision by writing to the
Township Committee, which shall then conduct a hearing on such
appeal, after written notice to all interested parties, and shall
determine the appeal within 35 days of its receipt. [Amended
1-14-1975 by Ord. No. 8-74]
A. Public officers or other persons enumerated in N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6, as
amended. [Amended 1-14-1975 by Ord. No. 8-74]
B. Persons lawfully using firearms and weapons in the defense or
protection of person or property.
C. Persons carrying, possessing or transporting firearms in compliance
with Chapter 39 (entitled "Firearms, Other Dangerous Weapons and
Instruments of Crime") and Chapter 58 (entitled "Licensing and Other
Provisions Relating to Firearms") of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes
Annotated, as amended and supplemented. [Amended 1-14-1975 by
Ord. No. 8-74]
D. Hunters lawfully complying with the requirements and provisions of
Title 23 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, as amended, or any rules
and regulations promulgated thereunder; provided, however, that
hunting activities shall not be conducted in violation of the provisions of
§ 177-2 of this chapter.
E. Persons transporting any firearm or weapon while traveling directly to
or from any proper hunting place, provided that such persons have in
their possession a valid hunting license; or while traveling directly to or
from any proper place for practice, match, target, trap or skeet
shooting, or shooting exhibitions; provided, however, that during the
course of traveling for the purposes set forth in this subsection, the
firearm or weapon is unloaded and contained in a closed and fastened
case, gunbox, securely tied package or locked in the trunk of the
automobile in which the person is transporting the firearm or weapon;
and provided, further, that the course of travel to or from such places
§ 177-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-3
1:163
§ 177-4. Effect of provisions.
This chapter shall have no force or effect within the boundaries of the lands
owned by the United States of America in the Township of Harding.40
Chapter 189
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 171.
§ 189-1. License required; expiration, renewal and fees.41
No person shall conduct a retail food establishment except as defined and
regulated by N.J.A.C. 8:24, Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and
Food and Beverage Vending Machines. All licenses shall expire annually on
May 31 of each year, and applications for renewal thereof shall be submitted
may include such deviations as may be reasonable or necessary under
the circumstances.
F. Any farmers or fruit growers using firearms or weapons against gray
squirrels, rabbits or hares on property owned or leased by them and
used for the raising of fruit, vegetables, trees, shrubbery, nursery stock
or other produce; provided, however, that they first file a statement of
their intention to do so with the Harding Township Police Department;
and provided, also, that they fully comply with N.J.S.A. 23:4-9.
G. Any person killing crows, hawks, woodchuck and vermin when in the
act of destroying poultry, crops or property, as permitted by N.J.S.A.
23:4-25; provided, however, that they first file a statement of their
intention to do so with the Harding Township Police Department.
H. Any owner or lessee of any land, a portion of which is pasture fields
seeded with cultivated grass or land on which planted crops are
growing, or the authorized agents of the owner or lessee of such land,
having on their person a written permit issued by the Division of Fish,
Game and Shell Fisheries in the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and countersigned by the owner or lessee, or
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 23:4-42, and killing any deer that may be
found on that land during the period covered by the permit, provided,
however, that they first file a statement of their intention to do so with
the Harding Township Police Department.
40.Editor's Note: Original Section 4-7.5, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 1-14-1975 by Ord. No. 8-74.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 177-3 HARDING CODE § 189-1
1:164
together with the required fee prior to June 1 of each year. Fees for such
licenses shall be as provided in Chapter 171, Fees, except that the Board of
Health may waive license fees for nonprofit organizations.
Chapter 193
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 285.
§ 189-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-1
1:165

ARTICLE I
Raffle Licenses
§ 193-1. Authority to approve granting of raffle licenses;
notification required.
A. The Township Clerk is hereby delegated the authority to approve the
granting of raffle licenses within the Township of Harding. In the event
that the Township Clerk has a conflict of interest or is otherwise unable
to issue said license, the Township Committee shall retain the authority.
B. The Township Clerk shall notify the Township Committee when raffles
are issued.
§ 193-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-1
1:167
Chapter 199
GASOLINE STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 171. Land use and development — See Ch. 225.
§ 199-1. License required. [Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90]42
Gas stations are not a permitted use unless Board of Adjustment approval is
granted. This chapter applies to those instances.
§ 199-2. Issuance of license. [Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90]
The issuance of any such license shall be in the discretion of the Township
Committee and shall be issued by that body upon the payment by the
applicant of the proper fee therefor as hereinafter provided, together with
the sum as provided in Chapter 171, Fees, for the cost and expense of
issuing such license.
§ 199-3. Duration of license; nontransferability.
Every such license shall remain in force and be valid only for the time
therein expressed, or, if none is expressed, such licenses shall apply only to
the person or persons to whom granted and shall not be transferable for the
calendar year in which they are issued.
§ 199-4. Display of license.
Any person to whom such license is granted, as herein provided, is hereby
required to exhibit such license whenever called upon so to do by a police
officer or other person.
§ 199-5. Fees. [Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90]
The license fees under this chapter shall be as provided in Chapter 171,
Fees.
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 193-1 HARDING CODE § 199-5
1:168
Chapter 204
GRADING PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 140.
Land use and development — See Ch. 225.
Streets and driveways — See Ch. 346.
§ 204-1. Findings and purposes.
The Township Committee does hereby find that grading and related site
improvements not subject to subdivision or site plan approval should be
suitably regulated to ensure compliance with various Township
requirements. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish an efficient and
effective mechanism to ensure such regulation.
§ 204-2. Applicability and exemptions.
A. Applicability. Subject to the provisions listed below, a grading permit is
required for any project which includes any of the following:
[Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 07-17; 5-14-2018 by Ord. No.
07-18]
(1) Any project that results in a net increase to lot coverage that is
more than 0.5% of the lot size.
(2) Projects which result in a disturbance of more than 5,000 square
feet that are required to comply with Article XVII (Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control) of the Township Land Use and Development
Code (Chapter 225).
(3) Projects that include construction of a new driveway.
(4) Any project that increases net lot coverage by more than 1,000
square feet.
B. Exemptions. Projects exempt from the requirements of the section are
as follows:
(1) Projects receiving subdivision or site plan approval from the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, provided that required
performance bonds and inspection fees have been posted. This
exemption is applicable only to subdivision or site plan
improvements and not individual lot construction.
(2) Projects that are exempt from Article XVII (Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control) and have been granted a variance from
stormwater requirements and steep slope requirements (as
applicable) and do not include construction of a driveway.
§ 199-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-2
1:169
§ 204-3. Permit procedures.
Whenever a permit is required in connection with an applicable project, said
permit shall be obtained from the Township Engineer in accordance with
the procedures set forth below and the requirements and standards of this
chapter.
§ 204-4. Permit issuance.
The Township Engineer shall issue a grading permit upon receipt of an
application for such permit, approval of a grading plan, and payment of
permit fees and escrow fees as required in Article III of the Township Land
Use and Development Code (Chapter 225, § 225-7). For projects that are
subject to Article XVII (Soil Erosion and Sediment Control) of the Township
Land Use and Development Code (Chapter 225), a grading permit shall not
be issued unless plan certification has been granted.
§ 204-5. Plan content.
All permit applications shall be accompanied by a grading plan prepared by
a licensed professional engineer. The plan shall include the following:
(3) Any project that results in a net increase to lot coverage of less
than 400 square feet. [Added 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 07-17;
amended 5-14-2018 by Ord. No. 07-18]
A. Any person desiring to engage in activities identified in § 204-2A of this
section shall file an application with the Building Department on a form
to be provided for said purpose and shall pay the associated application
and escrow fees. Application and escrow fees shall be in accordance
with Article III of the Township Land Use and Development Code
(Chapter 225, § 225-7). Said application shall be accompanied by a
grading plan prepared by a licensed professional engineer.
B. Any person desiring to engage in activities subject to Article XVII (Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control) of the Township Land Use and
Development Code (Chapter 225) shall also submit an application for
plan certification as required by that article.
C. The filing of an application shall constitute the applicant's consent to
the Township Engineer or his/her designee(s) for entry upon the land
for purposes of inspection and enforcement.
D. Within 30 days of the filing of an application, the Township Engineer
shall render his/her decision upon the application and, in the case of
partial or complete disapproval, shall set forth the basis for such
decision in writing.
A. All information as required on Checklist A, attached to this chapter.43
43.Editor's Note: Checklist A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 204-2 HARDING CODE § 204-5
1:170
§ 204-6. Approval of plan.
In considering and approving a plan, the Township Engineer may impose
reasonable conditions or requirements necessary or desirable for the
proper implementation of the plan, in accordance with the purposes and
intent of this chapter.
§ 204-7. Compliance with plan.
After a plan has been approved, it shall be unlawful for the applicant, or
any person performing services in implementing the plan, to deviate from
or change, amend or modify the plan in any way, except in accordance with
§ 204-8 below.
§ 204-8. Minor amendments to plan.
Amendments, changes or modifications of a minor nature to a plan required
as the result of conditions arising in the field during construction may be
ordered or approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 204-9. Standards for permit issuance.
The following factors shall be taken into consideration in determining
whether to issue a grading permit:
B. All information as necessary or appropriate to fully and adequately
describe the proposed project and all measures required to comply with
requirements of the Township Code.
C. The plan shall cover all stages and aspects of the proposed project from
grading, stripping, excavation and other site preparation through and
including both final grading and the installation of permanent
improvements.
A. Whether the proposed project is in conformance with the following
sections of the Township Code (as applicable):
(1) Soil erosion and sediment control (Article XVII of Chapter 225).
(2) Steep slopes (Article XVIII of Chapter 225).
(3) Flood damage prevention (Article XIX of Chapter 225).
(4) Stormwater management (Article XXXIX of Chapter 225).
(5) Driveways (Article III of Chapter 346).
B. Whether the proposed project would permanently alter existing
drainage patterns.
C. Whether the grading activity has any negative impact on the
stormwater drainage onto adjoining lands.
§ 204-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-9
1:171
§ 204-10. Enforcement and inspection.
§ 204-11. Violations and penalties.
D. Whether the proposed project, whenever feasible, retains and protects
natural vegetation and the natural ground surface.
E. Whether the proposed design conforms to accepted safety and
engineering practices.
A. The requirements of this chapter shall be enforced by the Township
Engineer who shall also inspect or require adequate inspection of the
work carried out pursuant to this chapter.
B. Generally, inspections shall be conducted at the following times:
(1) Prior to the issuance of a permit to evaluate existing site conditions
and identify potential problems.
(2) Intermittently during the course of construction to verify the
maintenance of satisfactory site conditions.
(3) During the construction of all required stormwater control
measures.
(4) After completion of all construction and the completion of
vegetative stabilization measures.
(5) At other times as may be necessary because of unsatisfactory
conditions.
C. If the Township Engineer finds conditions other than as shown in the
plan, or in the event of failure to comply with the plan or any condition
thereto, he/she may refuse to approve further work and may require
necessary measures to be promptly installed and may require
modifications to the plan when, in the judgment of the Township
Engineer, such are necessary to properly control off-site impacts.
D. The applicant shall have the approved plan on site during construction.
E. In the event of failure to comply with the requirements of this section,
the Zoning Official shall refuse to issue zoning permits and shall revoke
zoning permits which may have been issued.
A. If any person violates any of the provisions of this chapter, the Township
may institute a civil action in the Superior Court for injunctive relief to
prohibit and prevent such violation or violations, and such court may
proceed in a summary manner.
B. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, any
standard promulgated pursuant to this chapter or fails to comply with
the provisions of a grading permit shall be liable to a penalty of not less
than $25 nor more than $2,000, to be collected in a summary
§ 204-9 HARDING CODE § 204-11
1:172
§ 204-12. Appeals.
proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1
et seq. except for soil erosion and sediment control violations which
shall be subject to the provisions of § 225-94.
C. The Superior Court and municipal court shall have jurisdiction to
enforce the Penalty Enforcement Law.
D. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it
continues shall constitute an additional separate and distinct offense.
A. Grading plan approval. Any person aggrieved by a decision or action of
the Township Engineer in denying plan approval shall first submit a
written request for reconsideration to the Township Engineer within 10
working days of the action taken, and schedule a meeting to review the
reasons for the denial. If the applicant is still aggrieved, the Engineer
shall identify the bases for noncompliance in a written opinion within 35
calendar days after the meeting, unless additional time is mutually
agreed upon by the Township Engineer and the aggrieved person. If the
applicant is still aggrieved, he shall file a written notice of appeal with
the Township Clerk within 10 working days of the meeting with the
Township Engineer, and the Township Committee shall hear the appeal
within 60 days of receipt of the notice of appeal.
B. Steep slope requirements. Development of steep slopes is regulated in
§ 225-116 of the Land Use and Development Ordinance. Any appeals
must be heard by the Board of Adjustment.
C. Flood damage prevention requirements. Exceptions from flood damage
prevention requirements must be heard by the Planning Board in
accordance with § 225-102 of the Land Use and Development
Ordinance.
D. Stormwater management requirements. Stormwater management
requirements are referenced in § 225-116 of the Land Use and
Development Ordinance. Any appeals, including appeals of any waiver
determination by the Township Engineer, must be heard by the Board of
Adjustment.
E. Driveways. Driveway standards are contained in § 225-76 of the Land
Use and Development Ordinance. Any appeals to these standards must
be heard by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with § 346-14D of
the Township Code.
§ 204-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-12
1:173
Chapter 225
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 116.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 140.
Fees — See Ch. 171.
Gasoline stations — See Ch. 199.
Noise — See Ch. 258.
Parks — See Ch. 280.
Streets and driveways — See Ch. 346.
Sewers and water — See Ch. 422.
§ 204-12 HARDING CODE § 204-12
1:174
Part 1
Administration And General Provisions
ARTICLE I
Purpose, Administration and Enforcement
§ 225-1. Purpose.
A. General purpose. The use and development of land may have a
substantial impact upon the character of the Township and its
environment, as well as upon traffic, utilities and property values
therein, thereby affecting the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
The general purpose of this chapter, as may be more specifically set
forth herein, shall be to provide rules, regulations, procedures and
standards to guide land use and development in the Township pursuant
to the power and authority conferred upon the Township in the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
B. Specific purposes.
(1) To encourage the appropriate use or development of all lands in the
Township, in a manner which will promote the public health, safety,
morals, and general welfare;
(2) To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural disasters;
(3) To provide adequate light, air and open space;
(4) To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities
and concentration that will contribute to the well-being of persons
and neighborhoods and the preservation of the environment;
(5) To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public
funds by the coordination of public development with land use
policies;
(6) To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational and commercial and
industrial uses and open space, both public and private, according
to their respective environmental requirements in order to meet
the needs of all the Township's citizens;
(7) To encourage the location and design of transportation routes
which will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging
location of such facilities and routes which result in congestion or
blight;
(8) To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements;
(9) To promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open
space, energy resources and valuable natural resources and to
§ 225-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-1
1:175
§ 225-2. Administration.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by Township agencies,
officials, employees and consultants in accordance with the Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and the Flood Hazard and Control Act,
N.J.S.A. 58:16A-1 et seq.
§ 225-3. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment through
improper use of land;
(10) To encourage coordination of the various public and private
procedures and activities shaping land development with a view of
lessening the cost of such development and to the more efficient
use of land;
(11) To promote utilization of renewable energy resources;
(12) To promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of
recyclable materials from municipal solid waste through the use of
planning practices designed to incorporate the State Recycling
Plan goals and to complement municipal recycling programs;
(13) To prevent soil erosion, sedimentation and related damage by:
(a) Surface water retention, drainage and disposal; and
(b) Protecting exposed soil surfaces during and after construction.
(14) To minimize the expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects and the need for rescue and relief efforts
associated with flooding;
(15) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and
bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; and
(16) To ensure that potential buyers of areas of special flood hazard are
notified of the hazard and that those who occupy those areas
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Except as otherwise provided in Subsections D, E, G and H, this chapter
shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer, who is empowered to cause any
buildings or premises to be inspected and examined and to order in
writing the remedying of any condition found to exist therein or thereat
in violation of any provision of this chapter. The owner or agent of a
building or premises where a violation of any provision of this chapter
shall have been committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of any
part of the building or premises in which such violation shall have been
committed or shall exist, or the agent, architect, builder, contractor or
any other person who shall commit, take part or assist in any such
violation or who shall maintain any building or premises in which any
§ 225-1 HARDING CODE § 225-3
1:176
violation of this chapter shall exist, shall for each and every violation,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable by imprisonment in the Morris
County Jail or in any place provided by the Township for the detention
of prisoners for a period not exceeding 10 days or a fine in an amount
not exceeding $1,250, or both, except as otherwise expressly provided
for in this § 225-3. [Amended 5-16-2001 by Ord. No. 11-01;
4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 4-03; 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10]
B. If, before final or minor subdivision approval has been obtained, any
person transfers or sells, as owner or agent, any land which forms a
part of a subdivision on which, by ordinance, the Board is required to
act, such person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000, and
each parcel or lot so disposed of shall be deemed a separate violation.
In addition to the foregoing, if the streets in a subdivision are not such
that a structure within the subdivision would meet the requirements for
a building permit under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34, as
amended and supplemented, the Township may institute and maintain a
civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief.
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract of sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56, as amended and
supplemented.
C. In any action pursuant to Subsection B hereof, the transferee,
purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a lien upon the portion of the
land from which the subdivision was made that remains in the
possession of the subdivider or his assigns or successors to secure the
return of any deposit made or purchase price paid, and also a
reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any.
Any such action must be brought within two years after the date of the
recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said land,
or within six years from the date of the purchase contract if no
instrument of transfer has been recorded with the Morris County Clerk.
D. (Reserved)44
E. The provisions of Article XX, Great Swamp Watershed Environmental
Protection, shall be enforced by the Township Engineer, who is
empowered to cause the stream corridor within or along any land
subject to development activity regulated by this chapter to be
inspected and examined and to order the remedying of any condition
found to exist in violation of any provision of this article. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 5-98]
44.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Enforcement, violations, penalties; soil erosion and
sediment control and stormwater management, as amended, was repealed 11-17-2010 by
Ord. No. 8-10.
§ 225-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-3
1:177
F. Violations and penalties; flood damage prevention. Any person who
violates Article XIX or fails to comply with any of its requirements,
including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
the general penalty included in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I,
and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case;
provided, however, that any offense which also constitutes a violation of
the New Jersey Flood Hazard and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et
seq., shall also be punishable by the fines imposed by N.J.S.A.
58:16A-63. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of
Harding from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation of Article XIX. [Amended 11-17-2010 by Ord.
No. 15-10]
G. Violations and penalties; tree conservation enforcement. The provisions
of Article XXI, Tree Conservation, shall be enforced by the Tree
Conservation Officer, who is empowered to cause the land subject to
activity regulated by said article to be inspected and examined and to
order the remedying of any condition found to exist in violation of any
provision of said article. As a condition of a permit issued under this
article, any person may be required to replace any trees with
replacement trees of like or superior species and of a size not less than
three inches in diameter measured six inches above ground level.
Replacement trees shall be guaranteed for a period of two years with a
bond or cash equivalent. Any person violating any provision of said
Article XXI shall be subject to the general penalty included in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Article I. Each tree cut down or removed in
violation of said article shall be considered a separate violation. [Added
5-16-2001 by Ord. No. 11-01; 11-17-2010 by Ord. No. 15-10]
H. Violations; penalties; injunctive relief for demolition delay on historic
buildings. [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 4-03]
(1) Violations. If any person shall undertake any demolition of a
building subject to § 225-114 without first having obtained and
posted a certificate of appropriateness, such person shall be
deemed to be in violation of § 225-114. Upon learning of the
violation, the Zoning Officer or the Construction Official shall
personally serve upon the owner of the lot whereon the violation is
occurring a notice describing the violation in detail and giving the
owner 10 days to abate the violation by seeking review of the
demolition by the Historic Preservation Commission. The owner
may be required to restore the building to a condition consistent
with its historic character and integrity, as approved by the Historic
Preservation Commission. If the owner cannot be personally served
within the Township with said notice, a copy shall be posted on site
and a copy sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
owner at the last known address as it appears on the municipal tax
rolls.
§ 225-3 HARDING CODE § 225-3
1:178
§ 225-4. Zoning permit required. [Added 6-16-2010 by Ord. No.
10-10]
(2) Penalties. A violation of this subsection by a demolition without a
certificate of appropriateness therefor shall be subject to the
general penalty included in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
I; except that at least a minimum penalty of a fine not exceeding
$100 shall be imposed for each day of violation of this subsection.
Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate violation.
[Amended 11-17-2010 by Ord. No. 15-10]
(3) Injunctive relief. In the event that demolition is about to occur that
will permanently and adversely change the building and/or the
historic district without a certificate of appropriateness having
been issued, the Zoning Officer may apply to the Superior Court of
New Jersey for such injunctive relief as is necessary to prevent
such demolition.
I. Violations and penalties, failure to remove temporary real estate sign.
In addition to any other remedies which may be provided in this
chapter, any violation of the provisions of § 225-119 governing the
installation of any form of real estate sign shall be subject to the general
penalty included in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, per day for
each sign which shall be determined to be in violation of the abovementioned
provisions. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each
day during which it continues shall constitute an additional and distinct
offense. [Amended 12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96; 11-17-2010 by
Ord. No. 15-10]
A. Subject to the exemptions in Subsection B, no building or other
structure shall be erected, constructed, remodeled, moved, enlarged or
externally altered, no building or structure shall be used or occupied
and no grading permit, building permit or certificate of occupancy shall
be issued unless and until a zoning permit has been issued by the
Zoning Officer. A zoning permit shall also be required for a change in
use or occupancy of a nonresidential property and for development
activity not requiring a grading permit or building permit, including but
not limited to installation or enlargement of driveway paving, a patio,
deck, exterior stairs/steps, a sign, a fence, driveway entrance gates,
driveway entrance pillars or posts (including light posts), recreation
court, shed or other structure not requiring a building permit.
[Amended 10-19-2015 by Ord. No. 05-15]
B. A zoning permit shall not be required for the following: [Amended
6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 11-18]
(1) Internal building improvements, routine property maintenance and
exterior building maintenance or repair activity not involving
enlargement of a building or structure or a change to its footprint.
§ 225-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-4
1:179
(2) Any change in use of occupancy of a residential property involving
continued residential use or occupancy.
C. An application for a zoning permit shall be submitted by use of the form
to be obtained from the Zoning Officer and including such information
as provided for therein. The Zoning Officer may require submission of
additional information deemed to be necessary in order to make an
informed determination.
D. An application for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by the fee
provided for in Chapter 171.
E. An application for a zoning permit may be submitted for the purpose of
obtaining a determination as to whether a development proposal
requires variance relief.
F. A zoning permit shall not be issued for development activity on any
property as to which there are any outstanding unpaid property taxes.
G. The Zoning Officer shall issue or deny a zoning permit application
within 10 days of submission of a complete application, including
payment of the required application fee.
§ 225-4 HARDING CODE § 225-4
1:180
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Interpretation
§ 225-5. Definitions. [Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 4-89;
6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 6-89; 12-9-1991 by Ord. No. 8-91; 8-10-1992
by Ord. No. 4-92; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 12-92; 11-12-1996 by Ord.
No. 7-96; 12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96; 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 2-98; 6-15-1998 by Ord. 3-98; 9-14-1998 by
Ord. No. 5-98; 2-8-1999 by Ord. No. 1-99; 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
5-99; 6-21-1999 by Ord. No. 6-99; 7-12-1999 by Ord. No. 9-99]
Unless specifically defined below, or in the Municipal Land Use Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), or in the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act (N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.), or in New Jersey's Surface Water Quality
Standards (N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.1 et seq.), words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage unless the context clearly indicates a contrary intent.
ACCESSORY BUILDING or ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A detached
building or structure above, on or below the ground, subordinate and
customarily incidental to the principal building or structure.
ACCESSORY USE — A use of a building or lot or portion thereof subordinate
but related to the principal use, e.g., a home occupation in a residence.
AFFORDABLE ACCESSORY RESIDENCE — A dwelling unit that is located
on and subordinate to the main dwelling on a property, and which is
rented to an income-eligible household in compliance with the rules and
regulations of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (COAH). An
affordable accessory residence, defined in COAH rules as an "accessory
apartment," is a self-contained residential dwelling unit with a kitchen,
sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters and a private entrance, which is
created within an existing home, or through conversion of an existing
accessory structure on the same site, or by an addition to an existing home
or accessory building or by the construction of a new accessory structure
on the same site.[Added 6-10-2009 by Ord. No. 5-09]
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — A residential dwelling which is sold or rented at
a rate within the means of a low- or moderate-income household as defined
in N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4.
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Land uses normally associated with
the production of food, fiber, and/or livestock for sale. For purposes of
this chapter, such uses shall not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacture of agriculturally related
products.
AGRICULTURAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — The agricultural
management practices recommended or endorsed by the State Agriculture
Development Committee, plus those practices complying with an approved
conservation plan.[Added 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 7-00]
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:181
AGRICULTURE — The production principally for the sale to others of plants,
animals or their products, including, but not limited to, forage and sod
crops; grain and feed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; livestock,
including dairy and beef cattle, poultry, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules
and goats; grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental
and greenhouse products; and other commodities as described in the
Standard Industrial Classification for agriculture, forestry, fishing and
trapping. Agriculture shall not include intensive poultry or swine production
or extensive animal feedlot operations.[Added 12-27-2000 by Ord. No.
7-00]
APPEAL — For the purposes of Article XIX, the word "appeal" means a
request for a review of the Planning Board's interpretation of any provision
of Article XIX, or a request for an exception.[Added 11-28-2001 by Ord.
No. 19-01]
APPLICANT — An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary
interest in the land sought to be developed to commence and maintain
proceedings to develop the same under this chapter for himself or another.
The term "applicant" shall include, where applicable, a vendee under a
contract to sell, a person holding an option to purchase or a lessee.
APPROVED PLAN — For purposes of Article XVII, a plan to control soil
erosion and sedimentation, which has been approved by the proper
Township authority.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to
three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
ARTIFICIAL WETLAND — A man-made freshwater wetland.
ASSISTED-LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services (NJDOH) providing
apartment-style housing, congregate dining, and assisted-living services
when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the proprietor.
Apartment units shall be designed to accommodate one or two persons and
shall include, at a minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom,
and a lockable door on the unit entrance. Some or all of the units may also
include a kitchenette.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BEDROOM — A room for sleeping purposes with a minimum size of 150
square feet.
§ 225-5 HARDING CODE § 225-5
1:182
BOARD — Unless otherwise specified, the Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment, whichever has jurisdiction to act on a development application
in accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25, 55D-60
and 55D-70, as amended and supplemented.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Zoning Board of Adjustment of the
Township duly created pursuant to § 7-33 of this Code.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of a
building and is intended, through its design and construction, to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
BUFFER STRIP — A landscaped, planted strip providing vertical screening
to protect a development from a condition beyond the development, e.g., an
arterial road, and to be maintained for the life of the use to which the land
is put.
BUILDABLE AREA — That portion of a building envelope within which a
building or structure is permitted to be located.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a roofed structure which
is installed, constructed, assembled or erected on the ground or attached
to something having a location on or in the ground, adapted to permanent,
temporary or continuous use (see also "accessory building").
BUILDING AREA — The maximum horizontal plan projection of all covered
or roofed areas on a lot, including the main building and its accessory
buildings or structures, but not including roof overhangs of four feet or
less.[Amended 10-21-2009 by Ord. No. 12-09]
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The central portion of any lot lying between
required yards and/or setback lines. 45
BUILDING LINE — The vertical plan projection of all covered or roofed
areas. In the case of irregularly shaped or placed buildings, building lines
shall be considered lines parallel to or concentric with lot lines through the
nearest covered point of the building.
CIRCULATION — The provision for the movement of people, goods, water,
sewage or power by means of road, highways, railways, waterways,
airways, pipes, conduits or other means and including facilities for transit,
transportation and communication.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
COMMERCIAL FARM — A farm management unit of no less than five
acres producing agricultural or horticultural products worth $2,500 or
more annually and satisfying the eligibility criteria for differential property
taxation pursuant to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, P.L. 1964, c.
48,46 or a farm management unit less than five acres producing agricultural
or horticultural products worth $50,000 or more annually and otherwise
45.Editor's Note: The definition of "building floor area," which followed this definition, was
repealed 3-15-2006 by Ord. No. 7-06.
46.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:183
satisfying the eligibility criteria for differential property taxation pursuant
to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, P.L. 1964, c. 48.[Added
12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 7-00]
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a site
designated as a planned development, and designed and intended for the
use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common
open space may contain such complementary structures and improvements
as are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the planned development.
CONCEPT PLAN — See "sketch plat" and "sketch site plan."
CONSERVATION PLAN — A set of decisions regarding the use of soil
and water resources. The plan is developed by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service and approved by the Morris County Soil Conservation
District.[Added 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 7-00]
CORNER LOT — A lot fronting on two or more streets at their
intersection(s).
COVERAGE — See "lot coverage."
CRITICAL AREA — A sediment-producing highly erodible or severely
eroded area.
CUT — A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed
or will be removed by excavation; the depth below the original ground
surface to the excavated surface.
DEPTH OF LOT — See "lot depth."
DETACHED DWELLING — See "dwelling."
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment area created by constructing an
embankment, excavating a pit, or both, for the purpose of temporarily
storing stormwater.
DETENTION FACILITY — A detention basin or alternative structure
designed to temporarily store stormwater runoff.
DEVELOPMENT — Any proposal to subdivide a parcel of land for the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or
enlargement of any building or other structure, or for any mining excavation
or land fill or land disturbance (except solely for agricultural purposes), and
any use or change in use of any building or other structure or land for which
permission may be required pursuant to this chapter. For the purposes
of Article XIX, the word "development" shall also mean any man-made
change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited
to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials
located within an area of special flood hazard.[Amended 11-28-2001 by
Ord. No. 19-01]
§ 225-5 HARDING CODE § 225-5
1:184
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The application form and all accompanying
documents required by this chapter for consideration by a Board for action
on a development.
DEVELOPMENT SITE AREA, GROSS — See "site area, gross."
DIVERSION — A channel with or without a supporting ridge on the lower
side constructed across or at the bottom of a slope.
DUPLEX — See "twin house."
DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT — A group of interrelated rooms or
structures intended or designed for nontransient residential use of one
family, separated from other dwelling units by lockable doors or common
walls, having access to the outside without crossing another dwelling and
having living and sleeping facilities, cooking facilities and complete sanitary
facilities.
EASEMENT — A benefit or restriction established in an instrument
recorded in the office of the Morris County Clerk to permit or prevent the
use of land by the public or a particular person or persons, other than the
owner(s), for a specified purpose or in a specified manner.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A building without a basement built in an area of
special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated floor elevated above
the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and piers) or shear
walls parallel to the flow of water, and adequately anchored so as not
to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood as great
as the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood hazard,
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or
solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.[Amended 11-28-2001 by Ord. No.
19-01]
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The construction official responsible for
enforcement of, among other things, Chapter 140 of this Code. 47
ENGINEER — The Township Engineer.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — The Environmental Commission of the
Township created pursuant to § 7-36 of this Code.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of land surface by water, wind,
ice or gravity.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug, quarried,
uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
EXCEPTION — For the purposes of Article XIX only, the word "exception"
shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of Article XIX, Flood
Damage Prevention, which permits construction in a manner that would
otherwise be prohibited thereby.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:185
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical location of the existing ground surface
prior to excavating or filling.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single
nonprofit housekeeping unit and residing together for indefinite periods of
time as a stable and permanent living unit.[Amended 6-5-2002 by Ord.
No. 6-02]
FARM CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan which provides for the use of land,
within its capabilities and treatment, within practical limits, according to a
chosen use to prevent further deterioration of soil and water resources.
FARMING — Agriculture, including the raising and harvesting of crops or
trees as a source of income, conducted upon a lot in single ownership of not
less than five acres in area. The existence of a vegetable garden for home
consumption shall not be construed as farming.
FARM MANAGEMENT UNIT — A parcel or parcels of land, whether
contiguous or noncontiguous, together with agricultural or horticultural
buildings, structures and facilities, producing agricultural or horticultural
products, and operated as a single enterprise.[Added 12-27-2000 by Ord.
No. 7-00]
FARM MARKET — A facility used for the wholesale and retail marketing of
the agricultural output of a commercial farm, and products that contribute
to farm income, except that if a farm market is used for retail marketing,
at least 51% of the annual gross sales of the retail farm market shall be
generated from sales of the agricultural output of the commercial farm
or at least 51% of the sales area shall be devoted to the sale of the
agricultural output of the commercial farm, and except that if a retail
farm market is located on land less than five acres in area, the land on
which the farm market is located shall produce annually agricultural or
horticultural products worth at least $2,500. A farm market may be situated
within or occupy a portion of a building such as a barn or other farm
outbuilding.[Added 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 7-00]
FARM STAND — A structure having no more than three permanent exterior
walls which is utilized to sell products from commercial farms devoted to
agricultural and horticultural uses. A garage-style door(s) may be utilized
to fully enclose the farm stand for security purposes when not open for
business.[Added 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 7-00]
FENCE — An enclosing barrier, solid or partially open, to prevent straying
from within or intrusion from without. A fence more than seven feet high is
also considered a structure for purposes of this chapter.
FINAL PLAT — See "plat."
FINISHED GRADE — The final grade or elevation of the ground surface
conforming to the proposed design.
FLAG LOT — A lot not satisfying the conventional minimum lot frontage
requirements of the zone district, generally configured in the shape of a
flag, with its road frontage provided by a strip of land referred to as the
"flag staff" portion of the lot.[Amended 10-17-2007 by Ord. No. 12-07]
§ 225-5 HARDING CODE § 225-5
1:186
FLAG STAFF — The portion of a flag lot consisting of a strip of land
with insufficient road frontage which, when setback limitations are applied,
contains no building envelope. The primary purpose of the flag staff is to
provide road frontage and access for a flag lot.[Added 10-17-2007 by Ord.
No. 12-07]
FLOOD-FRINGE AREA — The area between the floodway and the boundary
of the one-hundred-year flood. The flood-fringe area is synonymous with the
term "floodway fringe," as used in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The floodway and the flood fringe area as
determined by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
pursuant to the New Jersey Flood Hazard and Control Act, N.J.S.A.
58:16A-50 et seq.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the Township.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.[Amended 11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
FLOOD or FLOODING — A temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of rivers, streams
or other inland waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of
surface waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN — The area inundated by NJDEP's regulatory flood including
the watercourse that creates it. "NJDEP's regulatory flood" means NJDEP's
adopted Flood Hazard Area Design Flood along streams for which NJDEP
has an adopted flood hazard area and floodway study, and the one-hundredyear
flood along nondelineated streams for which NJDEP has not delineated
a flood hazard area.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as flood damage prevention ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The
term describes such state or local regulations, or any combination thereof,
which provides standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.[Added 11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
FLOODPROOFING — A combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for
the reduction or elimination of the likelihood of flood damages.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a brook, stream or other watercourse and
portions of the flood hazard area of the adjacent land areas that must
be reserved to discharge the flow of water of the base flood without
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:187
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2 foot. 48
[Amended 11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The sum of the area of all floors of buildings or
structures compared to the total area of the site. For lots containing land in
two or more zones, see § 225-116E.
FRESHWATER WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or
saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support,
a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation; provided, however,
that in designating a wetland, the three-parameter approach (that is,
hydrology, soils and vegetation) enumerated in the Federal Manual for
Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, 1989, and any
subsequent amendments thereto shall be used.
FRONT ELEVATION — Also referred to in this chapter as the "front facade,"
the front elevation shall be considered the side of a building or structure
that faces a road upon which the lot abuts. If the lot abuts more than
one road, the front elevation or front facade includes all sides of the
building facing each road, except in the case of lots fronting on Route 202,
in which case the front elevation shall be deemed to be the side of the
building facing Route 202 only. For the purpose of determining the front
facade in relation to limitations on the location of accessory structures,
if the principal building is constructed on an angle or if the portion of
the principal building facing the road is curvilinear, the front elevation or
front facade shall be that portion of the building situated closest to the
road.[Amended 9-5-2001 by Ord. No. 17-01]
FRONT YARD — The area between the road line and a line drawn parallel to
the road line through the nearest point of the building and extending from
side lot line to side lot line.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A closed residential building or portion thereof for the
shelter of motor vehicles owned or used by an occupant of the premises.
GRADING — Any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling, or any combination
thereof, and the land in its cut or filled condition.
GREAT SWAMP WATERSHED STREAM CORRIDOR PRESERVATION AREA
— An area along and adjacent to a stream or watercourse as well as wetland
and standard transition areas within the Great Swamp watershed within
which it is the policy of the municipality to preserve all lands in their natural
state to the greatest extent possible. Section 225-110 of the Code specifies
the lands that constitute the Great Swamp Stream Corridor Preservation
Area.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — Unless otherwise stipulated in any zoning
district, building height shall be measured as the vertical distance from
either the average existing (preconstruction) or the average finished grade,
48.Editor's Note: The definition of "floor area, building," which followed this definition, was
repealed 3-15-2006 by Ord. No. 7-06.
§ 225-5 HARDING CODE § 225-5
1:188
whichever is lower, on all sides of the building at a distance of 15 feet from
the perimeter of the building to the highest point of the roof of the finished
building. In no event shall the height of a building at the front elevation,
measured as required herein, exceed the applicable building height for the
zoning district (see "front elevation").[Amended 3-15-2006 by Ord. No.
7-06; 10-21-2009 by Ord. No. 12-09]
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.[Added 11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:[Added 11-28-2001 by
Ord. No. 19-01]
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation or activity carried out for gain,
conducted within a dwelling unit or other structure situated on the lot,
which is subordinate or accessory to the use of the premises as a private
residence.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — See "neighborhood association."
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building, structure or group of buildings or
structures, that by design, construction, configuration and operation are
primarily intended for the conduct of organized religious services and
customary accessory uses incidental and subordinate to the principal use of
the property (see § 225-171).[Added 6-20-2001 by Ord. No. 8-01]
INFILTRATION FACILITY — Any structure or device designed to infiltrate
retained water to the subsurface and which is not an injection well. These
facilities may be above grade or below grade. Above-grade infiltration
facilities temporarily impound surface water runoff above grade, to a
maximum depth of two feet, with all retained water infiltrated to recharge.
Below-grade infiltration facilities temporarily retain surface water runoff
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
B.
C. Individually listed on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places;
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:189
below grade in the interstices of coarse aggregate, or other porous media,
with all retained water infiltrated to recharge. Examples of below-grade
infiltration facilities include gravel-surface parking areas, gravel-filled
trenches, and dry wells.
INTERMITTENT STREAM OR WATERCOURSE — Any stream or drainage
channel with definite bed and banks in which there is not a permanent flow
of water as shown on the detailed map sheets in the Morris County Soil
Survey published by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, unless site specific information to the contrary is
presented to and accepted by the Board.
LAND — Any ground, soil or earth, including marshes, swamps,
drainageways and areas not permanently covered by water, within the
Township.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving clearing, grading,
transporting, or filling and any other activity which causes land to be
exposed to the danger of erosion.
LOT — A designated plot, parcel, tract or area of land separated from other
parcels or tracts by descriptions established by a subdivision plat of record,
survey map, metes and bounds description or otherwise as permitted by
law, and to be used, sold, leased, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — In acres or square feet, the total horizontal area of a
separately bounded property included within property lines or right-of-way
lines or described by metes and bounds.
LOT COVERAGE or COVERAGE — The percentage of lot area that is
occupied by buildings and structures, including all roofed areas, plus the
area of all uncovered driveways, aisles, sidewalks, parking spaces, loading
spaces, swimming pools and associated pool decks, patios, recreation courts
and similar areas that are improved or required, specifically excluding any
emergency generator having: a rated generating capacity not exceeding 20
kilowatts; a footprint, including the pad, not exceeding 20 square feet; and
a height not exceeding 4 feet. For purposes of this definition, drainage and
landscaped areas shall not be considered improved. For lots containing land
in two or more zones, see § 225-116E.[Amended 6-4-2003 by Ord. No.
12-03; 11-16-2011 by Ord. No. 12-11]
LOT DEPTH — The length of a line, lying midway between and parallel to
side lines or midway between and making equal angles with two converging
side lines, between the point of its intersection with the street line and the
point of its intersection with a rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE or ROAD FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance between
the side lot lines measured along the road line or, in the case where any
portion of the road line is curved, the horizontal distance between lot lines
along the front setback line.
LOT LINE — Any boundary of a lot.
LOT SIZE — The total area included within the lot and road lines.
§ 225-5 HARDING CODE § 225-5
1:190
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines measured along a
line drawn parallel or concentric to the road line at a distance from the road
line equal to the minimum front yard setback.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
the basement, of a building. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure,
usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of other applicable nonelevation design requirements.
LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development or the standards included
in the rules and regulations of COAH for home ownership and rental costs,
and occupied or reserved for occupancy by households with a gross
household income equal to 50% or less of the median gross household
income for households of the same size within the housing region in which
the housing is located, and which is subject to affordability controls
promulgated or approved by COAH.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by
the Township for the maintenance of any required improvements, including
but not limited to surety bonds, letters of credit under the circumstances
specified in § 225-51D and cash as specified in § 225-51E of this chapter.
MAJOR SITE PLAN — Any site plan which is not a minor site plan.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision which is not a minor subdivision.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreation
vehicle.[Added 11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written report and
proposals recommending the physical, economic and social development of
the Township, which shall have been duly adopted by the Planning Board,
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28, as amended
and supplemented.
MINOR SITE PLAN — Any site plan which is not exempted from site
plan review by § 225-66 of this chapter and is limited to the proposed
construction of an accessory residence in the R-1 and RR Zones or an
accessory structure and/or use specifically permitted by this chapter, such
as an off-street parking area or home office occupation; or consists of an
expansion of or an addition to an existing conforming structure and/or use
not accounting for more than 500 square feet of an enclosed or roofed area
or 1,000 square feet of soil disturbance; provided, however, that such site
plan does not adversely affect the development of any adjoining property
and does not involve:[Amended 6-4-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03; 11-3-2004
by Ord. No. 22-04]
A. A planned development.
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:191
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision resulting in not more than three
lots; not involving a planned development, any new street or the extension
of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which will be assessed pursuant
to § 225-48B of this chapter. If any proposed subdivision is submitted for
a tract of land within a period of three years from the date of approval of
a minor subdivision in which said tract was involved, then such proposed
subdivision shall be classified as a major subdivision unless the combined
effect of the earlier minor subdivision and the proposed subdivision could
have been classified as a minor subdivision.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development or the standards
included in the rules and regulations of COAH for home ownership and
rental costs, and occupied or reserved for occupancy by households with a
gross household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the median
gross household income for households of the same size within the housing
region in which the housing is located, and which is subject to affordability
controls promulgated or approved by COAH.
MULCHING — The application of plant residue or other suitable materials
to the land surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place and aid in
establishing plant cover.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING — A building containing three or more dwelling
units occupied or intended to be occupied by persons living independently
of each other or a group of such buildings.[Added 4-16-2008 by Ord. No.
5-08]
NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION — An incorporated nonprofit organization
operating in a planned development under recorded land agreements
through which:
NET RESIDENTIAL LOT AREA — See "site area, net residential."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of Ordinance No. 3-1982, an
ordinance providing for the prevention of flood damage, including any
subsequent improvements to such structures.[Amended 11-28-2001 by
Ord. No. 19-01]
B. A variance from any provision of this chapter.
C. The installation of any road improvements.
D. The expansion of any public facilities.
A. Each lot owner shall be a member.
Each occupied dwelling unit is subject to a charge for a proportionate
share of the expenses for the organization's activities and maintenance,
including any maintenance costs levied against the association by the
Township.
B.
C. Each owner and tenant has a right to use the common property.
§ 225-5 HARDING CODE § 225-5
1:192
N.J.A.C. — The New Jersey Administrative Code.
NJDEP — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
N.J.S.A. — New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
NONCONFORMING USE or NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A use or
activity which was lawful or a building or structure which was lawfully
situated on a lot prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning
ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zone in
which it is taking place or located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
NUISANCE FACTOR — An offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious
thing or practice or a cause or source of annoyance, such as but not limited
to unreasonable quantities of:
A. Noise.
B. Dust.
C. Smoke.
D. Fumes, gas or vapors.
E. Odor.
F. Glare.
G. Flashes.
H. Vibrations.
I. Shock waves.
J. Heat.
K. Electronic or atomic radiation.
L. Objectionable effluent or stormwater runoff.
M. The noise of the congregation of people, particularly at night.
N. Passenger traffic.
O. The transportation of goods or materials by truck or other means.
P. The invasion of nonabutting street frontage by parking.
The obscuring or masking of adjacent or nearby property by projecting
signs, marquees or canopies.
Q.
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:193
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with the Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32, as amended and supplemented, or any prior
act authorizing such adoption.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property of which the lot is a part which is the subject of a development
application or the closest half of the street or right-of-way abutting the
property of which the lot is a part.[Amended 11-15-1999 by Ord. No.
13-99]
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — An area, not on a road, accessible from a
road and both suitable and intended for the parking of a passenger motor
vehicle.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on the closest half of the abutting street or
right-of-way.[Amended 11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 13-99]
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment, provided that such area may be improved with only those
buildings, structures, roads and off-street parking and other improvements
that are designed to be incidental to the natural openness of the land.
OWNER — An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity having an entire or partial legal
proprietary interest in fee in a parcel of land.
PERENNIAL STREAM OR WATERCOURSE — Any stream or watercourse
mapped as perennial on either the 7.5 Minute Series Topographic Maps
published by the U.S. Geological Survey or the detailed map sheets of the
Morris County Soil Survey published by the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service (now known as the Natural Resources
Conservation Service), unless site-specific information to the contrary is
presented to an accepted by the Board.
The exposed storage of inoperable vehicles, junk, materials, neglect of
land, dilapidation of buildings and the exposed parking of commercial
vehicles on residential lots or areas.
R.
Unusual risks of fire or explosion, such as the manufacture and/or
storage of wood, fuel, explosives, flammable liquids or gasoline.
S.
The parking of motor vehicles in required front yards on other than
established driveways.
T.
Any use or storage of feed, food, garbage or other matter in a manner
conducive to the support or spread of rodents or other pests.
U.
The local ownership and exposed parking or the use of any portable
or mobile devices having any other nuisance factors, including but
not limited to such things as sound trucks and advertising matter on
vehicles beyond the identification of the owner or business.
V.
W. Similar matters covered by other statutes, ordinances or common laws.
§ 225-5 HARDING CODE § 225-5
1:194
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security, which may be accepted by the
Township, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters of credit under
the circumstances specified in § 225-51D and cash as specified in § 225-51E
of this chapter.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — A planned residential neighborhood or a
residential cluster.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD (PRN) — A community of
dwelling facilities to be developed as a single entity according to a plan,
defined as planned unit residential development in the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-6, and having the following characteristics:
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Township duly created
pursuant to § 7-32 of this Code.
PLAT — The map of a subdivision.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — See "plat."
PRIVATE ROAD — A private road is a street which is not dedicated to the
public, but which has been approved by the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment in connection with a major subdivision or site plan.
REAR YARD — The area between a rear lot line and the nearest setback line
and extending from side lot line to side lot line.
A. A gross site area of 25 or more acres.
A variety of the following permitted dwelling types accommodating
both small and large families: single-family, twin house and townhouse.
B.
C. A self-contained internal street pattern, excluding through traffic.
Common open space of five acres or more as a functioning active
recreational or agricultural area accessible to all people in the
neighborhood on foot or by bicycle, and additional passive common
open space for preservation of natural slopes, floodplains, or
watercourses.
D.
FINAL PLAT — The map of all or a portion of a major subdivision, which
meets the requirements of this chapter and the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq., is submitted to the Board for final approval and, if
approved, is filed with the Morris County Clerk.
A.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The map indicating the proposed layout of a
major subdivision which meets the requirements of this chapter and is
submitted to the Board for preliminary approval.
B.
SKETCH PLAT — The map of a subdivision which meets the
requirements of this chapter, which is of sufficient accuracy to be
used for the purposes of discussion and classification of a subdivision
as major or minor and which, in the case of a minor subdivision, is
submitted to the Board for approval. When such plat is not submitted
for approval, it may also be referred to as a "concept plan."
C.
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:195
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
RECREATION VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single chassis; 400
square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal projections;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck;
and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.[Added 11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
RECYCLING AREA — An area allocated for the collection and storage
of source-separated recyclable materials.[Added 4-16-2008 by Ord. No.
5-08]
REGULATORY FLOOD — The one-hundred-year flood along nondelineated
watercourses or the Flood Hazard Area design flood along delineated
watercourses.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER (RC) — A community of single-family detached
houses to be developed as a single entity according to a plan as defined in
the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-6, and having the following
characteristics:
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per acre of gross
site area, including roads, easements and open space portions of a planned
development (see "site area, gross").
RETAIL SALES — The sale of items on the premises directly to the
consumer and not for resale.[Added 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 7-00]
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment area with a permanent pool made
by constructing an embankment, or excavating a pit, or both, for the
purpose of temporarily storing stormwater. A retention basin is also called
a "wet basin" or "wet detention basin."
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land and space within a lot or a public road on
which use rights exist for a specific purpose, such as vehicular traffic, signs,
hydrants, pipelines, telephone wires, trees, shrubbery, lines of sight, slopes
and the proper amount of light and air, including access to such uses.
ROAD — See "street."
ROAD FRONTAGE — See "lot frontage."
ROAD LINE — The dividing line between a road or street, whether public
or private, and a lot, which is commonly referred to as the right-of-way line.
The road line shall be a line parallel to the center line of the road and at
A. A gross site area of 25 or more acres.
Lot sizes smaller than those prevailing or zoned in the adjacent or
surrounding area.
B.
Common open space of five acres or more as a functioning active
recreational or agricultural area accessible to all people in the cluster
on foot or by bicycle, and additional passive common open space for
preservation of natural slopes, floodplains or watercourses.
C.
§ 225-5 HARDING CODE § 225-5
1:196
a distance equal to 1/2 of the legal width of the road. If the road width
is not specified, then a distance of 25 feet from the center line shall be
used.[Amended 6-5-2002 by Ord. No. 6-02]
SAFETY AND STABILIZATION BOND GUARANTEE — A guarantee solely
for the purpose of returning property that has been disturbed to a safe
and stable condition or otherwise implementing measures to protect the
public from access to an unsafe or unstable conditions.[Added 6-11-2018
by Ord. No. 12-18]
SCS — The Soil Conservation Service (now the Natural Resources
Conservation Service) of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site or origin
by air, water or gravity as a result of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — That area formed by a barrier or dam built at a
suitable location to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or other materials.
SEDIMENT POOL — A reservoir space allotted to the accumulation of
submerged sediment during the life of a structure.
SETBACK LINE — The permitted building line within any lot parallel to
or concentric with any road line or any lot line, behind which all principal
and accessory buildings and structures and parking areas, other than a
driveway, must be placed at a distance equal to the depth of the required
yard. Distances to setback lines shall be measured horizontally from road or
lot lines.
SIDE YARD — The area between a side lot line and the nearest setback line,
and between the front and rear yards.
SIGN — A visible name, identification, description, display, illustration,
device, structure or object which is affixed on, painted or represented
directly or indirectly on or inside a building or structure or erected on a
lot, and which directs attention to and/or gives information about an object,
product, place, activity, institution, organization, business or the interest of
any person or product.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A separate unattached building
containing one dwelling unit arranged, intended or designed to be occupied
by a family consisting of one or more persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit.
BUSINESS SIGN — A sign identifying the business activity, products,
use or other matters concerning the parcel or premises on which the
sign is located.
A.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign identifying the occupant of a
structure, a lot or space and the activity.
B.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary nonilluminated sign advertising
the sale, open house, rental or leasing of the premises on which it is
located.
C.
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:197
SITE — Any lot or parcel of land which is the subject of a development
application.
SITE AREA, GROSS — The total gross acreage of a planned development
within existing roads and/or property lines prior to development or
subdivision, including roads, easements and open space portion of the
development, but excluding roads existing prior to the development. The
gross site area is used in determining residential density.
SITE AREA, NET RESIDENTIAL and NET RESIDENTIAL LOT AREA —
The gross site area of a planned development less common open space and
roads. Where the common space is not designated as a distinguishable lot,
the net residential site area shall be considered as the area within a cordon
line surrounding all residential buildings and 25 feet therefrom.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown
the existing and proposed conditions of the property, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways; the location of all existing and proposed buildings
and other structures, driveways, parking spaces, walkways, means of
ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping, signs,
lighting and screening devices; and any other information that may
reasonably be required in order for the Board to make an informed
determination concerning compliance of the plan with the requirements of
this chapter.
SKETCH PLAT — See "plat."
SKETCH SITE PLAN — See "site plan."
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A governmental subdivision of this
state denominating the Morris County Soil Conservation District which
encompasses the Township, organized in accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:24-1 et
seq., as amended and supplemented.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan which fully
indicates necessary land treatment measures, including a schedule of the
timing for their installation, which will effectively minimize soil erosion and
sedimentation during and after the development of a site.
FINAL SITE PLAN — The map of all or a portion of a major site plan,
which meets the requirements of this chapter and is submitted to the
Board for final approval.
A.
PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN — The map indicating the proposed layout
of a major site plan which meets the requirements of this chapter and
is submitted to the Board for preliminary approval.
B.
SKETCH SITE PLAN — The map of a site plan, which meets the
requirements of this chapter, which is of sufficient accuracy to be used
for the purposes of discussion and classification of a site plan as major
or minor and which, in the case of a minor site plan, is submitted to the
Board for approval. When such site plan is not submitted for approval,
it may also be referred to as a "concept plan."
C.
§ 225-5 HARDING CODE § 225-5
1:198
SOMERSET COUNTY STORMWATER DETENTION BASIN HANDBOOK —
The Handbook for Stormwater Detention Basins (with supplement) dated
December 1991, published by the County of Somerset, New Jersey, and any
revisions or amendments thereto.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT — For purposes of Article XIX,
Flood Damage Prevention, any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate located within an area of special flood hazard,
including but not limited to construction of buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, clearing, cutting or the removal
of timber, excavation or drilling operations.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS — Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction of the State of New Jersey State Highway Department
dated 1961 and revisions thereof.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date a building permit is issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180
days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement
of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as the pouring of a
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any
work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for
a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For the purposes of Article XIX, for a substantial
improvement, the "actual start" of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.[Amended
11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
STATE OPEN WATERS — Those waters of the United States within the
boundary of the state or subject to its jurisdiction that are not wetlands as
defined in the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7A.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground resulting
from precipitation.
STORY — Any covered area with a clear headroom of 6 1/2 feet or more,
whether finished or not. If the ceiling or underside of overhead supporting
members is less than four feet above the average grade surrounding any
space, that space shall not be considered a story. Any space that meets
the definition of a "story, half" shall not be considered a story.[Amended
6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 10-18]
STORY, HALF — A space under a sloping roof which has a point of
intersection of the roof and outside wall face not more than three feet
above the top floor level, and in which space the possible floor area with
a headroom of five feet or less occupies at least 40% of the total area of
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:199
the story directly beneath. Within the TH-1 Townhouse Zone 1 only, any
such space with a maximum clear headroom less than 6.5 feet and that is
unfinished shall not be considered a half story.[Amended 6-11-2018 by
Ord. No. 10-18; 11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 23-18]
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or Township roadway; or
which is shown on a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or which is
approved by official action as provided by this chapter; or which is shown
on a plan duly filed and recorded in the office of the Morris County Clerk
prior to the appointment of the Planning Board and the grant to such Board
of the power to review plats; and includes the land between street lines,
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders,
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within street lines.
See N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq. for street hierarchy definitions.
STRIPPING — Any activity which removes or significantly disturbs
vegetated or otherwise stabilized soil surface, including clearing and
grubbing operations.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed, constructed,
assembled or erected on, above or below the surfaces of a parcel of land or
upon another structure or building and including fences and garden walls
more than seven feet high (see also "accessory structure"). For the purpose
of Article XIX, "structure" shall mean a walled building, a manufactured
home or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above
ground.[Amended 11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity who is an applicant to a Board to
subdivide land for himself or another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, or the relocation or elimination of a lot line. Where appropriate to
the context, "subdivision" also means the process of applying for approval
for any such division or lot line relocation or elimination. If no new road
is involved, the following divisions shall not be considered subdivisions:
divisions of land for agricultural purposes where the resulting parcels are
five acres or larger in size, divisions of property by testamentary or intestate
provisions and divisions of property pursuant to court order (see "major
subdivision" and "minor subdivision").
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — For the purposes of Article XIX, "substantial
damage" shall mean the damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.[Added 11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction
of the improvement. This term includes improvements to structures which
§ 225-5 HARDING CODE § 225-5
1:200
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:[Amended
11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
TOWNHOUSE — A contiguous building or buildings, including one of three
or more contiguous dwelling units in the same structure, each separated by
plane vertical party walls and having direct access to the outside and the
road without use of a common hall, passageway or land and so laid out that
each is susceptible to sale as an individual house and lot.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Harding in the County of Morris and State
of New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP AUTHORITY — For purposes of Article XVII, Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control, the proper Township authority to approve the soil erosion
and sediment control plan, which shall include the Planning Board, Board of
Adjustment, Construction Official, Township Engineer, Township Committee
and such other Township departments, officials, employees and consultants
as have the authority to approve such plans.[Amended 11-17-2010 by
Ord. No. 15-10]
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE — The governing body of the Township,
consisting of five members duly elected pursuant to law.
TOWNSHIP DETAILS — Detail drawings as prepared by the Township
Engineer dated September 1965 and revisions thereof.
TREATMENT TRAIN — Sequence of structures or devices through which
runoff passes before exiting the project site. The combined characteristics
of the individual structures or devices shall satisfy the performance
requirements associated with the no-net-increase provisions of this chapter.
TREE — For purposes of Article XXI, Tree Conservation, any live woody
perennial plant having a diameter greater than eight inches measured at
a point of 4 1/2 feet above the ground.[Amended 5-16-2001 by Ord. No.
11-01]49
TWIN HOUSE — A building containing two dwelling units separated by
a party wall in a vertical plane with each unit susceptible to sale as an
individual house and lot.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:201
USE — The purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged,
intended or employed or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained
(see "accessory use").
USE VARIANCE — Relief from the strict application of a requirement of
this chapter applied for or granted by the Board of Adjustment pursuant
to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, as amended and
supplemented.
VARIANCE — Relief from the strict application of a requirement of this
chapter applied for or granted by the Board of Adjustment or the Planning
Board pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c or d, as
amended and supplemented.
VEGETATIVE PROTECTION — The stabilization of erosive or sedimentproducing
areas by covering the soil with permanent seeding, producing
long-term vegetative cover; short-term seeding, producing temporary
vegetative cover; or sodding, producing areas covered with a turf of
perennial sod-forming grass.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river,
creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine
or wash in which water flows in a definite direction or course, either
continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed and
banks, and any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of the
overflow of floodwater.
WATER QUALITY STORM — A one-year frequency, twenty-four-hour storm
(2.7 inches of rainfall), using the Type III rainfall distribution recommended
for New Jersey by the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service or a
storm of 1.25 inches of rainfall falling uniformly in two hours.
WET BASIN — A detention basin designed to retain some water on a
permanent basis. Another name of wet basin is "wet detention basin" or
"retention basin."
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — A device for sending
and receiving of low-power electromagnetic waves (typically less than 500
watts) used for delivery of wireless radio telecommunications through a
network.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT COMPOUND — An
area where wireless telecommunications buildings, equipment, antennas,
and/or towers are located.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — Antennas, towers,
equipment, buildings and/or structures for the delivery of wireless radio
telecommunications through a network.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A vertical structure
designed to support wireless telecommunications antennas, which may be a
monopole, self-supporting or of guyed lattice construction.
YARD and REQUIRED YARD — The area between any lot or road line and
the nearest setback line.
§ 225-5 HARDING CODE § 225-5
1:202
ZONE — A district of the Township.
ZONING OFFICER — The Township official responsible for enforcement of
Part 3, Zoning, of this chapter and/or his duly authorized representatives.
§ 225-6. Interpretation; conflict with other laws.
A. The rules, regulations and standards of this chapter applicable to
development plans shall be considered the minimum requirements for
the protection of the public health, safety, morals, convenience and
general welfare of the citizens of the Township. Any action taken by the
Board under the provisions of this chapter shall give primary
consideration to the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the
entire community. However, if the developer or his agent can clearly
demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions pertaining to his land,
the literal enforcement of one or more of these regulations is
impractical or will exact undue hardship, the Board may permit such
modifications as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and
intent of the rules, regulations and standards established by this
chapter.
B. It is not intended by this chapter or amendments hereof to repeal,
abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing
provision of any law, ordinance, rule, regulation or permit previously
adopted or issued (other than the predecessor of this chapter), or which
shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law, relating to the use of
buildings or premises; nor is it intended by this chapter or amendments
hereof to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or
other agreement between private persons; provided, however, that
where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or requires larger
yards or other open spaces than are imposed or required by an existing
law, ordinance, rule, regulation or permit or by any such easement,
covenant or agreement, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-6
1:203

ARTICLE III
Fees
§ 225-7. Fee schedule. [Amended 2-17-2010 by Ord. No. 3-10]
The fees required in connection with or for each application for
development, soil erosion, sediment control plan, flood hazard development
permit, zoning review, or any other permit or approval procedure pursuant
to this chapter, shall be as specified in Chapter 171 of the Township Code.
§ 225-8. Application made under multiple provisions; filing fee.
Where an application is made under more than one section of this chapter
or the Township Code (for example, site plan and variance, subdivision and
grading permit, etc.), the filing fee shall be the sum of the applicable fees
unless specifically provided to the contrary.
§ 225-9. Adoption of additional fees.
Fees for applications or for the rendering of any service by the Planning
Board or the Board of Adjustment or any member of their administrative
staffs which are not otherwise provided by this chapter may be provided for
and adopted by either such Board as part of its rules and regulations.
§ 225-10. Board of Education exemption.
The Harding Township Board of Education shall be exempt from any fees
in connection with development applications or any other administrative
requirements provided for in this chapter.
§ 225-11. (Reserved) (Fee exemptions -- municipal; nonprofit
organizations.)
§ 225-12. (Reserved)
§ 225-13. (Reserved)
§ 225-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-13
1:205

ARTICLE IV
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment Rules and
Regulations; Meetings; Hearings; Conflicts of Interest
§ 225-14. Rules and regulations.
The Planning Board and Board of Adjustment shall adopt, and may amend,
reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter, for the
administration of its functions, powers and duties, and shall furnish a copy
thereof to any person upon request and may charge a reasonable fee for
such copy. Copies of all such rules and regulations and amendments thereto
shall be maintained in the office of the administrative officer.
§ 225-15. Meetings.
§ 225-16. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings,
if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be
made available for public inspection during normal business hours at the
office of the Board Secretary. Any interested party shall have the right
to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceedings concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use.
A. Regular meetings of both the Planning Board and the Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled not less than once a month and shall be
held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of applications to process.
The rules and regulations of both Boards shall fix the time and place for
holding regular meetings.
B. The rules and regulations for both Boards may provide for special
meetings at the call of the Chairman or at the request of any two Board
members, which shall be held on notice to the members of the Board
and the public in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-6.
D. All action shall be taken by a majority vote of the members present,
except as otherwise required by any provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public, and notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with
the requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et
seq. An executive session for the purpose of discussing and studying
any matters to come before either Board shall not be deemed a regular
or special meeting.
§ 225-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-17
1:207
§ 225-17. Hearings.
A. Hearing required. The Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment shall
hold a hearing on each application for major or minor subdivision,
major or minor site plan, planned development, conditional use permit,
variance, appeal, interpretation, special flood hazard development
permit or amendment of the Master Plan, except that, in the case of an
application to the Planning Board solely for approval of a minor
subdivision or a minor site plan or a special flood hazard development
permit, if the Planning Board has designated a committee of the
Planning Board to act on its behalf with respect to such an application,
a hearing shall not be required thereon. A hearing shall also be held
when an applicant requests approval of an amendment to any
previously approved subdivision or site plan for which a public hearing
was required. [Amended 8-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4-92; 4-20-2005 by
Ord. No. 5-05]
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties.
In the issuance of subpoenas, the administration of oaths and the taking
of testimony, the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations
Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq., shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses shall be taken under oath or
affirmation by the presiding officer or person designated by him, and
the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all interested
parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if not
represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to the time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence. A complete set of maps and documents for which
approval is sought at a hearing shall be on file and available for public
inspection at least 10 days before the date of the hearing during normal
business hours in the office of the Board Secretary. The applicant may
produce other documents, records or testimony at the hearing to
substantiate or clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and
documents.
E. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer or mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
F. Absences of Board members. When any hearing before a Board shall
carry over two or more meetings, a member of the Board who was
absent for one or more of the meetings shall be eligible to vote on the
matter upon which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his
§ 225-17 HARDING CODE § 225-17
1:208
§ 225-18. Notice requirements. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
13-92]
absence from one or more of the meetings; provided, however, that
such Board member has available to him a transcript or recording of
the meeting from which he was absent and certifies in writing to the
Board that he has read such transcript or listened to such recording.
A. Whenever a hearing is required pursuant to § 225-17A, the applicant
shall give notice thereof at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing
on the application as follows: [Amended 4-20-2005 by Ord. No.
5-05]
(1) Public notice shall be given by publication in an official newspaper
of the Township.
(2) Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property, as shown on
the current tax duplicate, located within 200 feet in all directions of
the property which is the subject of such hearing and whether
located within or without the Township; provided that this
requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to the
condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit
has a unit above or below it, or horizontal property regime, in the
case of any co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above or
below it. Notice shall be given by personally serving a copy thereof
on the property owner, as shown on said current tax duplicate, or
his agent in charge of the property or by mailing a copy thereof by
certified mail to the property owner at his address as shown on said
current tax duplicate. A return receipt is not required. Notice to a
partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner.
Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its
president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized by
appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowners' association,
because of its ownership of common elements or areas located
within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the hearing,
may be made in the same manner as to a corporation without
further notice to unit owners, co-owners or homeowners on
account of such common elements or areas.
(3) Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall
be given by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice
required to be given, pursuant to Subsection A(2), to the owners of
lands in such adjoining municipality, which are located within 200
feet of the subject premises.
(4) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Morris County Planning Board of a hearing on an application for
§ 225-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-18
1:209
development of property adjacent to an existing county road or
proposed road shown on the Official County Map or on the County
Master Plan, adjoining other county land or situated within 200
feet of a Township boundary.
(5) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
(6) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
State Planning Commission of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Board Secretary.
(7) Notice of hearings and applications for approval of a major
subdivision or a site plan not defined as a minor site plan under this
chapter requiring public notice pursuant to this § 105-20A shall be
given, in the case of a public utility, cable television company or
local utility which possesses a right-of-way or easement within the
Township and which has registered with the Township Tax Assessor
in accordance with Subsection A(7)(a) below, by serving a copy of
the notice on the person whose name appears on the registration
form on behalf of the public utility, cable television company or
local utility or mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the person
whose name appears on the registration form at the address shown
on that form.
(a) Every public utility, cable television company and local utility
having a right-of-way or easement in the Township and
interested in receiving notice pursuant to this Subsection A(7)
may register with the Township Tax Assessor. The registration
shall remain in effect until revoked by the public utility, cable
television company or local utility or by its successor in
interest.
(b) The Township Tax Assessor shall adopt a registration form and
shall maintain a record of all public utilities, cable television
companies, and local utilities which have registered pursuant
to Subsection A(7)(a) above. The registration form shall
include the name of the public utility, cable television company
or local utility and the name, address and position of the
person to whom notice shall be forwarded, as required by this
Subsection A(7). This information shall be provided to any
applicant as provided by Subsection A(9) below.
(8) The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of services of the
notices required in this subsection with the Board prior to or at the
time of the hearing.
(9) The Township Tax Assessor shall, within seven days after receipt of
a written request therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee as
§ 225-18 HARDING CODE § 225-18
1:210
§ 225-19. Conflicts of interest; making quorums. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 10-92]
set forth in Chapter 171, make and certify a list from the current
tax duplicate of names and addresses to whom the applicant is
required to give notice pursuant to Subsection A. In addition, the
Township Tax Assessor shall include on the list the names,
addresses and positions of those persons who, not less than seven
days prior to the date on which the applicant requested the list,
have registered to receive notice pursuant to Subsection A(7)(a)
above.
(10) Any notice made by certified mail shall be deemed complete upon
mailing.
(11) Notices of hearing shall state the applicant's name; the date, time
and place of the hearing; the nature of the matters to be
considered, including the type and, if appropriate, extent of each
variance request; and an identification of the property proposed for
development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot and
block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Township Tax Assessor's office, and the location and times at which
any maps and documents for which approval is sought are available
for inspection.
B. Whenever a hearing is required on any revision or amendment of the
Township Master Plan, such notice shall be given by the Planning Board
Secretary in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-13.
C. Whenever a hearing is required on the adoption, revision or
amendment of a development regulation, a Township capital
improvement program or a Township Official Map, such notice shall be
given by the Township Clerk to adjoining municipalities and to the
Morris County Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-15.
A. No member of the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment shall be
permitted to act on any matter in which he has, either directly or
indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Whenever any such
member shall disqualify himself from acting on a particular matter, he
shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter;
nor shall he participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
B. If the Planning Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular or
alternate members is prohibited from acting on a matter due to the
member's personal or financial interests therein, regular members of
the Board of Adjustment shall be called upon to serve, for that matter
only, as temporary members of the Planning Board in order of seniority
of continuous service to the Board of Adjustment until there are the
minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act
upon the matter without any personal or financial interest therein,
§ 225-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-19
1:211
§ 225-20. (Reserved)
whether direct or indirect. If a choice has to be made between regular
members of equal seniority, the Chairman of the Board of Adjustment
shall make the choice.
C. If the Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum because any of its regular or
alternate members is prohibited from acting on a matter due to the
member's personal or financial interests therein, Class IV members of
the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as
temporary members of the Board of Adjustment. The Class IV members
of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve in order of seniority
of continuous service to the Planning Board until there are the
minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act
upon the matter without any personal or financial interest therein,
whether direct or indirect. If a choice has to be made between Class IV
members of equal seniority, the Chairman of the Planning Board shall
make the choice.
§ 225-19 HARDING CODE § 225-20
1:212
ARTICLE V
(Reserved) (Master Plan)
§ 225-21. (Reserved) (Preparation and contents.)
§ 225-22. (Reserved) (Periodic reexamination and report.)
§ 225-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-22
1:213

ARTICLE VI
(Reserved) (Capital Improvement Program)
§ 225-23. (Reserved) (Preparation of capital improvement
program.)
§ 225-24. (Reserved) (Adoption of capital improvement program.)
§ 225-25. (Reserved) (Review of capital projects.)
§ 225-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-25
1:215

ARTICLE VII
(Reserved) (The Official Map)
§ 225-26. (Reserved) (Establish an Official Map.)
§ 225-27. (Reserved) (Change or addition to map.)
§ 225-28. (Reserved) (Issuance of permits for buildings or
structures.)
§ 225-29. (Reserved) (Building lot to abut street.)
§ 225-30. (Reserved) (Appeals.)
§ 225-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-30
1:217

Part 2
Development Review
ARTICLE VIII
Applications and Appeals Generally
§ 225-31. Applications and appeals.
§ 225-32. Application to be certified as complete. [Amended
9-5-2001 by Ord. No. 17-01]
A. Applications and appeals within the jurisdiction of the Planning Board
and the Board of Adjustment shall be filed with the respective Secretary
for each Board in accordance with the rules and regulations of each
Board and the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The applicant shall
obtain all necessary forms from the Board Secretary who shall inform
the applicant as to the procedures and timetable to be followed. All
applications shall be accompanied by the applicable fee as set forth in
Chapter 171 of this Code.
B. Development Review Committee. All applications within the jurisdiction
of the Planning Board submitted for concept plan review shall be
referred to the Development Review Committee for its review in
accordance with §§ 225-60 and 225-67 of this chapter. [Amended
3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 4-04]
A. The Secretary of the Board with whom an application for development
is filed shall mark all documents relating to the application as "received
on (the date of submission)" and immediately forward such documents
to the Chairman of the Board or the Chairman of the appropriate
subcommittee of the Board. An application for development shall be
complete for purposes of commencing the applicable time period for
action by a Board when so certified by the Board or by the Boards
Administrator. In the event that the Board or the Boards Administrator
does not certify the application to be complete within 45 days of the
date of its submission, the application shall be deemed complete upon
the expiration of the forty-five-day period for purposes of commencing
the applicable time period for the Board to act unless:
(1) The application lacks information required by the checklists set
forth in Article IX, Application Checklists; and
(2) The Board or the Boards Administrator has notified the applicant,
in writing, of the deficiencies in the application within 45 days of
submission of the application.
B. Said notice may also set forth the ordinances violated for which
variances or exemptions have not been requested, but the failure to set
forth such violations in such notice shall not be a waiver of the Board's
right thereafter to deny an application because of such violations. The
applicant may request that one or more of the submission requirements
§ 225-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-32
1:219
§ 225-33. Taxes and assessments.
Every application for development submitted to the Planning Board or to
the Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property
which is the subject of such application; or, if it is shown that taxes or
assessments are delinquent on said property, any approvals or other relief
granted by the Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt payment
of such taxes or assessments, or the making of adequate provision for
the payment thereof in such manner that the Township will be adequately
protected.
§ 225-34. Timetable for action upon applications.
be waived, in which event the Board or the Boards Administrator shall
grant or deny the request within 45 days. Nothing herein shall be
construed as diminishing the applicant's obligation to prove in the
application process that he is entitled to approval of the application.
The Board may subsequently require correction of any information
found to be in error and submission of additional information not
specified in the checklist or any revisions in the accompanying
documents, as are reasonably necessary to make an informed decision
as to whether the requirements necessary for approval of the
application for development have been met. The application shall not
be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information or
any revisions of errors in the accompanying documents so required
by the Board. If the Board requires a substantial amendment or the
applicant submits a substantial amendment to an application, whether
or not the application has been the subject of a hearing, an amended
application shall be submitted and proceeded upon as in the case of an
original application, and the time of decision shall commence at such
time as the amended application is complete (as if it were an original
application).
A. After submission of a complete application to the Secretary of the
Board, the Board shall act on an application for development within the
time set forth in this chapter for applications of that type as follows:
[Amended 12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96]
Type of Application
Time for
Decision
(1) For an application involving a variance or an
appeal from a decision of an administrative officer
relating to enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter or a request to direct issuance of a
building permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or
55D-36
120 days
(2) For a minor subdivision application 45 days
§ 225-32 HARDING CODE § 225-34
1:220
§ 225-35. Variance applications. [Adopted 12-12-1967 by Ord. No.
3-67 as Section 3-2.15B of Subchapter 3-2 of the 1967 Revised
General Ordinances; amended in its entirety 11-9-1987 by Ord. No.
13-87]
Type of Application
Time for
Decision
(3) For a preliminary major subdivision application:
(a) 10 or fewer lots 45 days
(b) More than 10 lots 95 days
(4) For a final major subdivision application 45 days
(5) For a minor site plan application 45 days
(6) For a preliminary major site plan application:
(a) Involving 10 acres or less and 10 dwelling
units or less
45 days
(b) Involving more than 10 acres or more than
10 dwelling units
95 days
(7) For a final major site plan application 45 days
(8) For a conditional use permit 95 days
(9) For a special flood hazard development permit 45 days
B. If an application includes a combination of more than one of the
applications referred to above, the Board shall act on the combined
application within the longest time period permitted for it to act on any
of the included applications. If a proposed development requires
approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use and also seeks the
grant of a variance or of a special flood hazard development permit or
direction for issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or
55D-36, the developer may elect to submit separate successive
applications to the Board, first for the grant of a variance or special
flood hazard development permit or direction for issuance of a permit
and subsequently for any required approval of a subdivision, site plan
or conditional use. In the event that separate successive applications
are filed, the period for granting or denying approval of each
application shall be as set forth above for applications of that type.
A. Details of applications and fees. Applications for a variance pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c or d, appeals of decisions of an administrative
officer of the Township and requests for an interpretation relating to
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70a or b or for direction for issuance of a building permit
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or 55D-36 shall be accompanied by all of
the items set forth on Checklist B,50 together with payment of an
50.Editor's Note: Checklist B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-35
1:221
§ 225-36. Decisions.
application fee and a technical review fee in accordance with Chapter
171 of this Code. [Amended 9-4-2002 by Ord. No. 11-02]
B. Time to act. Notwithstanding any shorter time period in which a Board
is required on a different type of application which may accompany
such a variance application or appeal or request for interpretation or
direction for issuance of a building permit, the Board shall act upon any
such application within 120 days after submission by the applicant of a
complete application to the Secretary of the Board or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
C. Period of effectiveness of grant of variance. [Amended 12-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 8-91]
(1) If a Board grants a variance not concurrently with or subject to
subsequent site plan or subdivision approval, the variance shall
expire one year from the date of the decision of the Board unless
any authorized development activity has been actually commenced
within such one-year period and any authorized development
activity is subsequently pursued in a reasonably diligent manner.
The Board may approve one or more extensions of such one-year
period upon application and payment of the fee provided for in
Chapter 171 based on a finding of reasonable justification for the
delay or the existence of other good cause. [Amended 6-16-2010
by Ord. No. 10-10]
(2) If a Board grants a variance application concurrently with, or
subject to, site plan or subdivision approval, the term of duration of
the variation shall be coterminous with the statutory periods
governing the effect of any site plan and/or subdivision approvals,
as provided by the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq., as amended.
A. The Board shall include findings of fact and conclusions based thereon
in each decision on any application for development and shall reduce
the decision to writing. The Board shall provide the findings and
conclusions through either:
(1) A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in this chapter for action by the Board on the application
for development; or
(2) A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the Board voted
to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the Board who
voted for the action taken may vote on the memorializing
resolution, and the vote of majority of such members present at the
meeting at which the resolution is presented for adoption shall be
sufficient to adopt the resolution. An action denying an application
§ 225-35 HARDING CODE § 225-36
1:222
§ 225-37. (Reserved)51
§ 225-38. Appeals to Planning Board. [Added 4-11-1988 by Ord. No.
4-88]
If, pursuant to § 225-61B and § 225-68A(2), the Planning Board shall
designate a committee of the Planning Board to act on its behalf in
connection with any or all applications for minor subdivision approval and
minor site plan approval, an appeal from a final decision of such committee
with respect to any such application may be made to the Planning Board,
provided that such appeal shall be made within 10 days of the date of the
first publication of such decision pursuant to § 225-36C. Any such appeal
shall be deemed to be an original application to the Planning Board by the
person who applied to the committee as of the date of such appeal. Failure
to take an appeal pursuant to this section shall not prevent or affect any
rights such person might have.
§ 225-39. Conditional approvals.
resulting from the failure of a motion to receive the number of
votes required to approve an application shall be memorialized by
resolution as provided above, with those members voting against
the motion for approval being the members eligible to vote on the
memorializing resolution. The vote on any such resolution shall be
deemed to be a memorialization of the action of the Board and not
to be an action of the Board; however, the date of the adoption of
the resolution shall constitute the date of the decision for purposes
of the mailings, filings and publications required by Subsections B
and C of this section.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board Secretary within 10
days of the date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to
his attorney, without separate charge, and to all persons who request a
copy and who have paid the required fee. A copy of the decision shall
also be filed by the Board Secretary, who shall make a copy of such filed
decision available for public inspection during office hours and a copy
available to any interested party upon payment of the required fee.
C. A brief notice of the decision, if final, shall be published by the Board
Secretary, without charge to the applicant, in an official newspaper of
the Township. The applicant may also arrange for such publication.
D. Whenever an applicant wishes to claim approval of his application for
development by reason of the failure of the Board to grant or deny
approval within the applicable time period, the applicant shall comply
with the procedural requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.4.
51.Editor's Note: Former § 225-37, Appeals to Township Committee, was repealed 12-12-2016
by Ord. No. 10-16.
§ 225-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-39
1:223
A. Conditions precedent. Whenever any application for development is
approved subject to specified conditions, intended to be fulfilled before
the approval becomes effective, said conditional approval shall lapse
and become null and void unless all such conditions for which no
deadline is specified (by reference to a date or the occurrence of an
event) are fulfilled within 190 days of the date of conditional approval.
B. The fulfillment of all conditions precedent shall be reported in writing
to the Board Secretary or enforcing officer, who may cause such reports
to be verified in an appropriate manner. Only upon fulfillment of all
conditions shall any subdivision plat or site plan be signed or any
building permit, certificate or occupancy, special flood hazard
development permit or other permit or other required approval be
issued.
C. Conditions subsequent. Whenever any application for development is
granted preliminary approval subject to conditions which by their terms
are incapable of being fulfilled or are not required to be fulfilled prior to
the final approval of the application, the performance of which is not
guaranteed by bonds or securities of any type, failure to fulfill any such
condition within six months from the date of the final approval of the
application for development shall be grounds for the issuance of a stopwork
order by the enforcing officer and the withholding of any permit,
certificate of occupancy or other approval until such condition or
conditions are fulfilled.
D. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the Board
from specifying a longer period of time within which any specific
condition must be fulfilled, or from granting, upon an ex parte
application, an extension of time for fulfilling a condition for good cause
shown.
§ 225-39 HARDING CODE § 225-39
1:224
ARTICLE IX
Application Checklists
§ 225-40. Completion of checklists required.
§ 225-41. Checklist A: Application for Development: Subdivisions
and Site Plans.53 [Amended 9-4-2002 by Ord. No. 11-02]
This checklist applies to all applications for development filed with the
Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment for a minor subdivision, minor
site plan, preliminary and/or final major subdivision and preliminary and/or
final site plan approval.
A. An application for development filed with the Planning Board or the
Board of Adjustment shall not be deemed complete until all of the
documents and information set forth on Checklists A through C,52
applicable to the particular type of application, have been submitted,
unless, upon receipt of a written request from the applicant, a specific
requirement is waived by the Board or the Board Administrator.
Checklists A through C, which follow, apply to the following types of
applications: [Amended 9-4-2002 by Ord. No. 11-02]
(1) Checklist A: all applications for minor subdivisions, minor site
plans, preliminary major subdivisions, preliminary major site plans,
final subdivisions and final site plans.
(2) Checklist B: applications to the Board of Adjustment for variances,
appeals of decisions of the Zoning or Tree Conservation Officer,
requests for interpretation of a zoning ordinance or requests
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 through 40:55D-36.
(3) Checklist C: all applications for special flood hazard development
permits.
B. A determination of completeness is in no way an evaluation of the
adequacy or acceptability of the information submitted and shall not be
construed as diminishing the applicant's obligation to prove in the
application process that he is entitled to approval of the application.
The Board may subsequently require correction of any information
found to be in error and submission of additional information not
specified in this chapter or any revisions in the accompanying
documents, as are reasonably necessary to make an informed decision
as to whether the requirements necessary for approval of the
application for development have been met.
52.Editor's Note: Checklists A through C are included as attachments to this chapter.
53.Editor's Note: Checklist A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-42
1:225
§ 225-42. Checklist B: Application for Variance or Appeal to the
Board of Adjustment.54 [Amended 9-4-2002 by Ord. No. 11-02]
This checklist applies to all applications to the Board of Adjustment for a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c or d. This checklist is also required
for any other type of application to the Board of Adjustment other than for
subdivision or site plan approval (for which Checklist A is also required),
including appeals from decisions of the Zoning or Tree Conservation Officer,
requests for interpretation of a zoning ordinance or requests pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 and 40:55D-36.
§ 225-43. Checklist C: Special flood hazard development permits.55
[Amended 9-4-2002 by Ord. No. 11-02]
This checklist applies to all applications to the Planning Board (or a
committee thereof) for special flood hazard development permits.
§ 225-44. (Reserved)56
§ 225-45. (Reserved)57
§ 225-46. (Reserved)
54.Editor's Note: Checklist B is included at the end of this chapter.
55.Editor's Note: Checklist C is included at the end of this chapter.
56.Editor's Note: Former § 105-46, Checklist D: Special Flood Hazard Development Permits,
was repealed 9-4-2002 by Ord. No. 11-02.
57.Editor's Note: Former § 105-47, Schedule E: "c" and "d" Variances and Other Applications
to Board of Adjustment, was repealed 9-4-2002 by Ord. No. 11-02.
§ 225-42 HARDING CODE § 225-46
1:226
ARTICLE X
Improvements
§ 225-47. On-site improvements.
A. Prior to the filing of a final subdivision plat or recording of minor
subdivision deeds or as a condition of final site plan approval, or as a
condition to the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65, the developer shall have completed installation or shall
have furnished performance guaranties for the ultimate installation of
the following on-tract improvements within the development as or to
the extent approved or required by the Board; provided, however, that if
the Board finds that a developer does not intend to develop any or a
portion of the property in the foreseeable future, the Board may defer
the furnishing of a performance guaranty as to any such item until such
time as work thereon is commenced, upon the establishment of
adequate safeguards for such deferred guaranty: [Amended
6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18]
(1) Pavement.
(2) Gutters, curbs or combined gutters and curbs.
(3) Sidewalks.
(4) Off-street parking and loading areas.
(5) Street trees.
(6) Streetlighting.
(7) Surveyors' monuments.
(8) Streets.
(9) Water mains.
(10) Sanitary sewers.
(11) Community septic systems.
(12) Drainage structures.
(13) Public improvements of open space.
(14) Any gradings necessitated by the preceding improvements.
(15) Privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping.
B. In no event shall sewer laterals be laid until the rough grading is
completed, and no roads shall be paved until all heavy construction is
completed. Occupancy permits will not be issued until all utilities have
been installed and all road improvements completed. No improvements
shall be installed until all final plat details required by § 225-63 and all
final site plan details required by § 225-68C have been complied with
§ 225-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-47
1:227
§ 225-48. Off-site and off-tract improvements. [Amended 12-9-1996
by Ord. No. 8-96]
and until a final plat or final site plan is submitted to the Board and
Township Engineer for their preliminary approval.
C. If the installation of streetlighting has been made a condition of
approval of an application for development on a dedicated public street,
then upon notification, in writing, by the developer to the approving
authority and Township Committee that the streetlighting on a
dedicated public street has been installed and accepted for service by
the public utility and that certificates of occupancy have been issued for
at least 50% of the dwelling units and 50% of the floor area of the
nonresidential uses on the dedicated public street or portion thereof
indicated by section, the Township shall, within 30 days following
receipt of the notification, make appropriate arrangements with the
public utility for and assume the payment of the costs of the
streetlighting on the dedicated public street on a continuing basis. This
shall not be deemed to constitute acceptance of the street by the
Township. [Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 10-92]
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., where the need for off-site or offtract
improvements is deemed necessary as a result of the proposed
development application, the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
may require the applicant, as a condition of subdivision or site plan
approval, to construct or contribute its pro rata share of the cost of such
off-site or off-tract improvements in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. Off-site or off-tract improvements shall include:
(1) Street improvements, water, sewer, drainage or other facilities or
improvements of the types described in this chapter for on-site
installation, where the need for the provision of such improvements
off-site or off-tract is, in whole or part, made necessary by the
proposed development application and where the making of such
improvements will confer a benefit upon the applicant's property
which is the subject of the application for development.
(2) Any improvement or facility, the installation of which is required in
the public interest and the public need for which would not arise
but for the improvement of the property which is the subject of the
development application and the installation of which would confer
a benefit upon the applicant's property which is the subject of the
development application. In addition to improvements of the type
described in this chapter and referred to above, improvements
required to maintain a safe flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
are specifically declared to be necessary in the public interest.
(3) The installation of new or the extension or modification of existing
improvements made necessary in whole or in part by the
development application for which the applicant's property will be
benefitted by the improvement.
§ 225-47 HARDING CODE § 225-48
1:228
B. Prior to the granting of final approval of any subdivision or planned
development and prior to the issuance of any building permits for any
land use requiring site plan approval pursuant to this chapter, or for any
residence or other use of land on an unimproved street or where any
off-site or off-tract improvements have not yet been installed, the
developer shall pay its pro rata share of the cost of providing any
reasonable and necessary street improvements, water, sewer or
drainage facilities, and easements therefor, located outside the
property limits of the development but which are necessitated or
required by construction or improvements within the development. All
payments shall be made in the manner set forth hereinafter, it being the
intent of this section that the developer shall bear that portion of the
cost of the improvements which bears a rational nexus to the needs
created by the development and/or the benefits conferred upon such
development.
C. The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall
review each development application and determine the need for offsite
or off-tract improvements and the total cost therefor. The Board
shall determine the amount, if any, by which all properties serviced
thereby, including the applicant's property, will be specially benefitted
therefrom.
(1) In cases where reasonable and necessary off-site or off-tract
improvements are required and where no other property owners
will be specially benefitted by the installation of such
improvements, the Board shall require that the applicant, as a
condition of approval, and at the applicant's expense, provide for
and construct such improvements as if such improvements were
located on-site.
(2) In cases where the need for any off-site or off-tract improvements
are required and where the Board determines that properties other
than the applicant's will also be benefitted by the improvement, the
Board shall forward to the Township Committee a report containing
a list and description of all such improvements, together with its
request that the Township Committee determine, as set forth
hereinafter, how the improvements should be undertaken.
D. Where the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment has determined that
properties other than the applicant's will specially benefit from the
installation of off-site or off-tract improvements, and has forwarded a
report to the Township Committee, the Township Committee shall,
within 45 days, make the following determinations:
(1) That the recommended off-site or off-tract improvement should be
undertaken in the manner recommended by the Board or whether
the Committee is of the opinion that an alternative improvement
should be considered by the Board.
§ 225-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-48
1:229
(2) Whether the improvement should be constructed or installed by the
Township as a general improvement or as a local improvement.
(3) Whether the improvement is to be constructed or installed by the
developer under a formula providing for partial reimbursement by
the Township or otherwise for benefits to properties other than that
which is the subject of the development, where appropriate.
(4) The Township Engineer shall estimate, with the aid of such
Township officials or departments or other persons having
pertinent information or expertise, the cost of the improvement and
the amount by which all properties to be serviced thereby,
including the developer's property, will be specially benefitted
therefrom.
(5) Once the Township Committee has made the determinations
described above, the developer shall be required, as a condition of
final approval of the development, to provide a combination of
performance and maintenance guaranties, cash contributions,
developer's agreements and/or other forms of surety permitted by
law, to insure payment to the Township of one of the following
amounts:
(a) If the improvement is to be constructed by the Township as a
local improvement, the developer's proportionate share of the
total cost of the improvement.
(b) If the improvement is to be constructed by the developer, the
total cost of the off-site or off-tract improvement less an offset
for the value of the special benefit, if any, to properties other
than the developer's.
E. The amounts of money required pursuant to this section shall be
estimated sums, and such amounts shall be redetermined by the
Township Engineer following completion of all off-site and off-tract
improvements to ensure that the developer shall pay only its pro rata
share of the cost thereof. In the event that the payment made by the
developer is less than its share of the actual cost of the improvements,
then the developer shall be required to pay its additional proportionate
share of the cost thereof.
F. Should the developer pay the portion of the cost of improvements
determined to be its pro rata share under protest, legal action shall be
instituted within one year of such payment in order to preserve the
right to a judicial determination as to the fairness and reasonableness
of such amount.
G. In the event that the developer shall not be required to install the offsite
or off-tract improvements but is required to pay its pro rata share of
the cost therefor, then in that event there shall be paid to the Township
Chief Financial Officer the amount of the developer's share of the
determined cost of the off-site or off-tract improvement. All moneys
§ 225-48 HARDING CODE § 225-48
1:230
§ 225-49. Inspection of improvements.
§ 225-50. (Reserved)
received by the Township in accordance with the provisions of this
section shall be deposited in an interest-bearing account, and such
funds shall only be used for improvements for which they are deposited
or improvements serving the same purpose. If the improvements are
not initiated within 15 years from the date of payment, or other
mutually agreeable period of time, all deposited funds shall be returned
to the developer, or its legal successor in interest, together with
accumulated interest, less 10% of accumulated interest for
administrative costs. If after reasonable and diligent inquiry, the
Township is unable to locate the developer or its successor in interest
in order to return said funds, then the funds shall be placed in the
Township's general capital improvement fund and shall not be
returnable to the developer thereafter.
A. All of the on-site and off-site or off-tract improvements described in this
chapter, which are to be installed by the developer, shall be subject to
inspection and approval by the Township Engineer, who shall be
notified by the developer at least 24 hours prior to the start of
construction. No underground installation shall be covered until
inspected and approved.
B. Inspection by the Township Engineer or other Township officials of the
installation of improvements and utilities by the developer shall not
operate to subject the Township to liability for claims or suits of any
kind that may arise because of defects or negligence during
construction or at any time thereafter, it being recognized that the
responsibility to maintain safe conditions at all times during
construction and to provide proper utilities and improvements is upon
the developer and his contractors.
C. The developer shall reimburse the Township for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Township Engineer and other Township
officials for the foregoing inspections of improvements and for the
administration thereof, as set forth in Chapter 171 for subdivisions and
site plans.
§ 225-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-50
1:231

ARTICLE XI
Guaranties
§ 225-51. Performance and maintenance guaranties.
A. If a performance guaranty is required, it shall be posted in favor of the
Township in an amount equal to 120% of the cost of installation or
completion of installation of those improvements required by an
approval or developer's agreement, ordinance, or regulation to be
dedicated to a public entity, and that have not yet been installed as
determined by the Township Engineer according to the method of
calculation set forth below. The performance guaranty shall assure the
installation of all required but uncompleted improvements on or before
an agreed date. The performance guaranty shall be approved by the
Township Attorney as to form, sufficiency and execution. The Township
Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of the improvements
covered by the guaranty, which itemized cost estimate shall be
appended to each performance guaranty posted by the obligor.
[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 10-92; 12-9-1996 by Ord. No.
8-96; 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18]
(1) Developer's agreement. Coincident with the furnishing of any
performance guaranty by the developer, there shall be executed an
agreement between the developer and the Township of Harding
incorporating all of the terms and conditions of approval imposed
by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment consistent with
subdivision or site plan approval. Such agreement shall also
contain provisions respecting compliance with all applicable
municipal ordinances, the approved plans and specifications, the
schedule of work and completion date, the inspection and approval
of work by the Township Engineer, the payment of inspection fees,
the correction of defective work, and the rights of the Township to
enforce compliance with the agreement and to alleviate any
adverse conditions or impacts caused by the applicant and not
corrected after due notice, with the costs of the foregoing to be
borne by the applicant. The agreement shall also provide for the
posting of a maintenance guaranty, if required by the Township,
consistent with the provisions of this chapter. [Amended
12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96]
(2) The cost of the installation of improvements shall be estimated by
the Township Engineer based on documented construction costs
for public improvements prevailing in the general area of the
Township. The developer may appeal the Township Engineer's
estimate to the Township Committee. The Township Committee
shall decide the appeal within 45 days of receipt of the appeal in
writing by the Township Clerk. After the developer posts a guaranty
with the Township based on the cost of the installation of
improvements as determined by the Township Committee, he may
institute legal action within one year of the posting in order to
§ 225-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-51
1:233
preserve the right to a judicial determination as to the fairness and
reasonableness of the amount of the guaranty.
(3) The amount of any performance guaranty may be reduced by the
Township Committee, by resolution, when portions of the
improvements have been certified by the Township Engineer to
have been completed. Prior to the release of a performance
guaranty, the developer shall file with the Township Clerk as-built
drawings, in ink, on tracing cloth or a Mylar reproducible drawing,
accurately showing the location, profile and size of any storm
drains, water mains, electric and telephone lines, including service
connections constructed within the development.
(4) The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guaranty has been provided may be extended by the
Township Committee by resolution. As a condition or as part of any
such extension, the amount of any performance guaranty shall be
increased or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to
exceed 120% of the cost of the installation, which cost shall be
determined pursuant to § 225-51A(2) of this chapter.
(5) If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with a performance guaranty, or if the premises are not
restored after a project has been abandoned, the obligor and
surety, if any, shall be liable thereon to the Township for the
reasonable cost of the improvements not completed or corrected
and for the reasonable expense of restoring the premises after
abandonment, and the Township may, either prior to or after the
receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete such improvements or
restore the premises. The Township Engineer's determination that
the obligor has defaulted in his obligation shall be binding and
conclusive upon the obligor.
(6) Municipal Engineer's review of improvements.
(a) Upon substantial completion of all required street
improvements (except for the top course) and appurtenant
utility improvements and the connection of same to the public
system, the obligor may request of the Township Committee in
writing, by certified mail addressed in care of the Township
Clerk, that the Township Engineer prepare, in accordance with
the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer
and appended to the performance guaranty pursuant to this
section of the Code, a list of all uncompleted or unsatisfactory
completed improvements. If such a request is made, the
obligor shall send a copy of the request to the Township
Engineer. The request shall indicate which improvements have
been completed and which improvements remain uncompleted
in the judgment of the obligor. Thereupon the Township
Engineer shall inspect all improvements covered by the
obligor's request and shall file a detailed list and report, in
§ 225-51 HARDING CODE § 225-51
1:234
writing, with the Township Committee and shall
simultaneously send a copy thereof to the obligor not later than
45 days after receipt of the obligor's request.
(b) The list prepared by the Township Engineer shall state, in
detail, with respect to each improvement determined to be
incomplete or unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the
incompleteness of each incomplete improvement or the nature
and extent of, and remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each
completed improvement determined to be unsatisfactory. The
report prepared by the Township Engineer shall identify each
improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory,
together with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction
to be made in the performance guaranty relating to the
completed and satisfactory improvement, in accordance with
the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer
and appended to the performance guaranty pursuant to this
section of the Code.
(7) Reduction of performance guaranty.
(a) The Township Committee, by resolution, shall either approve
the improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory
by the Township Engineer, or reject any or all of these
improvements upon the establishment in the resolution of
cause for rejection and shall approve and authorize the amount
of reduction to be made in the performance guaranty relating
to the improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized
cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and
appended to the performance guaranty pursuant to this section
of the Code. This resolution shall be adopted not later than 45
days after receipt of the list and report prepared by the
Township Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the
Township Committee, the obligor shall be released from all
liability pursuant to its performance guaranty, with respect to
those approved improvements, except for that portion
adequately sufficient to secure completion or correction of the
improvements not yet approved; provided that 30% of the
amount of the performance guaranty posted shall be retained
to ensure completion and acceptability of all improvements.
(b) Obligor's legal recourse.
[1] If the Township Engineer fails to send or provide the list
and report as requested by the obligor pursuant to
Subsection A(5) of this section within 45 days from receipt
of the request, the obligor may apply to the court in a
summary manner for an order compelling the Township
Engineer to provide the list and report within a stated
time, and the cost of applying to the court, including
§ 225-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-51
1:235
reasonable attorney's fees, may be awarded to the
prevailing party.
[2] If the Township Committee fails to approve or reject the
improvements determined by the Township Engineer to be
complete and satisfactory or reduce the performance
guaranty for the complete and satisfactory improvements
within 45 days from the receipt of the Township Engineer's
list and report, the obligor may apply to the court in a
summary manner for an order compelling, within a stated
time, approval of the complete and satisfactory
improvements and approval of a reduction in the
performance guaranty for the approval of complete and
satisfactory improvements in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer
and appended to the performance guaranty pursuant to
this section; and the cost of applying to the court,
including reasonable attorney's fees, may be awarded to
the prevailing party.
(c) In the event that the obligor made a cash deposit as part of the
performance guaranty, then any partial reduction granted in
the performance guaranty pursuant to this section of the Code
shall be applied to the cash deposit in the same proportion as
the original cash deposit bears to the full amount of the
performance guaranty.
(8) If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the obligor
shall complete or correct such improvements, and, upon
completion or correction, the same procedure of notification as set
forth in this section shall be followed.
(9) At the time when he files a performance guaranty, a developer or
his general contractor shall also file with the Township Clerk a
certificate of insurance guaranteeing notification to the Township
in the event of cancellation of his comprehensive general liability
insurance policy or of the worker's compensation policy or
employer's liability policy, which he shall maintain or cause all
subcontractors to maintain. All of the aforesaid policies shall be
subject to the approval of the Township Attorney and shall name
the Township as an additional insured. The comprehensive general
liability policy shall have limits of at least $500,000 for bodily injury
to each person and at least $1,000,000 in the aggregate for each
accident, and property liability of at least $50,000 for each accident
and at least $100,000 aggregate property damage.
(10) In the event that a developer seeks a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a development, unit, lot, building or phase of
development, as a condition of the issuance thereof, the developer
shall furnish a separate guarantee referred to as a "temporary
certificate of occupancy guarantee" in favor of the Township of
§ 225-51 HARDING CODE § 225-51
1:236
Harding in an amount equal to 120% of the cost of installation
of only those improvements which are required to be installed
or completed as a condition precedent to the issuance of the
permanent certificate of occupancy for the development, unit, lot,
building or phase of development and which are not covered by an
existing performance guarantee. Upon the posting of a temporary
certificate of occupancy guarantee, all sums remaining under a
performance guarantee required by the Township of Harding shall
be released. The scope and amount of the temporary certificate
of occupancy guarantee shall be determined by the Township
Engineer. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be released
by the Township Engineer upon the issuance of a permanent
certificate of occupancy.
(11) At no time may the Township of Harding hold more than one
guarantee or bond of any type with respect to the same line item.
(12) Every developer shall provide a safety and stabilization guarantee
in favor of the Township of Harding. At the developer's option, a
safety and stabilization guarantee may be furnished either as a
separate guarantee or as a line item of the performance guarantee.
A safety and stabilization guarantee shall only be available to the
Township when: i) site disturbance has commenced and, thereafter,
all work on the development has ceased for a period of at least 60
consecutive days following such commencement for reasons other
than force majeure, and ii) work has not recommenced within 30
days following the provision of written notice by the municipality to
the developer of the municipality's intent to claim payment under
the guarantee. The Township shall not provide notice of its intent to
claim payment under a safety and stabilization guarantee until a
period of at least 60 days has elapsed during which all the work on
the development has ceased for reasons other than force majeure.
The Township shall provide written notice to a developer by
certified mail or other form of delivery providing evidence of
receipt. The amount of a safety and stabilization guarantee for a
development with bonded improvements in an amount not
exceeding $100,000 shall be $5,000. The amount of a safety and
stabilization guarantee for a development with bonded
improvements exceeding $100,000 shall be calculated as a
percentage of the bonded development costs of the development or
phase of development as follows: $5,000 for the first $100,000 of
bonded improvement costs, plus 2.5% of bonded improvements
costs in excess of $100,000 up to $1,000,000, plus 1% of bonded
improvement costs in excess of $1,000,000. The Township shall
release a developer's safety and stabilization guarantee upon the
developer's furnishing of a performance guarantee which includes
a line item for safety and stabilization in the amount required by
this subsection. The Township shall also release a developer's
safety and stabilization guarantee upon the municipal engineer's
determination that the development of the project site has reached
§ 225-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-51
1:237
a point that the improvements installed are adequate to avoid any
potential threat to public safety.
B. The Township shall require a developer to post a maintenance
guarantee for those improvements that are subject to a performance
guarantee that are being released and also upon the inspection and
issuance of final approval of the following site improvements: i)
stormwater management basins: ii) inflow and water quality structures
within the basins; and iii) the outflow pipes and structures of the
stormwater management systems, if any. The amount of the
maintenance guarantee shall not exceed 15% of the cost of the
improvements which are being released, which cost shall be
determined by the Township Engineer according to the method of
calculation set forth in § 225-51A(2) of this chapter. The term of any
maintenance guarantee required by this subsection shall be for a period
not to exceed two years and shall automatically expire at the end of the
established term. In the event that other governmental agencies or
public utilities automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the
improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance guaranty
to another governmental agency, no performance or maintenance
guaranty, as the case may be, shall be required by the Township for
such utilities or improvements. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
10-92; 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18]
C. (Reserved)58
D. A performance guaranty or maintenance guaranty which is an
irrevocable letter of credit shall be accepted if it: [Added 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 10-92]
(1) Constitutes an unconditional payment obligation of the issuer
running solely to the Township for an express initial period of time
in the amount determined pursuant to this section of the Code;
(2) Is issued by a banking or savings institution authorized to do and
doing business in New Jersey;
(3) Is for a period of time of at least one year; and
(4) Permits the Township to draw upon the letter of credit if the obligor
fails to furnish another letter of credit which complies with the
provisions of this section 30 days or more in advance of the
expiration date of the letter of credit or such longer period in
advance thereof as is stated in the letter of credit.
E. The Township shall not require that a maintenance guaranty required
pursuant to this section be in cash or that more than 10% of a
performance guaranty pursuant to this section be in cash. A developer
may, however, provide at his option some or all or a maintenance
58.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding a performance guaranty for soil erosion
and sediment control plans, was repealed 11-17-2010 by Ord. No. 8-10. See now § 225-91.
§ 225-51 HARDING CODE § 225-51
1:238
§ 225-52. (Reserved)
guaranty in cash, or more than 10% of a performance guaranty in cash.
[Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 10-92]
§ 225-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-52
1:239

ARTICLE XII
Environmental Impact Statements
§ 225-53. Requirement and purpose.
No building permit shall be issued for any building to be used otherwise
than as a one-family dwelling or as an accessory structure thereto, and
no major subdivision or major site plan shall receive preliminary approval,
until an environmental impact statement shall have been submitted to and
approved by the Board, unless the Board waives this requirement pursuant
to § 225-57. The purpose of requiring an environmental impact statement
is to permit the Board to assess the impact of a proposed project upon the
environment, including physical, social and aesthetic considerations, both
natural and man-made, which affect the quality of life. Particular emphasis
should be given to assessing the impact upon water and air resources,
pollution of all kinds, drainage, waste disposal, wetlands, floodplains, steep
slopes, shallow bedrock, critical areas and the landscape.
§ 225-54. Contents of statement.
The environmental impact statement shall include the following:
A. Plan and description of development: a project description, complete
with maps and drawings, which shall specify what is to be done and how
it is to be done during construction and operation. The description shall
locate the project within its regional, municipal and neighborhood
setting, including its relation to surrounding properties, roads, utility
lines, rivers, streams and vegetative patterns. The project description
shall include, but not be limited to, contours, buildings and other
structures, roads, paved areas, grading and regrading, adjacent natural
streams, floodplains, wetlands, critical areas, water supply, drainage,
stormwater runoff plans, sediment and soil erosion control, traffic
patterns, waste disposal plans (liquid, solid and recycling) and open
space management plans.
B. Inventory of existing environmental conditions: an inventory of existing
environmental conditions at the project site and in the affected region,
including delineation of all on-site easements, deed restrictions, rightsof-
way, stream encroachment lines, wetlands and floodplains. The
inventory shall describe air quality, water quality, water supply, surface
waters, including streams, ponds and marshes, wetlands, floodplains,
steep slopes, critical areas, shallow bedrock, hydrology, natural and
man-made drainage, geology, soils and properties thereof, including
capabilities and limitations, sewerage systems, topography, slope,
vegetation (including wetlands), wildlife, aquatic organisms, noise
characteristics and levels, traffic conditions, demography, land use,
aesthetics, history and archaeology. Air and water quality shall be
described with reference to standards promulgated by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, and soils shall be described
with reference to the Morris County Soil Survey and the criteria
§ 225-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-54
1:241
contained in the Morris County Soil Conservation District Standards
and Specifications.
C. Assessment of environmental impact of project: an assessment
supported by environmental data of the temporary and long-term
environmental impacts of the project upon the factors described in
Subsection B, which shall also include an evaluation of the effects of
water use and of liquid and solid wastes on the quality and quantity of
surface and ground waters.
D. Listing of all unavoidable adverse environmental impacts: a listing and
evaluation of adverse environmental impacts and damage to natural
resources which cannot be avoided, both on-site and off-site, as a result
of the project, with emphasis upon air and water pollution, increase in
noise, damage to plants, trees and wildlife systems, displacement of
people and businesses, impediments to existing traffic flow,
displacement of existing farms and increase in sedimentation and
siltation. Impacts upon any wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, critical
areas and shallow bedrock shall also be set forth and evaluated.
E. Steps to minimize environmental damage: a description of steps to be
taken to minimize or mitigate adverse environmental impacts during
construction and thereafter, both at the project site and in the affected
region, such description to be accompanied by necessary maps,
schedules and other explanatory data as may be needed to clarify and
explain the actions to be taken.
F. Alternatives: a statement of alternatives to the proposed project which
might avoid some or all of the adverse environmental effects of the
proposed project. The statement should include the reasons for the
acceptability or nonacceptability of each alternative.
G. Sewerage facilities:
(1) A wastewater management plan for which a New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) permit has been granted
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
Division of Water Resources, if required; or
(2) A showing that sewage can be disposed of through facilities
adequate to preclude water pollution and:
(a) If the disposal is on-site, the data on underlying geology; water
table; soils analysis; soil stratigraphy; percolation tests for
every sewage disposal site; topography; location and depth of
aquifers; and depth, capacity and type of construction of all
wells within 500 feet of the site; and any other pertinent data.
(b) If the disposal is off-site, the plant design capacity; the monthly
average and peak flows for the past 12 months; the daily
average and peak flows; the enforcement action against the
plant, if the capacity of the plant to treat industrial or
§ 225-54 HARDING CODE § 225-54
1:242
commercial wastes, if applicable; the receiving water quality
standards; the stream quality data from state, federal or
private sources; the stream flow (minimum average sevenconsecutive-
day flow with a frequency of occurrence of 10
years), plans for sewage treatment facility (local plans) and
state regional planning policy; and flows expected from other
approved subdivisions which are dependent upon sewage
treatment facilities in question.
(c) Compliance with all state and local sewage and health
regulations.
H. Water supply: a showing that an adequate potable water supply is
available and not threatened by nearby use of other land and:
(1) If the supply is from public facilities off-site, including private water
companies, the amount of diversion granted by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Water
Resources (maximum gallons of water pumped during any month);
present diversion (maximum gallons of water pumped during the
past 24 months); and diversions expected from other approved
subdivisions or site plans which are dependent upon the present
diversions granted by the Division of Water Resources;
(2) If the supply is from on-site sources, the location and depth of all
private and public water supplies within 500 feet of the
development improvements; the location, depth and adequacy of
proposed private or public water supplies to serve the proposed
development improvements; the geologic description of subsurface
conditions, including expected groundwater yields (using
published geologic reports or reports by a geologist); and
(3) Compliance with all state and local regulations.
I. Drainage: a showing that stormwater runoff from the site is so
controlled that on- and off-site erosion will not be either caused or
worsened and that potential of downstream flooding will not be
increased as a result of the development; and
(1) Volume and peak flow rates of stormwater runoff expected from the
undeveloped site and to be generated by new improvements,
including volumes and rates for two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fiftyand
one-hundred-year storm frequencies having durations
producing maximum flow rates before and after the proposed
development.
(2) Data on landscaping, vegetation maps, trees and ground cover,
existing on-site compared with that proposed.
(3) Changes of runoff rates and volumes to be caused by changes in
land use and the time of concentration.
§ 225-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-54
1:243
§ 225-55. General provisions.
(4) Plans for disposition of stormwater, whether by retention or
detention on-site or by other means so as to protect downstream
property.
(5) A stream encroachment permit from the Division of Water
Resources for fill or diversion of a water channel, alteration of a
stream or repair or construction of a bridge, culvert, reservoir,
dam, wall, pipeline or cable crossing.
(6) If the development lies in whole or in part in a floodplain, a
description of potential flood damages, including a summary of
flood stages from state and federal sources.
J. Solid waste disposal: a plan for disposal by means of a facility operating
in compliance with a municipal plan for the storage of recyclable
materials and the State Sanitary Code.
K. Air pollution: a showing that no visible smoke or deleterious chemical
changes are produced in the atmosphere by heating or incinerating
devices or by any processing of materials.
L. Licenses, permits, etc.: a list of all licenses, permits and other approvals
required by municipal, county or state and federal laws and the status
of each.
A. Filing. Twenty copies of the environmental impact statement shall be
submitted to the Board, together with the applicable fees in accordance
with Chapter 171. [Amended 9-4-2002 by Ord. No. 11-02]
B. Review of the environmental impact statement. In reviewing an
environmental impact statement, the Board shall take into
consideration the effect of the applicant's proposal upon all aspects of
the environment, including but not limited to sewage disposal, water
quality, water supply, preservation of trees and vegetation, protection of
watercourses, wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, critical areas and
shallow bedrock, protection of air resources, protection of aquifers,
protection of public lands and their uses and ecosystems, drainage,
traffic conditions and the presence of any nuisance factors.
C. Referral to Environmental Commission. The Board shall submit the
environmental impact statement for review to the Township
Environmental Commission and may submit it to such other
governmental bodies and to such consultants as it may deem
appropriate. The Board shall request that an advisory report be made to
it by the governmental body or consultant within 45 days of the
submission of the environmental impact statement to such
governmental body or consultant, or within such shorter time as the
Board shall be required to act upon an application to which the
environmental impact statement is related.
§ 225-54 HARDING CODE § 225-55
1:244
§ 225-56. Conditions.
The steps to be taken to minimize adverse environmental impacts during
construction and operation under § 225-54E and the alternatives which may
be approved by the Board under § 225-54F shall constitute conditions of the
approval of the environmental impact statement, together with such other
conditions as the Board may impose. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued until compliance shall have been made with such conditions.
§ 225-57. Waiver.
The Board, at its sole discretion, may waive the requirement for an
environmental impact statement, in whole or in part, if sufficient evidence
is submitted to support a conclusion that the proposed project will have a
negligible environmental impact or that a complete environmental impact
statement need not be prepared in order to evaluate adequately the
environmental impact of a project.
§ 225-58. Public and quasi-public projects.
An environmental impact statement as required herein shall also be
submitted with respect to all public or quasi-public projects unless they are
exempt from the requirements of local law by supervening county, state or
federal law.
§ 225-59. (Reserved)
D. The Board shall approve an environmental impact statement only if it
determines that the proposed development will not result in
appreciable harm to the natural environment; has been designed with a
view toward the protection of natural resources; and will not place an
excessive demand upon the total resources available for such proposal
and for any future proposals.
§ 225-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-59
1:245

ARTICLE XIII
Subdivision Review and Approval Procedures
§ 225-60. Informal review of concept plan. [Amended 10-16-2002 by
Ord. No. 12-02]
Developers are encouraged to request an informal review of a concept plan
for a development for which the developer intends to prepare and submit
an application for development to the Board so that the Board may be
informed of the applicant's intentions, classify the proposed subdivision as
major or minor, and so that the applicant may obtain the advice of the
Board and other Township officials in the early stages of the design in order
to avoid undue expense and delay in preparing more detailed plans and
specifications. If a concept plan is submitted, for applications under the
jurisdiction of the Planning Board, prior to review by the full Board, the
Secretary shall refer the concept plan and any supporting documents to the
Development Review Committee for its review and recommendation. Such
Committee shall not be governed by any statutory time limits in its review
of concept plans. The developer shall not be bound by any concept plan for
which informal review is requested, and the Board shall not be bound by
any such review. The request for concept plan review shall be accompanied
by any applicable fees in accordance with Chapter 171.
§ 225-61. Sketch plat for minor subdivision approval.
A. Purpose of submission of sketch plat. A sketch plat is required of all
applicants seeking approval of a minor subdivision (except for those
seeking merely a concept discussion with a committee designated for
such purpose by the Board) so that the Board may be informed of the
applicant's intentions and may classify the proposed subdivision as
major or minor and so that the applicant may obtain the advice of the
Board and other Township officials in the early stages of the design.
B. In those instances in which the Planning Board has the authority to
administer and implement this article with respect to an application for
minor subdivision approval, the Planning Board is hereby empowered
to designate a committee of the Planning Board to so act on its behalf
and to adopt rules and regulations relating to the procedures of the
committee. Any reference contained in this chapter to "Board" or
"Planning Board" shall be deemed to be a reference to a committee of
the Planning Board if the Planning Board designates such a committee
to so act. [Amended 4-11-1988 by Ord. No. 4-88]
C. Procedures for submitting sketch plat for minor subdivision approval.
(1) The applicant for minor subdivision approval shall submit 20 copies
of a complete sketch plat application, with a sketch plat attached,
to the Secretary of the Board at least 14 days prior to the regular
meeting of the Board at which consideration is desired; provided,
however, that if the application is submitted to the Planning Board
and if the Planning Board has designated a committee to act on its
§ 225-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-61
1:247
behalf with respect to minor subdivision applications pursuant to
Subsection B of this section, the applicant shall instead submit 10
of such copies sufficiently, prior to the date by which consideration
is desired, so as to permit the chairman of such committee to
schedule a meeting to act on the application at the mutual
convenience of the applicant and such committee. The sketch plat
application shall be accompanied by payment of an application fee
and technical review fee in accordance with Chapter 171 of this
Code. Also see Chapter 171 respecting the payment of deposits for
inspection fees prior to the performance of inspections of required
improvements.
(2) Immediately upon the receipt of a sketch plat, the Secretary of the
Board shall furnish one copy of the plat, together with supporting
documents, to each of the following:
(a) The Township Engineer.
(b) The Secretary of the Board of Health.
(c) The Morris County Planning Board, when required.
(d) The Clerk of an adjoining municipality, when required.
(e) Such other Township, county or state officials or agencies as
directed by the Board.
(3) If the Morris County Planning Board has approval authority with
respect to the application pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.2 et seq.
(applications along county roads or affecting county drainage
facilities), its action shall be noted on the sketch plat, and, if
disapproved, a statement of the reasons for disapproval shall be
returned to the applicant with the plat. If, within 30 days after
receiving the sketch plat, the Morris County Planning Board does
not comment thereon in writing to the Secretary of the Board, the
sketch plat shall be deemed to have been approved by the Morris
County Planning Board.
(4) Whenever a sketch plat is submitted for approval of a minor
subdivision which fronts on an existing public road, one copy of a
deed of dedication or easement shall be included in the application
to provide a sufficient right-of-way where the existing road right-ofway
is less than the minimum requirements of the public entity
which owns the road; provided, however, that the application shall
not be deemed incomplete for failure to submit such deed or
easement.
(5) The Board shall act upon an application for approval of a minor
subdivision within 45 days of the submission of a complete
application to the Secretary of the Board or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant.
§ 225-61 HARDING CODE § 225-61
1:248
(6) If the sketch plat is disapproved, the reasons for disapproval must
be remedied before an amended sketch plat can be submitted and
acted upon as in the case of an original sketch plat.
(7) If the Board grants an application for minor subdivision approval,
any conditions of such approval (other than those imposed by law)
shall be set forth in the resolution adopted by the Board. When all
conditions precedent to signing the sketch plat have been met, the
plat shall be submitted to the Chairman of the Board and the
Secretary of the Board for their signatures, which shall be
certification that the subdivision is exempt from obtaining further
Board approval.
(8) Before the Secretary of the Board returns the signed original of any
approved sketch plat to the subdivider, he shall be provided with
five copies thereof for distribution to other Township
representatives.
(9) The signed sketch plat of a minor subdivision shall be returned to
the subdivider within one week after the Chairman of the Board
and the Secretary of the Board have signed it.
(10) Except as provided in Subsection C(13) below, approval of a minor
subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date on which the
resolution of approval is adopted unless within such period a plat in
conformity with such approval and the provisions of the Map Filing
Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., or a deed clearly describing the
approved minor subdivision is filed by the developer with the
Morris County Clerk, the Township Engineer and the Township Tax
Assessor. Prior to the recording of any such deed, it shall have been
approved by the Board's Attorney, particularly as to easements
required or approved in connection with the minor subdivision. Any
such plat or deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by
the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board. In reviewing
the application for development for a proposed minor subdivision,
the Planning Board may accept a plat not in conformity with the
Map Filing Law, provided that if the developer chooses to file the
minor subdivision as provided herein by plat rather than deed, such
plat shall conform with the provisions of said law. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 12-92]
(11) The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions,
whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision
approval was granted shall not be changed for a period of two years
after the date on which the resolution of minor subdivision
approval is adopted, provided that the approved minor subdivision
shall have been duly recorded as provided in this section. [Added
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 12-92]
(12) Unless the application for minor subdivision approval is acted upon
by a committee of the Planning Board pursuant to Subsection B
§ 225-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-61
1:249
§ 225-62. Preliminary plat.
above, the Secretary of the Board shall cause an official notice of
the approval of a minor subdivision to be published in a newspaper
of general circulation within the Township.
(13) The Planning Board may extend the one-hundred-ninety-day period
for filing a minor subdivision plat or deed pursuant to Subsection
C(10) above, if the subdivider proves to the reasonable satisfaction
of the Planning Board that the subdivider was barred or prevented,
directly or indirectly, from filing because of delays in obtaining
legally required approvals from other governmental or quasigovernmental
entities and that the subdivider applied promptly for
and diligently pursued the required approvals. The length of the
extension shall be equal to the period of delay caused by the wait
for the required approvals, as determined by the Planning Board.
The subdivider may apply for the extension either before or after
what would otherwise be the expiration date. [Added 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 12-92]
(14) The Planning Board shall grant an extension of minor subdivision
approval for a period determined by the Board but not exceeding
one year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the
subdivider proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that
the subdivider was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining
legally required approvals from other governmental entities and
that the subdivider applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. A subdivider shall apply for the extension
before what would otherwise be the expiration date of minor
subdivision approval or the 91st day after the subdivider receives
the last legally required approval from other governmental entities,
whichever occurs later. [Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 12-92]
D. Details of sketch plat. The sketch plat shall be drawn by a licensed New
Jersey land surveyor in compliance with the applicable provisions of
Article XV, Design Standards for Subdivisions, and shall be based on a
current field survey performed under the supervision of a licensed New
Jersey land surveyor who must sign and seal the plat. The entire tract
shall be shown on one sheet unless waived by the Board. It shall also
show or be accompanied by all of the applicable items set forth on
Checklist A.59
A. Purpose for submission of preliminary plat. A preliminary plat and
supporting documents are required so that the Planning Board may
approve a specific design of a major subdivision and its public
improvements. "Preliminary approval" means that the approval is
subject to consideration of the final plat.
59.Editor's Note: Checklist A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-61 HARDING CODE § 225-62
1:250
B. Procedures for submitting preliminary plat.
(1) The subdivider shall submit 20 copies of a complete application,
including completed application forms, each with a copy of the
preliminary plat and supporting documentation, including the soil
erosion and sediment control plan if required by Article XVII, Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control, of this chapter, to the Secretary of
the Board at least three weeks prior to the regular Board meeting
at which consideration is desired. The application shall be
accompanied by an application fee together with a technical review
fee in accordance with Chapter 171. See also Chapter 171
respecting the payment of deposits for inspection fees prior to the
performance of inspections of required improvements. [Amended
9-4-2002 by Ord. No. 11-02]
(2) Immediately upon the receipt of a preliminary plat, the Secretary of
the Board shall furnish one copy of the plat, together with
supporting documents, to each of the following:
(a) If under the jurisdiction of the Planning Board, the
Development Review Committee.
(b) The Township Engineer.
(c) The Secretary of the Board of Health.
(d) The Morris County Planning Board, when required.
(e) The Clerk of an adjoining municipality, when required.
(f) The Township Environmental Commission.
(g) The Township Historic Preservation Commission, when
required.
(h) The Shade Tree Advisory Committee.
(i) Such other Township, county or state officials or agencies as
directed by the Board.
(3) If the Morris County Planning Board has approval authority with
respect to the application pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.2 et seq.
(applications along county roads or affecting county drainage
facilities), its action shall be noted on the preliminary plat, and, if
disapproved, a statement of the reasons for disapproval shall be
returned to the applicant with the plat. If, within 30 days after
receiving the preliminary plat, the Morris County Planning Board
does not comment thereon in writing to the Secretary of the Board,
the preliminary plat shall be deemed to have been approved by the
Morris County Planning Board.
(4) The Board shall act upon the application for preliminary approval
of a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots within 45 days of the submission
§ 225-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-62
1:251
of a complete application to the Secretary of the Board, or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. The
Board shall act upon the application for preliminary approval of a
subdivision of more than 10 lots within 95 days of the submission
of a complete application to the Secretary of the Board, or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(5) If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the reasons for disapproval
must be remedied before an amended plan can be submitted and
acted upon as in the case of an original plat.
(6) If the Board grants an application for preliminary subdivision
approval, any conditions of such approval, other than those
imposed by law, shall be set forth in the resolution adopted by the
Board. When all conditions precedent to signing the preliminary
plat have been met, the Chairman of the Board shall affix his
signature to the preliminary plat with a notation that it has
received preliminary approval and has been returned to the
subdivider for compliance with the procedure for final approval in
§ 225-63.
(7) Preliminary approval.
(a) Preliminary approval shall confer upon the subdivider the
following rights for a three-year period from the date on which
the resolution of preliminary approval is adopted: [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 12-92]
[1] The general terms and conditions under which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed;
[2] The subdivider may submit on or before the expiration
date of such three-year period the whole or any part or
parts of said plat for final approval;
[3] Upon timely application by the subdivider, the Board may
grant extensions for additional periods of at least one year,
but not to exceed a total extension of two years, subject to
any ordinance revisions in design standards.
(b) Provided, however, that, in the case of a subdivision of an area
of 50 acres or more, the Board may grant the rights referred to
in Subsection B(7)(a) above for such period of time, longer
than three years, as shall be determined by the Board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling
units and the nonresidential floor area permissible under
preliminary approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may
apply for thereafter, and the Board may thereafter grant, an
extension to preliminary approval for such additional period of
time as shall be determined by the Board to be reasonable,
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and the
§ 225-62 HARDING CODE § 225-62
1:252
§ 225-63. Final plat.
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval, the potential number of dwelling units and the
potential nonresidential floor area of the section or sections
awaiting final approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development; provided that, if the
design standards have been revised, such revised standards
may govern.
(c) Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of
preliminary approval pursuant to Subsection B(7)(a)[3] or
B(7)(b) above, and preliminary approval has expired before the
date on which the extension is granted, the extension shall
begin on what would otherwise be the expiration date. The
subdivider may apply for the extension either before or after
what would otherwise be the expiration date. [Added
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 12-92]
(d) The Planning Board shall grant an extension of preliminary
approval for a period determined by the Board but not
exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the
expiration date, if the subdivider proves to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board that the subdivider was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the
development because of delays in obtaining legally required
approval from other governmental entities and that the
subdivider applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. A subdivider shall apply for the extension
before what would otherwise be the expiration date of
preliminary approval or the 91st day after the subdivider
receives the last legally required approval from other
governmental entities, whichever occurs later. An extension
granted pursuant to this subsection shall not preclude the
Planning Board from granting an extension pursuant to
Subsection B(7)(a)[3] or B(7)(b) above. [Added 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 12-92]
C. Details of preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and
legibly drawn and reproduced, and the entire tract shall be shown on
one sheet unless waived by the Board. It shall be drawn by a licensed
New Jersey land surveyor in compliance with the provisions of Article
XV, Design Standards for Subdivisions, and shall be based on a current
field survey performed under the supervision of a licensed New Jersey
land surveyor who must sign and seal the plat. It shall show or be
accompanied by all of the applicable items set forth on Checklist A.60
A. Purpose for submission of final plat. A final plat and supporting
drawings and documents for a proposed major subdivision constitute
60.Editor's Note: Checklist A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-63
1:253
the complete development plan of the proposed subdivision and become
the basis for the construction of the subdivision and inspection by the
Township Engineer and Board. The plat itself must be recorded in the
Morris County Clerk's office to have legal status.
B. Procedures for submitting final plat.
(1) The subdivider shall submit the original tracing, two cloth
translucent copies of the original tracing, two cloth prints, 20
black-on-white prints and 20 copies of the application form for final
approval to the Board Secretary within three years from the date of
tentative approval, and at least 14 days prior to a regular Board
meeting. Unless the preliminary plat is approved without changes,
the final plat shall have incorporated all changes or modifications
required by the Board. [Amended 9-4-2002 by Ord. No. 11-02]
(2) The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the Township
Engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all utilities in exact
location and elevation and identifying those portions already
installed. He shall also state that the subdivider has complied with
one or both of the following:
(a) All improvements have been in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
(b) A performance guaranty has been posted with the Township
Clerk in sufficient amount to assure the completion of all
required improvements.
(3) The application shall be accompanied by an application fee
together with a technical review fee in accordance with Chapter
171. See also Chapter 171 respecting the payment of deposits for
inspection fees prior to the performance of inspections of required
improvements.
(4) If the Morris County Planning Board has approval authority with
respect to the application pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.2 et seq.
(applications along county roads or affecting county drainage
facilities), its action shall be noted on the final plat, and, if
disapproved, a statement of the reasons for disapproval shall be
returned to the applicant. If, within 30 days after receiving the final
plat, the Morris County Planning Board does not comment thereon
in writing to the Secretary of the Board, the final plat shall be
deemed to have been approved by the Morris County Planning
Board.
(5) Prior to final approval by the Board, whenever the subdivision
fronts on an existing public road, one copy of a deed of dedication
or easement shall be included in the application to provide a
sufficient right-of-way where the existing road right-of-way is less
than the minimum requirements of the public entity which owns
§ 225-63 HARDING CODE § 225-63
1:254
the road; provided, however, that the application shall not be
deemed incomplete for failure to submit such deed or easement.61
(6) The Board shall act upon the application for final approval of a
subdivision within 45 days after submission of a complete
application to the Secretary of the Board or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(7) If the final plat is disapproved, the reasons for disapproval must be
remedied before an amended plan can be submitted and acted
upon as in the case of an original plat.
(8) If the Board grants an application for final subdivision approval,
any conditions of such approval shall be set forth in the resolution
adopted by the Board. When all conditions precedent to signing the
final plat have been met, the final plat shall be executed in
accordance with the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 to
46:23-9.16, as amended and supplemented, and signed by the
Chairman and Secretary of the Board, the Township Engineer and
the owner.
(9) After the signing of the final plat, the subdivider shall file the final
plat with the Morris County Clerk within 95 days from the date of
such signing. If a final plat is not filed within this period, or any
extension thereof granted pursuant to Subsection B(12) hereof, the
approval shall expire. [Amended 12-9-1991 by Ord. No. 8-91]
(10) Upon application by the subdivider and for good cause shown, the
Board may make a reasonable extension of the time within which
the subdivider must file with the Morris County Clerk for a period
not to exceed 190 days from the date of the signing of the final plat;
provided, however, that the plat shall be revised according to any
change in regulations or ordinances applicable to the plat
subsequent to the original ninety-five-day time period.
(11) The Planning Board may extend the ninety-five-day or onehundred-
ninety-day period if the subdivider proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Board that the subdivider
was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from filing because
of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental or quasi-governmental entities and that the
subdivider applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required
approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal to the period
of delay caused by the wait for the required approvals, as
determined by the Planning Board. The subdivider may apply for an
extension either before or after the original expiration date.
[Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 12-92]
61.Editor's Note: Original Subsection B(6), regarding county planning board approval, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 225-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-63
1:255
(12) "Expiration of approval" shall mean that the previous approval by
the Board shall be null and void, and, in order to obtain a
reapproval, a new filing fee shall be paid, and a review of all
previous findings must be conducted.
(13) After final approval and recording of the final plat with the Morris
County Clerk's office, one duplicate Mylar tracing, one cloth print
and five paper prints of the true copy of the recorded final plat shall
be submitted to the Secretary of the Board for distribution to the
Tax Assessor and such other Township, county or state officials or
agencies as directed by the Board.
(14) Final approval. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 12-92]
(a) If a final plat has been duly filed with the Morris County Clerk
in accordance with Subsections B(9) and B(13) above, final
approval shall confer upon the subdivider the following rights:
[1] The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary
approval first granted and all other rights conferred upon
the subdivider pursuant to § 225-62B(7) shall not be
changed for a period of two years after the date on which
the resolution of final approval is adopted; and
[2] If the subdivider has followed the standards prescribed for
final approval, the Board may grant extensions for
additional periods of one year, but not to exceed three
extensions;
(b) Provided, however, that in the case of a subdivision for a
planned development of 50 acres or more, or a conventional
subdivision for 150 acres or more, the Board may grant the
rights referred to in Subsection B(14)(a) above for such period
of time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the
Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number
of dwelling units and the nonresidential floor area permissible
under final approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development. The subdivider may
apply for thereafter, and the Board may thereafter grant, an
extension of final approval for such additional period of time as
shall be determined by the Board to be reasonable, taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and the
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, the
number of dwelling units and the nonresidential floor area
remaining to be developed, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development.
(c) Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of final
approval pursuant to Subsection B(14)(a)[2] or B(14)(b) above
and final approval has expired before the date on which the
extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what would
§ 225-63 HARDING CODE § 225-63
1:256
§ 225-64. Notice of farm use. [Added 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 7-00]
otherwise be the expiration date. The subdivider may apply for
the extension either before or after what would otherwise be
the expiration date.
(d) The Planning Board shall grant an extension of final approval
for a period determined by the Board but not exceeding one
year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the
subdivider proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board
that the subdivider was barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of
delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the subdivider applied
promptly for and diligently pursued these approvals. A
subdivider shall apply for the extension before what would
otherwise be the expiration date of final approval or the 91st
day after the subdivider receives the last legally required
approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs
later. An extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall
not preclude the Planning Board from granting an extension
pursuant to Subsection B(14)(a)[2] or B(14)(b) above.
(15) The granting of final approval terminates the effective time period
of preliminary approval pursuant to § 225-62B(7).
C. Details of final plat. The final plat shall comply with the Map Filing Law,
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., and the provisions of Article XIX, Flood
Damage Prevention. It shall be clearly and legibly drawn on translucent
tracing cloth or its equivalent with signatures in ink. When more than
one sheet is required, an index sheet of the same size shall be filed,
showing the entire subdivision on one sheet. In addition to showing or
being accompanied by the same information required for a preliminary
plat (except that commonly owned contiguous property shall be
excluded if not part of the application), the final plat shall show or be
accompanied by all of the applicable items set forth on Checklist A.62
A. For the purpose of giving due notice of the right to farm in all zoning
districts, the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall require an
applicant for major or minor subdivision, as a condition of approval of
such application, to provide every lot purchaser with a copy of the rightto-
farm section (§ 225-116L) of this chapter.
B. Whenever a new major or minor subdivision abuts a commercial farm or
vacant land, the following language shall be inserted in the deed of all
lots: "The grantee is hereby noticed that there is, or may in the future
be, a farm use near the described premises from which may emanate
noise, odors, dust, and fumes associated with agricultural management
62.Editor's Note: Checklist A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-64
1:257
practices permitted under the 'Right to Farm' section of the Land Use
and Development Ordinance."
§ 225-64 HARDING CODE § 225-64
1:258
ARTICLE XIV
Site Plan Review and Approval Procedures
§ 225-65. Site plan approval required.
§ 225-66. Exemption from requirements.
There shall be exempt from the requirements of this article a proposed site
plan which:
§ 225-67. Informal review of concept plan. [Amended 10-16-2002 by
Ord. No. 12-02]
Developers are encouraged to request an informal review of a concept plan
for a development for which the developer intends to prepare and submit
an application for development to the Board so that the Board may be
informed of the applicant's intentions, classify the proposed site plan as
major or minor, and so that the applicant may obtain the advice of the
Board and other Township officials in the early stages of the design in order
to avoid undue expense and delay in preparing more detailed plans and
specifications. If a concept plan is submitted, for applications under the
jurisdiction of the Planning Board, prior to review by the full Board, the
Secretary shall refer the concept plan and any supporting documents to the
A. Subject to the exemptions provided in § 225-66, no building or other
structure shall be erected, constructed, remodeled, moved, enlarged or
externally altered, no structure or land appurtenant thereto shall be
used or occupied and no building permit or certificate of occupancy
shall be issued unless and until a site plan for that structure or land
shall have been granted minor site plan approval or final site plan
approval by resolution adopted by the Board and all conditions, if any,
to such approval have been satisfied.
B. The provisions of this section shall also apply to: [Added 4-10-1989 by
Ord. No. 4-89]
(1) Any modification of a previously approved site plan.
(2) Installation or modification of any site lighting, solid waste
containers, walkways and landscaping. [Amended 6-12-1989 by
Ord. No. 6-89]
(3) Modification of any parking lot layout or driveway access, including
modifications to designations of parking spaces but not including
routine maintenance of parking lots.
A. Provides only for a detached single-family dwelling or a structure or use
accessory thereto on an individual lot;
B. Involves normal maintenance or replacement, such as a new roof,
painting, new siding or similar activity. [Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord.
No. 4-89]
§ 225-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-67
1:259
Development Review Committee for its review and recommendation. Such
Committee shall not be governed by any statutory time limits in its review of
site plans. The developer shall not be bound by any concept plan for which
informal review is requested, and the Board shall not be bound by any such
review. The request for concept plan review shall be accompanied by any
applicable fees in accordance with Chapter 171.
§ 225-68. Site plan applications.
A. Sketch site plan.
(1) Purpose of submission of sketch site plan. A sketch site plan is
required of all applicants seeking approval of a minor site plan
(except for those seeking merely a concept discussion with a
committee designated for such purpose by the Board) so that the
Board may be informed of the applicant's intentions and may
classify the proposed site plan as major or minor and so that the
applicant may obtain the advice of the Board and other Township
officials in the early stages of the design.
(2) In those instances in which the Planning Board has authority to
administer and implement this article with respect to an
application for minor site plan approval, the Planning Board is
hereby empowered to designate a committee of the Planning Board
to so act on its behalf, and to adopt rules and regulations relating to
the procedures of the committee. Any reference contained in this
chapter to "Board" or "Planning Board" shall be deemed to be a
reference to a committee of the Planning Board if the Planning
Board designates such a committee to so act. [Amended
4-11-1988 by Ord. No. 4-88]
(3) Procedures for submitting sketch site plan for minor site plan
approval.
(a) The applicant for minor site plan approval shall submit 20
copies of a complete sketch site plan application, with a sketch
site plan attached, to the Secretary of the Board at least 14
days prior to the regular meeting of the Board at which
consideration is desired; provided, however, that if the
application is submitted to the Planning Board, and if the
Planning Board has designated a committee to act on its behalf
with respect to minor site plan applications pursuant to
Subsection A(1), the applicant shall instead submit 10 of such
copies sufficiently prior to the date by which consideration is
desired so as to permit the Chairman of such committee to
schedule a meeting to act on the application at the mutual
convenience of the applicant and such committee. The minor
site plan application shall be accompanied by payment of an
application fee together with a technical review fee in
accordance with Chapter 171. See also Chapter 171 respecting
§ 225-67 HARDING CODE § 225-68
1:260
the payment of deposits for inspection fees prior to the
performance of inspections of required improvements.
(b) Immediately upon the receipt of a sketch site plan, the Board
Secretary shall furnish one copy of the plat, together with
supporting documents, to each of the following:
[1] The Township Engineer.
[2] The Secretary of the Board of Health.
[3] The Morris County Planning Board (when required).
[4] The clerk of an adjoining municipality (when required).
[5] Such other Township, county or state officials or agencies
as directed by the Board.
(c) If the Morris County Planning Board has approval authority
with respect to the application pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6 et
seq. (applications along county roads or affecting county
drainage facilities), its action shall be noted on the sketch site
plan, and, if disapproved, a statement of the reasons for
disapproval shall be returned to the applicant with the site
plan. If, within 30 days after receiving the sketch site plan, the
Morris County Planning Board does not comment thereon in
writing to the Secretary of the Board, the sketch site plan shall
be deemed to have been approved by the Morris County
Planning Board.
(d) Whenever a sketch site plan of a minor site plan which fronts
on an existing public road is submitted for approval, one copy
of a deed of dedication or easement shall be included in the
application to provide sufficient right-of-way where the
existing road right-of-way is less than the minimum
requirements of the public entity which owns the road;
provided, however, that the application shall not be deemed
incomplete for failure to submit such deed or easement.
(e) The Board shall act upon an application for approval of a minor
site plan within 45 days of the submission of a complete
application to the Secretary of the Board or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(f) If the sketch site plan is disapproved, the reasons for
disapproval must be remedied before an amended sketch site
plan can be submitted and acted upon as in the case of an
original sketch site plan.
(g) If the Board grants an application for minor site plan approval,
any conditions of such approval (other than those imposed by
law) shall be set forth in the resolution adopted by the Board.
When all conditions precedent to signing the sketch site plan
§ 225-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-68
1:261
have been met, the sketch site plan shall be submitted to the
Chairman of the Board, the Board Secretary and the Township
Engineer for their signatures, which shall be certification that
the site plan is approved by the Board and is exempt from
obtaining further Board approval.
(h) The Board Secretary may defer the return of the signed sketch
site plan to the developer until he has been provided with five
copies thereof for distribution to other Township
representatives.
(i) The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions
upon which minor site plan approval was granted shall not be
changed for a period of two years after the date of minor site
plan approval. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of
this period for a period determined by the Board but not
exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the
expiration date, if the developer proves to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the
development because of delays in obtaining legally required
approvals from other governmental entities and that the
developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
approvals. A developer shall apply for this extension before
what would otherwise be the expiration date or the 91st day
after the date on which the developer receives the last of the
legally required approvals from the other governmental
entities, whichever occurs later. [Amended 10-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 11-92]
(4) Details of sketch site plan. The sketch site plan shall be prepared by
and bear the seal of a professional engineer, architect or
professional planner, licensed to practice in New Jersey. The entire
tract shall be shown on one sheet, unless waived by the Board's
engineering consultant. All sheets shall be collated and bound. The
sketch site plan shall show or be accompanied by all of the
applicable items set forth on Checklist A.63
B. Preliminary site plan.
(1) Procedures for submitting preliminary site plan.
(a) The applicant for preliminary site plan approval shall submit
20 copies of a complete site plan application, including
completed application form with a preliminary site plan and
supporting documentation attached, to the Secretary of the
Board at least three weeks prior to the regular meeting of the
Board at which consideration is desired. The preliminary site
plan application shall be accompanied by payment of an
63.Editor's Note: Checklist A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-68 HARDING CODE § 225-68
1:262
application fee together with a technical review fee in
accordance with Chapter 171. See also Chapter 171 respecting
the payment of deposits for inspection fees prior to the
performance of inspections of required improvements.
[Amended 9-4-2002 by Ord. No. 11-02]
(b) Immediately upon the receipt of a preliminary site plan
application, the Secretary of the Board shall furnish one copy
of the plat, together with supporting documents, to each of the
following:
[1] If under the jurisdiction of the Planning Board, the
Development Review Committee.
[2] The Township Engineer.
[3] The Secretary of the Board of Health.
[4] The Morris County Planning Board, when required.
[5] The clerk of an adjoining municipality, when required.
[6] The Township Environmental Commission.
[7] The Township Historic Preservation Commission, when
required.
[8] The Shade Tree Advisory Committee.
[9] Such other Township, county or state officials or agencies
as directed by the Board.
(c) If the Morris County Planning Board has approval authority
with respect to the application pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6 et
seq. (applications affecting county roads or drainage facilities),
its action shall be noted on the preliminary site plan, and, if
disapproved, a statement of the reasons for disapproval shall
be returned to the applicant with the site plan. If, within 30
days after receiving the preliminary site plan, the Morris
County Planning Board does not return its copy along with any
comments to the Secretary of the Board, the preliminary site
plan shall be deemed to have been approved by the Morris
County Planning Board.
(d) Whenever a preliminary site plan which fronts on an existing
public road is submitted for approval, one copy of a deed of
dedication or easement shall be included in the application to
provide sufficient right-of-way where the existing road right-ofway
is less than the minimum requirements of the public entity
which owns the road; provided, however, that the application
shall not be deemed incomplete for failure to submit such deed
or easement.
§ 225-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-68
1:263
(e) The Board shall act upon an application for approval of a
preliminary site plan which involves 10 acres of land or less
and 10 dwelling units or less within 45 days of the submission
of a complete application to the Secretary of the Board or
within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. The Board shall act upon an application for approval
of a preliminary site plan which involves more than 10 acres or
more than 10 dwelling units within 95 days of the submission
of a complete application to the Secretary of the Board or
within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
(f) The Board shall include findings of fact and conclusions based
thereon in a written resolution adopted at a meeting held
within the time period set forth in Subsection B(1)(e) above or
adopted at a meeting held not more than 45 days after the date
of the meeting at which the Board voted to grant or deny
approval, by a majority of Board members present who voted
for the action taken. The applicant shall be mailed a copy of the
resolution within 10 days after it is adopted. If the preliminary
site plan is disapproved, the reasons for disapproval must be
remedied before an amended preliminary site plan can be
submitted and acted upon as in the case of an original
preliminary site plan.
(g) If the Board grants an application for preliminary site plan
approval, any conditions of such approval (other than those
imposed by law) shall be set forth in the resolution adopted by
the Board. When all conditions precedent to signing the
preliminary site plan have been met, the Chairman of the
Board, the Board Secretary and the Township Engineer shall
affix their signatures to the preliminary site plan with a
notation that it has received preliminary approval and has been
returned to the applicant for compliance with the procedure
for final site plan approval in Subsection C of this section.
(h) The Secretary of the Board may defer the return of the signed
original of an approved preliminary site plan to the applicant
until he has been provided with five copies thereof for
distribution to other Township representatives.
(2) Details of preliminary site plan. The preliminary site plan shall be
prepared by and bear the seal of a professional engineer, architect
or professional planner licensed to practice in New Jersey. The
entire tract shall be shown on one sheet, unless waived by the
Board's engineering consultant. All sheets shall be collated and
bound. The preliminary site plan shall show or be accompanied by
all of the applicable items set forth on Checklists A and B.64
64.Editor's Note: Checklists A and B are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-68 HARDING CODE § 225-68
1:264
C. Final site plan.
(1) Procedures for submitting final site plan.
(a) The applicant for final site plan approval shall submit 20 copies
of a complete site plan application, with a final site plan
attached, to the Secretary of the Board at least 14 days prior to
the regular meeting of the Board at which consideration is
desired. The final site plan application shall be accompanied by
payment of an application fee together with a technical review
fee in accordance with Chapter 171. See also Chapter 171
respecting the payment of deposits for inspection fees prior to
the performance of inspections of required improvements.
(b) If the Morris County Planning Board has approval authority
with respect to the application pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6 et
seq. (applications affecting county roads or drainage facilities),
its action shall be noted on the final site plan, and, if
disapproved, a statement of the reasons for disapproval shall
be returned to the applicant with the site plan. If, within 30
days after receiving the final site plan, the Morris County
Planning Board does not return its copy along with any
comments to the Secretary of the Board, the final site plan
shall be deemed to have been approved by the Morris County
Planning Board.
(c) Whenever a final site plan which fronts on an existing public
road is submitted for approval, unless previously submitted,
one copy of a deed of dedication or easement shall be included
in the application to provide sufficient right-of-way where the
existing right-of-way is less than the minimum requirements of
the public entity which owns the road; provided, however, that
the application shall not be deemed incomplete for failure to
submit such deed or easement.
(d) The Board shall act upon an application for approval of a final
site plan within 45 days of the submission of a complete
application to the Secretary of the Board or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(e) The Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates of the application for final
approval conform to the standards established by this article
for final approval and the conditions of preliminary approval,
provided that, in the case of a planned development, the Board
may permit minimal deviations from the conditions of
preliminary approval necessitated by a change of conditions
beyond the control of the developer since the date of
preliminary approval, without the developer's being required
to submit another application for preliminary approval.
§ 225-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-68
1:265
(f) An application for final approval shall not be considered by the
developer until any required designs for water supply, drainage
and sanitary and waste disposal facilities have been approved
by the Township Board of Health and the Township Engineer.
(g) The Board shall review and approve or deny site plans
simultaneously with any associated review for subdivision
approval or variances filed contemporaneously by the
applicant, without the developer's being required to make
further application to the Board, or the Board's being required
to hold further hearings. The longest time period for action by
the Board shall apply to both the subdivision and the site plan
applications.
(h) If the final site plan is disapproved, the reasons for disapproval
must be remedied before an amended final site plan can be
submitted and acted upon as in the case of an original final site
plan.
(i) If the Board grants an application for final site plan approval,
any conditions of such approval (other than those imposed by
law) shall be set forth in the resolution adopted by the Board.
As a condition for final approval of a site plan, an applicant
shall pay or agree to pay his pro rata share of the cost of
providing only reasonable and necessary street improvements
and water, sewerage and drainage facilities and easements
therefor located outside the property limits of the development
but necessitated or required by construction or improvements
within such development. When all conditions precedent to
signing the final site plan have been met, the Chairman of the
Board, the Board Secretary and the Township Engineer shall
affix their signatures to the final site plan, which shall be
certification that the site plan is exempt from obtaining further
Board approval.
(j) The Secretary of the Board may defer the return of the signed
original of an approved final site plan to the applicant until he
has been provided with five copies thereof for distribution to
other Township representatives.
(2) Details of final site plan. The final site plan shall be prepared by and
bear the seal of a professional engineer, architect or professional
planner licensed to practice in New Jersey. The final site plan shall
include all information required to be shown on the preliminary site
plan in final and detailed form with precise dimensions and
elevations, except that commonly owned and contiguous property
may be excluded. In addition, and more specifically, the final site
plan shall show or be accompanied by all of the applicable items set
forth on Checklists A and C.65
65.Editor's Note: Checklists A and C are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-68 HARDING CODE § 225-69
1:266
§ 225-69. Compliance with other standards required.
Before granting minor or preliminary or final site plan approval, the Board
shall determine that the plan is consistent with all of the requirements of
this chapter and the Township Code. Where deemed necessary or advisable
by the Board, the applicant shall submit to the Board additional reports on
the plan from the following departments, agencies, officials or employees,
including but not limited to:
§ 225-70. Effect of preliminary site plan approval.
A. The Township Board of Health.
B. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
C. The United States Army Corps of Engineers.
D. The Morris Township Sewer Department.
E. The Southeast Morris County Municipal Utilities Authority. [Amended
8-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4-92]
F. The Township Environmental Commission.
G. The Township Recreation Association.
H. The Township Shade Tree Advisory Committee. [Amended 8-10-1992
by Ord. No. 4-92]
I. The Township Engineer.
J. The Zoning Officer.
K. The Tax Collector.
L. The Township Police Department.
M. The New Vernon and Green Village Volunteer Fire Departments.
N. The Township Planner.
O. The Morris County Soil Conservation District.
P. Where required, the Morris County Planning Board.
A. Preliminary site plan approval shall, except as provided in Subsection B
below, confer upon the applicant the following rights for a three-year
period from the date on which the resolution of preliminary approval is
adopted: [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 11-92]
(1) The general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval
was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to use
requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and
sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-site and off-tract
improvements; any requirements peculiar to preservation of
§ 225-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-70
1:267
existing natural resources on the site; safe and efficient vehicular
and pedestrian circulation, parking and loading; screening,
landscaping and location of structures; and exterior lighting;
except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the
Township from modifying, by ordinance, such general terms and
conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public health and
safety.
(2) The applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary site plan and the anticipated timetable
for development of the balance of the tract.
(3) The applicant may apply for and the Board may grant extensions of
such preliminary approval for additional periods of at least one
year but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided that
if the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such
revised standards may govern.
B. In the case of a site plan for an area of 50 acres or more, the Board may
grant the rights referred to in Subsection A above for such period of
time longer than three years, as shall be determined by the Board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may apply for thereafter, and the Board may thereafter
grant, an extension of preliminary approval for such additional period
of time as shall be determined by the Board to be reasonable, taking
into consideration the number of dwelling units and types and floor
area permissible under preliminary approval, the potential number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the section or sections
awaiting final approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if the design
standards have been revised, such revised standards may govern.
C. Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of preliminary
approval pursuant to Subsections A(3) and B of this section above, and
the preliminary approval has expired before the date on which the
extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise
be the expiration date. The applicant may apply for the extension either
before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date. [Added
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 11-92]
D. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of preliminary approval for
a period determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from what
would otherwise be the expiration date, if the applicant proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the applicant was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the applicant applied promptly for and
diligently pursued the required approvals. An applicant shall apply for
§ 225-70 HARDING CODE § 225-70
1:268
§ 225-71. Effect of final site plan approval.
the extension before what would otherwise be the expiration date
of preliminary approval or the 91st day after the applicant receives
the last legally required approval from other governmental entities,
whichever occurs later. An extension granted pursuant to this
subsection shall not preclude the Planning Board from granting an
extension pursuant to Subsections A(3) and B above. [Added
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 11-92]
A. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the applicant pursuant to
§ 225-70, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date on which the resolution of final
approval is adopted. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 11-92]
B. In the event that an applicant who has received final site plan approval
shall not complete his application for a building permit within two years
after the date of such approval, then and in that event such final
approval shall terminate, unless such period is extended by resolution
of the Board upon written application of the applicant. In the case of a
site plan for a planned development of 50 acres or more, a conventional
site plan for 150 acres or more or a site plan for development of a
nonresidential floor area of 200,000 square feet or more, the Board may
grant the rights referred to in Subsection A of this section for such
period of time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the
Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of
dwelling units and types and floor area permissible under final
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development. The applicant may apply for thereafter, and the Board
may thereafter grant, an extension of final approval for such additional
period of time as shall be determined by the Board to be reasonable,
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and types and
floor area permissible under final approval, the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be developed,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development.
C. Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of final approval
pursuant to Subsection A and B of this section, and final approval has
expired before the date on which the extension is granted, the
extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the expiration date.
The developer may apply for the extension either before or after what
would otherwise be the expiration date. [Added 10-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 11-92]
D. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of final approval for a
period determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from what
would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
§ 225-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-71
1:269
§ 225-72. (Reserved)
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly for and
diligently pursued these approvals. A developer shall apply for the
extension before what would otherwise be the expiration date of final
approval or the 91st day after the developer receives the last legally
required approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs
later. An extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall not
preclude the Planning Board from granting an extension pursuant to
Subsection A or B of this section. [Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
11-92]
E. The Board may permit a deviation from the final plan if caused by
change of conditions beyond the control of the applicant since the date
of final approval, and the deviation would not substantially alter the
character of the development or substantially impair the intent and
purpose of the Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
§ 225-71 HARDING CODE § 225-72
1:270
ARTICLE XV
Design Standards for Subdivisions
[Amended 6-12-1995 by Ord. No. 5-95; 2-9-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96;
4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 2-98]
§ 225-73. Applicability. [Amended 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 2-03]
§ 225-74. Subdivision planning and design principles.
A. Subdivision design shall conform with the planning and design
principles and other provisions of this article and, for residential land
use, the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards and
Special Area Standards approved for Harding Township.
B. All site improvements proposed or required for any residential
subdivision shall comply with §§ 225-74 and 225-75 of this article and
the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C.
5:21-1.1 et seq. as modified by resolutions of the New Jersey Site
Improvement Advisory Board as follows:
(1) Private roads located within the Great Swamp Watershed Overlay
Zone shall conform with New Jersey Site Improvement Advisory
Board Resolution No. 97-1, Special Area Standards For Private
Roads in Harding Township, Morris County.
(2) Stormwater management shall conform with New Jersey Site
Improvement Advisory Board Resolution No. 02-1, Special Area
Standards For Stormwater Management In The Township of
Harding, Morris County.
C. All site improvements proposed or required for any nonresidential
subdivision shall conform with § 225-74, § 225-75 and Part 4,
Stormwater Management, of this chapter.
A. General. The subdivider shall observe the requirements and principles
of land subdivision of this article in the design of each subdivision or
portion thereof.
B. Conformance with the Master Plan or Official Map. The plat shall
conform to planning and design principles that encourage good
development patterns within the Township. Where either or both an
Official Map or Master Plan has or have been adopted, the subdivision
shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon. The
roads, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and
playgrounds shown on an officially adopted Master Plan or Official Map
shall be considered prior to the approval of a plat. Roads and drainage
rights-of-way shall also be shown on the final plat and shall be such as
to lend themselves to the harmonious development of the Township and
enhance the public welfare in accordance with § 225-75. [Amended
4-20-2005 by Ord. No. 5-05]
§ 225-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-74
1:271
C. Stormwater management. [Amended 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 2-03]
(1) Stormwater shall be managed to control the rate and volume of
runoff, to maintain the stability of streams and watercourses, to
control soil erosion and the transport of sediment, to control
nonpoint source pollution of surface waters, to induce groundwater
recharge and to protect the quality of groundwater resources from
degradation.
(2) Residential subdivisions. Stormwater management proposed or
required for any residential subdivision shall conform with
Subchapter 7, Stormwater Management, of the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards as modified by Resolution
No. 02-1, Special Area Standards For Stormwater Management In
The Township of Harding, Morris County, adopted by the New
Jersey Site Improvement Advisory Board.
(3) Nonresidential subdivision. Stormwater management proposed or
required for any nonresidential subdivision shall conform with Part
4, Stormwater Management, of this chapter.
D. Natural features and steep slopes. Natural features such as trees,
brooks, hilltops and views shall be preserved and enhanced wherever
possible in designing any subdivision containing such features.
(1) Trees. Trees of eight-inch diameter or greater, measured four feet
above ground level, and other specimen trees or vegetation which
may be affected by the construction of proposed road or drainage
improvements shall be shown on the plans and designated in the
field prior to the Board's site inspection of the property.
(2) Steep slopes. All subdivisions shall comply with the provisions of
Article XVII and, with respect to subdivisions of land situated in the
R-1 and RR Zones, the provisions relating to steep slopes. If a
proposed vacant lot in the R-1 and RR Zones does not contain at
least 1.75 acres of land (of which at least 10,000 contiguous square
feet shall be within the building envelope) free of wetlands and
wetland transition areas, flood hazard areas, and slope areas
exceeding 12%, whether alone or in combination, a conceptual lot
grading plan shall be submitted to demonstrate that the lot is
configured in a way that it may reasonably be used for the intended
purpose. The lot grading plan shall be drawn in conformance with
the standards contained in Article XVIII. [Amended 9-13-1999 by
Ord. No. 11-99; 11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04]
(3) Wetlands, transition areas, stream corridors and stream
encroachment areas. All subdivisions shall be designed to avoid
disturbance of wetlands, transition areas, stream corridors and
stream encroachment areas, which shall be the subject of
conservation easements in accordance with the requirements of
§ 225-110D. [Added 3-19-2003 by Ord. No. 5-03]
§ 225-74 HARDING CODE § 225-74
1:272
(4) Unique natural or environmentally sensitive areas. All subdivisions
shall be designed to preserve and avoid disturbance of any unique
natural or environmentally sensitive areas of the property that may
be identified during the application review proceedings and be
determined to warrant protection. Examples include mature forests
or other unique vegetation, extraordinary steep slopes and scenic
views. Any such areas may be required to be the subject of a
conservation easement in accordance with § 225-110D. [Added
3-19-2003 by Ord. No. 5-03]
E. Landscaping. All minor and major subdivision applications shall be
accompanied by a landscape plan prepared by a licensed landscape
architect that addresses the visual impact of the subdivision from
existing public roads, and from proposed roads within the subdivision,
and provides for landscaping consistent with the rural character of the
site or surrounding areas. Specific measures including, but not limited
to, plan notes, specifications, and typical drawings designed to preserve
and protect large trees shall be shown on the plan and shall be carried
out during the construction of all proposed improvements. Trees or
other vegetation approved as part of the landscape plan that do not
survive through two growing seasons following the installation of
subdivision improvements shall be replaced. [Amended 5-16-2001 by
Ord. No. 11-01; 3-15-2006 by Ord. No. 7-06]
F. Bridle (equestrian) trails. Subdividers should, if feasible, provide for
and preserve existing bridle trails whenever they traverse a site or a
portion thereof. Where preservation of an existing trail alignment poses
practical difficulties for future lot utilization, the trail should be
realigned whenever possible, so as to maintain the integrity of the trail.
G. Topsoil protection. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as
spoil. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover to all areas of
the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
H. Renewable energy sources. The Board may, in its discretion, require
that buildings or structures use renewable energy sources.
I. Plumbing and sewage disposal system. Existing Township Plumbing and
Individual Sewage Disposal System Codes and other such codes as may
from time to time be passed by ordinance shall be complied with.
J. Public utilities. All public utility improvements shall conform to the
applicable state standards.
(1) Location of easements. Wherever the utility is not installed in the
pubic right-of-way, an appropriate utility easement shall be
provided. Such easements shall be located along property lines or
elsewhere in consultation with the companies or Township
departments concerned. Even though construction may not be
anticipated in a proposed new development, provision should be
§ 225-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-74
1:273
made so that easements will be available should they be needed in
the future.
(2) Underground installation. In any subdivision, all utilities and their
service lines, including electric, telephone, gas and water, and lines
to serve cable television and satellite antenna receivers shall be
installed underground and in accordance with the specifications
and applicable tariff provisions of the appropriate utility. Where
road widths permit, utilities should be placed in the right-of-way
outside of the paved roadway.
K. Blocks. Block length, width or acreage within bounding streets shall be
such as to accommodate the topography and area, yard and parking
requirements of this chapter and to provide for convenient access,
circulation, control and safety of road traffic.
L. Lots.
(1) Size. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the
requirements of the zoning district in which the property is
situated, except in accordance with provisions for lot averaged
subdivisions in the RR Rural Residential Zone. [Amended
11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04]
(2) Sidelines. The side lot lines of each lot shall be at right angles to an
existing or proposed straight road or radial to an existing or
proposed curved road.
(3) Lot frontage. The minimum lot frontage shall be as required in each
zoning district as set forth in Part 3, Zoning, of this chapter.
(4) Lines on widened roads. Where extra width has been dedicated for
widening of existing roads, lots shall begin at such extra width line,
and all setbacks shall be measured from such line.
(5) Adverse natural conditions. Where there is a question as to the
suitability of a lot or lots for their intended use due to factors such
as rock formations, water conditions, topography or similar
circumstances, the Board may, after adequate investigation,
withhold approval of such lots.
(6) Rectangular shape. Each lot shall be rectangular in shape so far as
is possible.
(7) Flag lots. The creation of new flag lots shall be permitted
exclusively in the Rural Residential Zone in accordance with the
provisions of § 225-153. [Amended 10-17-2007 by Ord. No.
12-07]
M. Survey monuments. Survey monuments shall be installed in compliance
with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11(q), as amended and
supplemented.
§ 225-74 HARDING CODE § 225-75
1:274
§ 225-75. Requirements applicable to all subdivisions.
A. Roads. Except as modified by the special area standards set forth below,
roads and other site improvements installed as part of an approved
subdivision plan shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the state standards and the applicable provisions of Chapter 346,
Streets and Driveways, of this Code.
B. Plans for all roads shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with
Chapter 346, Streets and Driveways, of this Code.
C. Relationship to adjoining roads. The arrangement of roads now shown
on the Master Plan or Official Map shall be such as to provide for the
appropriate extension of existing mapped or potential roads. Consistent
with N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.8 of the state standards, new subdivisions that
adjoin or include existing roads that do not conform to widths as shown
on the Master Plan or Official Map or the road width requirements of
the state standards shall dedicate additional width along either one or
both sides of said road. If the subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of
the required extra width shall be dedicated.
D. Right-of-way width. The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot
line to lot line and, whether a public or private road, the right-of-way
width shall be consistent with that specified for the street type as set
forth in the state standards.
E. Access. Each lot shall have adequate access to a road. [Amended
11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04; 10-17-2007 by Ord. No. 12-07]
F. Cul-de-sac. An improved turnaround shall be provided at the end of a
public or private dead-end road (cul-de-sac). The turnaround shall be
designed in accordance with the state standards, but the level of
improvements shall be consistent with that of the road of which it is a
part, in accordance with the special area standards if located in the
Watershed Overlay Zone, or the state standards if located outside the
Watershed Overlay Zone. The cul-de-sac turnaround shall be tangent
whenever possible to the right side of the road. Where a parallel series
of dead-end roads are proposed, the plan shall provide easements for
cross-connection of utilities. If the dead-end road is of a temporary
nature, the cul-de-sac turnaround shall have provisions for reversion of
the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties in the event the road
could be extended.
G. Road names. No road shall have a name which will duplicate or so
nearly duplicate in spelling or phonetic sound as to be confused with
the name of an existing road within the Township or within an adjoining
municipality. The continuance of an existing road shall have the same
name. All road names and changes in road names shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Committee. When approving or disapproving
a road name, the Committee shall give primary consideration to the
proposed name's relationship with local historical, geographical,
§ 225-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-75
1:275
topographical or natural features of the site. [Amended 3-20-2002 by
Ord. No. 2-02]
H. Road name signs. Road name signs shall be provided and installed by
the subdivider on all road intersections of the subdivision, including
intersections with existing roads outside of the subdivision. Dead-end
road signs shall be installed wherever applicable. The design and
location of all road signs shall be subject to the approval of the
Township Engineer.
I. Off-street parking. Adequate off-street parking areas shall be provided
for all uses, and the adequacy of provisions for such facilities shall be
approved in advance by the Board. Off-street parking for residential
uses shall conform to the state standards. The construction of private
driveways, including off-street parking areas for single-family
dwellings, shall be in accordance with Chapter 346. The construction of
off-street parking for nonresidential uses shall conform to zoning
regulations and site plan requirements.
J. Numbers. Road numbers shall conform to the system adopted by the
Township Committee and shall have the approval of the Township
Engineer.
K. Fire protection facilities for major subdivisions and flag lots. All major
subdivisions and any minor subdivision involving the creation of a flag
lot shall be served by a natural or man-made water supply source for
fire protection purposes. Where public or private central water supply
systems are not available or not capable of being used for fire
protection services, the subdivider shall comply with the following
criteria and standards: [Added 10-5-1998 by Ord. No. 8-98;
amended 10-17-2007 by Ord. No. 12-07]
(1) Preliminary subdivision plans shall include provisions for a fire
protection water supply located and available within 1,850 feet of
all building lots measured along the roadway. Where there is a flag
lot, the measurement shall be made to the building setback line
nearest to the proposed driveway. Acceptable sources for water
supply include lakes, streams, natural or man-made ponds, existing
or proposed man-made storage facilities including underground
storage tanks and swimming pools, all in accordance with the
criteria and standards listed below and the standards of the
National Fire Protection Association. Consideration shall be given
to the recommendations of the Fire Department and Township
Engineer.
(2) Where there are adequate water resources and favorable
topographic features on a site to develop a pond to provide water
storage for fire protection, provisions may be made for such a
facility. The minimum storage capacity for a pond shall be 120,000
gallons except where the Board finds that this is not feasible
because of topographic or other site constraints.
§ 225-75 HARDING CODE § 225-75
1:276
(3) Combined stormwater retention/fire protection ponds are
encouraged.
(4) Underground water storage tanks shall have a capacity of at least
30,000 gallons. Where more than one underground storage tank is
necessary in a development, the capacity of each tank shall be at
least 25,000 gallons.
(5) All fire protection facilities shall be served by an all-weather access
lane and a suitable location for a Fire Department pumper truck to
draft water. Plans for ponds used for fire protection shall include an
all-weather access lane as well as a suitable location for a pumper
to draft water directly from the pond. Tanks installed below ground
level shall be located within the right-of-way of the road or other
suitable location, provided that all-weather access shall be made
available. Swimming pools used for fire protection purposes shall
be provided with adequate access in accordance with the
requirements of the Fire Department.
(6) All underground storage tanks shall be covered with at least three
feet of earth. In areas of high water table, the tank shall be installed
with anti-flotation footings and straps. Based upon the
recommendations of the Fire Department, the Board may require
the installation of a permanent sign within the road right-of-way, no
greater than two square feet, to indicate the location of the tank.
(7) All underground storage tanks shall be constructed of fiberglass,
concrete, or other noncorrosive materials and shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. All
underground tanks shall include the following:
(a) An access manhole.
(b) Riser connections which shall be capable of producing 1,500
gallons per minute for a minimum of 75% of the tank capacity.
(c) A refilling system in accordance with Fire Department
requirements.
(d) A suction hydrant with six-inch NST threads located at an
elevation no higher than 12 feet above the bottom of the tank.
(8) Upon recommendations of the Fire Department and Township
Engineer, the Board may approve alternate arrangements for fire
protection such as dry water lines and hydrants installed close to
active water lines if, in their opinion, such arrangements would
constitute an acceptable source of water meeting the intent of this
chapter.
(9) The fire protection system shall be installed or constructed and
fully operational prior to the issuance of the first building permit
for a new dwelling in the subdivision.
§ 225-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-75
1:277
§ 225-76. Special area standards.
(10) The homeowners' association, if any, or property owner shall be
responsible for fire protection system maintenance including but
not limited to the maintenance of proper water levels in water
storage tanks or approved swimming pools and clear access to fire
protection facilities for the Fire Department.
L. Recycling and solid waste requirements for new developments of
multifamily residential units or commercial, institutional, government
or industrial properties. Any application for subdivision approval for the
construction of multifamily dwellings of three or more units, singlefamily
developments of 50 or more units or any commercial,
institutional or industrial development shall include a recycling plan
that satisfies the requirements set forth in § 225-87. [Added
4-16-2008 by Ord. No. 5-08]
A. Applicability. The following provisions shall apply to all subdivisions of
land within the Great Swamp Watershed Overlay Zone as designated in
§ 225-110 of this chapter. These standards are intended to modify the
provisions of the state standards that would otherwise be applicable to
development. Except as modified below, all other applicable provisions
of the state standards shall apply to the design and construction of
subdivision improvements. [Added 10-21-2009 by Ord. No. 12-09]
B. Private roads. In order to protect the Great Swamp National Wildlife
Refuge, lessen stormwater runoff, and encourage the construction of
new roads that are compatible with the rural and historic character of
Harding, it is the policy of the Township to encourage narrow, lowimpact
private roads within the Watershed Overlay Zone, consistent
with the standards as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.1(c) as modified by
Resolution 97-1 adopted by the New Jersey Site Improvement Advisory
Board, for streets termed "country lanes" (one lane and two lanes). In
any subdivision application involving the need for a road within the
Watershed Overlay Zone, the Board may permit and can require the
road to be a private road, in accordance with the country lane
standards referenced above, as follows:
(1) When the road will serve no more than four lots, the construction
standards for the road shall be consistent with country lane (one
lane) standards as follows:
(a) The road shall be graded to a width of at least 16 feet and shall
be improved to a width of 12 feet with two-foot shoulders on
each side of the improved portion of the road.
(b) If the road will exceed 500 feet in length, it shall have one or
more turnouts for passing within sight of each other or a
connecting public or private road, not more than 500 feet
apart. Turnouts shall be improved to a width of at least 18 feet
§ 225-75 HARDING CODE § 225-76
1:278
and shall have a minimum length of 25 feet with fifteen-foot
tapers on each end.
(c) Road improvements shall be constructed in accordance with
the following requirements:
[1] If the road (country lane - one lane) is proposed to be
paved, it shall be paved in conformance with the state
standards pavement specifications for rural streets.
[2] Where the grade of a the road (country lane - one lane)
does not exceed 6%, the road may be gravel surfaced in
compliance with the following standards:
[a] The base course shall consist of dense-graded
aggregate (DGA) conforming with the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the
New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT).
The base shall be constructed to the thickness shown
in the following schedule:
Subgrade Category
Base Thickness
(inches)
Good to excellent 4
Medium 5
Poor 7
All subgrades shall be considered "poor" unless the
applicant proves otherwise through CBR testing or
field evaluation of soil classification. Test results shall
be reviewed by the Township Engineer.
[b] Construction shall conform with Section 301 - Soil
Aggregate Base Course and Dense-Graded Aggregate
Base Course of the Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction of the NJDOT.
[c] The subgrade preparation shall be approved by the
Township Engineer prior to placement of base course
material.
[d] The surface course shall consist of No. 8 coarse
aggregate conforming with the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the
NJDOT. The surface course shall be one inch thick and
shall be compacted as specified for the base course.
[3] Where a gravel-surfaced road (country lane - one lane)
intersects a street of higher order as set forth in the state
standards, the road shall be paved in conformance with
§ 225-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-76
1:279
the state standards pavement specifications for rural
streets a minimum distance of 20 feet from the edge of
pavement or curb of the higher order street.
[4] Where the grade of a road (country lane - one lane)
exceeds 6%, the road shall be paved in accordance with
the state standards pavement specifications for rural
streets.
(2) When the private road will serve more than four lots, the
construction standards for the road shall be consistent with
country lane (two lanes) standards as follows:
(a) The road (country lane - two lanes) shall be graded to a width
of at least 20 feet and shall be improved to a width of 16 feet
with two-foot shoulders on each side of the improved portion of
the road.
(b) The road shall be paved in accordance with the state standards
pavement specifications for rural streets.
(3) Additional road construction requirements.
(a) Road grade and design criteria shall be in accordance with the
following standards:
Design Standard
Gravel
Road
Paved
Road
Minimum grade 1% 0.5%
Maximum grade 6% 12%
Maximum grade within 50 feet of a
street intersection
5% 5%
Minimum center-line radius (feet) 100 100
Minimum tangent length between
reverse curves (feet)
25 50
Intersection curb radii (feet) 25 25
(b) Minimum vertical curve length shall be established in
accordance with the 1990 AASHTO A Policy on Geometric
Design of Highways and Streets and based on a speed limit of
30 miles per hour.
(4) If a private road serves one lot only, the Board may waive
requirements to improve the cul-de-sac turnaround unless the
Board determines that improvements are needed for public safety
reasons. The owner of the lot so served shall own title to the private
road. If a private road serves more than one lot, one of the lot
owners or an association of all users shall have title to the private
road, and ingress and egress easements shall be granted to all non-
§ 225-76 HARDING CODE § 225-76
1:280
owner users, and all users shall share equally in the cost of
maintenance and repairs, unless an agreement binding on all users
provides to the contrary. The provisions regulating such easements
and agreements shall be approved by the Board or, at its discretion,
the Board Attorney.
§ 225-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-76
1:281

ARTICLE XVI
Design Standards for Site Plans
§ 225-77. General provisions. [Amended 9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
11-99; 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 2-03]
§ 225-78. Site plan design and environmental protection. [Amended
3-19-2003 by Ord. No. 5-03]
A. Site plan design shall conform with the planning and design principles
and other provisions of this article and other articles of this chapter
applicable to the proposed land use and, for residential land use, the
New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards and Special Area
Standards approved for Harding Township.
B. All site improvements proposed or required for any residential site
development shall comply with the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq. as modified by
resolution of the New Jersey Site Improvement Advisory Board as
follows:
(1) Stormwater management shall conform with New Jersey Site
Improvement Advisory Board Resolution No. 02-1, Special Area
Standards For Stormwater Management In The Township of
Harding, Morris County.
(2) All site improvements proposed or required for any nonresidential
development shall conform with the provisions of this article and
Part 4, Stormwater Management, of this chapter.
A. Proposed structures shall be harmoniously related to the terrain and to
existing buildings and traveled ways in the vicinity that have a visual
relationship to the proposed structures. The achievement of such
relationship may include enclosure of space in conjunction with other
existing or proposed structures and the creation of focal points with
respect to avenues of approach, terrain features or other structures.
B. All site plans shall be designed to avoid disturbance of wetlands,
transition areas, stream corridors and stream encroachment areas,
which shall be the subject of conservation easements in accordance
with the requirements of § 225-110D.
C. Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be
preserved and enhanced wherever possible in designing any site plan
for property containing such features. All site plans shall be designed to
preserve and avoid disturbance of any unique natural or
environmentally sensitive areas of the property that may be identified
during the application review proceedings and be determined to
warrant protection. Examples include mature forests or other unique
vegetation, extraordinary steep slopes and scenic views. Any such areas
§ 225-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-78
1:283
§ 225-79. Cut and fill slopes.
Cut and fill slopes in soil shall not be steeper than 1 1/2 to 1. Slopes steeper
than 1 1/2 to 1 in soil shall be confined by a retaining wall, cribbing or other
acceptable method. Terracing is permitted. In order to allow ladders to be
used in the event of a fire, grading around buildings over one story in height
and located on a downhill slope shall not exceed 3% for a distance of 30 feet
from the sides of the building.
§ 225-80. Removal of vegetation; landscaping requirements.
The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state insofar as practicable
by minimizing the removal of vegetation and the disturbance of the earth.
Any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of
neighboring developed area. All banks shall be protected against erosion
and have rounded edges. Deep excavations and high fills shall be avoided
insofar as possible. If the development of the site necessitates removal of
established large trees with a diameter in excess of eight inches, special
attention shall be given to the planting of replacement trees or other
landscape treatments. The landscape plan shall show an adequate amount
of landscaping and screening, including the species, size and density of
the planting. In the absence of existing trees, trees should be planted no
more than 50 feet on center on both sides of every street and no more
than 60 feet on center in and around parking lots. All trees shall be of a
two-inch or greater caliper measured three feet above the ground at the
time of planting, of nursery stock and properly balled and burlapped if
evergreen. Trees that do not survive through two growing seasons following
completion of the project shall be replaced by the owner. No topsoil shall
be removed from the site or used as spoil. Topsoil moved during the course
of construction shall be redistributed so as to provide at least six inches
of cover to all disturbed but unimproved areas and shall be stabilized by
seeding or planting.
§ 225-81. Stormwater management. [Amended 11-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 13-99; 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 2-03]
may be required to be the subject of a conservation easement in
accordance with § 225-110D.
A. Stormwater shall be managed to control the rate and volume of runoff,
to maintain the stability of streams and watercourses, to control soil
erosion and the transport of sediment, to control nonpoint source
pollution of surface waters, to induce groundwater recharge and to
protect the quality of groundwater resources from degradation.
B. Residential site development. Stormwater management proposed or
required for any residential site development shall conform with
Subchapter 7, Stormwater Management, of the New Jersey Residential
Site Improvement Standards as modified by Resolution No. 02-1,
Special Area Standards for Stormwater Management in the Township of
§ 225-78 HARDING CODE § 225-81
1:284
§ 225-82. Utilities.
All utilities and their service lines, including electric, telephone, gas, water
and lines to serve cable television and satellite antenna receivers, except
high-voltage primary lines, shall be installed underground and in
accordance with the specifications and applicable tariff provisions of the
appropriate utility. Where road widths permit, utilities should be placed in
the right-of-way outside of the paved roadway.
§ 225-83. Vehicular and pedestrian movement.
Provisions shall be made for the safe, efficient and convenient movement of
both pedestrian and vehicular traffic within and adjacent to the proposed
development. Particular attention shall be given to the location and number
of access points to public streets; the adequacy of the connecting and
adjoining public streets; the interior pattern and width of roadways,
driveways, parking areas and walkways; the location of passenger loading
and unloading areas; provisions for deliveries, shipping and services; the
separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; berms and landscaping.
Roadways, driveways and parking areas shall be located and arranged so
that they are safe and convenient and so as to minimize adverse impacts on
the appearance of proposed structures as well as on existing and proposed
property in the vicinity. Guardrails and curbs may be required. Minimum
sight clearance triangles and extra rights-of-way and widths for
acceleration, deceleration and storage lanes shall be required at major
street intersections.
§ 225-84. Nonresidential parking areas and related improvements.
[Amended 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 2-03]
Harding, Morris County, adopted by the New Jersey Site Improvement
Advisory Board.
C. Nonresidential site development. Stormwater management proposed or
required for any nonresidential site development shall conform with
Part 4, Stormwater Management, of this chapter.
A. General. Parking spaces within the proposed site to accommodate offstreet
parking shall be 10 feet wide and 20 feet long exclusive of access
drives or aisles, except that all-day parking for office and commercial
establishments may be nine feet wide by 19 feet long; provided,
however, that a longitudinal (end-to-end) parking space shall be 10 feet
wide and 25 feet long, exclusive of access drives or aisles. All parking
spaces shall be provided with adequate means of ingress and egress
which shall be kept open and unobstructed at all times. The percent
grade of any parking area shall not be steeper than 6% nor flatter than
1%. The percent grade of any driveway shall not be steeper than 10%.
Parking shall conform to the following additional standards:
(1) Consideration shall be given to the visual relationship of parking
areas to roadways and surrounding properties, as well as to
§ 225-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-84
1:285
nuisance and pollution factors, such as noise, glare, water runoff
and air pollution.
(2) No off-street parking or loading area shall be located in a front yard
except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
(3) The width of all aisles providing direct access to individual parking
stalls shall be in accordance with the requirements as established
in the following Table of Minimum Permitted Aisle Widths in
Parking Areas. Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles
serving parking spaces placed at an angle other than 90°:
Table of Minimum Permitted Aisle
Widths in Parking Areas
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Aisle Width
(feet)
30° 12
45° 13
60° 18
90° (perpendicular) 25
(4) Pedestrian circulation within parking areas shall be, to as great an
extent possible, separated from vehicular traffic.
(5) Curbs or wheel stops anchored to the ground shall be provided in
appropriate locations in parking stalls. Parked vehicles shall not
overhang or extend over sidewalks.
(6) A landscaped island having a minimum width of 12 feet shall be
located between alternate dual rows of parking stalls and at other
locations to soften the visual impact of the parking area.
B. All parking areas, driveways and access roads and site improvements
shall be graded, improved and constructed to conform to Chapter 346,
except as modified by the Board as provided for in Subsection C of this
section. Pavement and curb sections may be required.
C. Parking area design requirements.
(1) Off-street parking areas shall comply with size and other design
standards set forth in Subsections A and B above.
(2) Pavement standards:
(a) Off-street parking areas shall be permanently paved in
accordance with Chapter 346 except that in connection with
site plan approval, the Board may, in its discretion, relax such
pavement standards upon making one or more of the following
findings:
§ 225-84 HARDING CODE § 225-84
1:286
[1] The type or intensity of expected vehicular traffic does not
require strict compliance with such pavement standards;
[2] The soil and terrain of the premises do not require strict
compliance with such pavement standards; or
[3] The interests of the Township would best be served by not
requiring strict compliance with such pavement standards.
(b) The minimum standards for pavement thicknesses shall be as
specified hereafter, in accordance with subgrade soil
conditions:
Poor
Subgrade
(inches)
Fair
Subgrade
(inches)
Good
Subgrade
(inches)
Bituminous concrete
pavement, passenger
car traffic and
occasional trucks
Surface course (Mix
5)
1 1/2 1 1
Base course (Mix 1) 4 1/2 3 1/2 3
Total thickness 6 4 1/2 4
Bituminous concrete
pavement, car and truck
traffic
Surface course (Mix
5)
2 2
Base course (Mix 1) 7 5 3 1/2
Total thickness 9 7 5
Stone aggregate
pavement, passenger
car traffic and
occasional trucks
Base course (Type 5,
Class A, soil
aggregate)
8 5 3
Surface course (3/
4-inch dirty road
stone) Top dressing
(3/8-inch or
1 1/2 1 1/2 1 1/2
5/8-inch clean stone) 1/2 + 1/2 + 1/2
§ 225-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-84
1:287
§ 225-85. Lighting.
Lighting shall comply with the following standards:
(3) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
include the meanings given herein:
FAIR SUBGRADE SOILS — Those which retain a moderate degree
of firmness under high moisture conditions. These soils will have a
CBR value between 5.0 and 10.0.
GOOD SUBGRADE SOILS — Those which retain a substantial
amount of their load-supporting capacity when wet. These soils will
have a CBR value greater than 10.0.
POOR SUBGRADE SOILS — Those which become quite soft and
plastic when wet. These soils will have a CBR value between 2.0
and 5.0.
(4) Additional standards. All premises where the pavement standards
have been relaxed shall be subject to periodic review by the Board,
and a change in type or intensity of vehicular use of any such
premises shall be grounds for said Board's requiring revisions to
the pavement standards in order to reflect the existing conditions.
All construction and materials shall conform to current Standard
Specifications of the New Jersey Department of Transportation and
addenda thereto. The Township Engineer may modify the thickness
requirement shown above in accordance with anticipated traffic
volume and axle loads. In addition, the Township Engineer may
modify the pavement thickness prior to construction if a
certification of subgrade CBR rating is made by a licensed New
Jersey professional engineer, based on a testing laboratory report
of the CBR of the actual subgrade.
A. Adequate outdoor lighting shall be provided to ensure safe and efficient
movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic and to provide light for
security and other necessary purposes.
B. All lighting shall conform to the Illuminating Engineering Society
Handbook, most recent edition, and the American National Practice for
Roadway Lighting (RP-8) approved by the American Standards
Institute, recent edition.
C. The average maintained illumination and the average level-to-minimum
point illumination shall conform to the following table. Illumination in
excess of the following shall not be permitted.
§ 225-84 HARDING CODE § 225-85
1:288
Classification
Average
Maintained
Illumination
(footcandles)
Average to
Minimum Ratio
Interior streets, residential 0.4 8:1
Access drives, residential 0.4 8:1
Access drives, commercial 0.6 6:1
Parking areas, residential 0.4 6:1
Parking areas, commercial 1.0 4:1
Parking areas, industrial 0.6 4:1
Intersections 1.0 to 2.0 4:1
Sidewalks, residential 0.2 8:1
Sidewalks, commercial 0.6 6:1
Sidewalks, industrial 0.6 6:1
D. The luminaire light distribution shall generally be designated as
"cutoff."
E. Mounting heights shall not exceed 23 feet. Lower heights shall be used
for walkways.
F. The source of light shall be as follows:
Classification Lamp Type
Industrial Metal halide
Commercial, office and residential Metal halide, Styltone
(Westinghouse) or approved equal
G. Lighting standards and fixtures shall be selected to minimize the
illumination of areas other than those for which the illumination is
intended. Light pollution shall be minimized by the proper selection of
the lamp, luminaire, light, pattern, mounting height and other variables
affecting the distribution of the light. All luminaires shall be hooded or
shielded to eliminate glare and shall not be directed at adjoining
properties. Lamps shall be recessed in the luminaire.
H. Luminaires should be manufactured by a major manufacturer of
illumination equipment,
I. The maximum illumination at any point on adjacent properties shall not
exceed 0.2 footcandle.
J. Illumination in and about commercial and business buildings, other
than for security purposes, shall be turned off during those hours when
the light is not actually required. Provisions shall be made to maintain
full illumination of parking areas, as well as service or access drives,
§ 225-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-85
1:289
§ 225-86. Outdoor storage, mechanical equipment, service areas,
truck loading areas and utility buildings.
Outdoor storage areas, outdoor and roof mechanical equipment, service
areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and structures and similar
accessory areas and structures shall be subject to such setbacks, screen
plantings or other screening methods as shall be required to prevent their
being incongruous with the existing or contemplated environment and the
surrounding properties.
§ 225-87. Renewable energy sources and solid waste recycling.
[Amended 9-5-2001 by Ord. No. 17-01; 4-16-2008 by Ord. No. 5-08]
where necessary to provide for businesses that may be open beyond the
hours of most establishments.
K. Security lighting required by the Township Police Department shall be
left on during hours when the premises are not in use and shall be
placed on separate circuits. The average maintained illumination for
security purposes shall be 0.4 footcandle.
L. Provisions shall be made for cutoff illumination of loading docks,
entrances and other special areas where greater illumination may be
required. Each special area shall be on a separate circuit which shall be
turned off when the area is not in use.
M. All wires and cables shall be underground.
N. The lighting plan shall be designed by an experienced expert lighting
designer who shall certify that the lighting plan conforms to these
standards.
O. The Board may modify the above lighting requirements where there is
sufficient evidence that such requirements are inadequate,
unnecessary or unreasonable.
A. Renewable energy resources. The Board may, in its discretion, require
that buildings or structures use renewable energy sources.
B. Solid waste and recycling requirements.
(1) Any application for site plan approval for the construction of
multifamily dwellings of three or more units, single-family
developments of 50 or more units or any commercial, institutional
or industrial development shall include provisions on the site for
the storage and disposition of solid waste and source-separated
recyclable materials. The application shall contain, at a minimum,
the following:
(a) A detailed analysis of the estimated composition and amounts
of solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development.
§ 225-85 HARDING CODE § 225-87
1:290
(b) One or more locations shown on the site plan that provide for
the convenient storage and disposition of recyclable materials
and solid waste by all owners, tenants and occupants. Any such
area shall comply with all setback limitations and no such area
shall be located in front of a principal building. Any recycling
and/or solid waste storage area shall be provided on an
impervious surface and be screened from view by enclosing it
within a building, or by a solid fence and/or landscaping, as
approved by the Board. It shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes including signage and
lighting as may be proposed by the applicant after consultation
with the Municipal Recycling Coordinator and the Township
Engineer.
(c) The location of recycling areas shall be convenient for the
disposition of source-separated recycling materials and may be
near, but clearly distinct from a refuse dumpster.
(d) Recycling/solid waste areas shall be adequately lit and shall be
safely and easily accessible to owners and tenants, collection
personnel, motor vehicles, and collection vehicles without
interference from parked cars or other obstacles.
(e) Recycling areas and any bins or containers placed therein shall
be designed so as to provide protection against adverse
environmental conditions that might render the collected
materials unmarketable. Any bins or containers used for the
collection of recyclable paper or cardboard, and which are
located in an outdoor recycling area, shall be equipped with a
lid, or otherwise covered, so as to keep the paper or cardboard
dry.
(f) Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials
accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of
access to the recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall
be equipped with signs indicating the materials to be placed
therein. All proposed signs shall be shown on the plans and
approved by the Board.
(g) Landscaping and/or fencing shall be shown on the plans and be
provided around any outdoor recycling area and shall be
developed in an aesthetically pleasing manner.
C. Contract with a hauling company for source separation of recyclables
as condition of issuance of certificate of occupancy. In instances where
the Township does not provide collection service, prior to the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy, the owner of any new multifamily housing
or commercial, institutional or industrial development shall supply a
copy of an executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes
of collection and recycling of source-separated recyclable materials.
§ 225-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-88
1:291
§ 225-88. Fire protection facilities. [Added 2-8-1999 by Ord. No.
3-99]
In addition to any applicable building code requirements for fire protection
systems installed within existing or proposed buildings, sites subject to
site plan review shall be served by a natural or man-made water supply
source for fire protection, provided, however, that the requirements of this
section shall not apply to a minor site plan. Where public or private central
water supply systems are not available or not capable of being used for fire
protection services, the following criteria and standards shall apply:
A. Acceptable sources for water supply include lakes, streams, natural or
man-made ponds, and existing or proposed man-made storage facilities
including underground storage tanks, all in accordance with the
criteria and standards listed below and the standards of the National
Fire Protection Association. Consideration shall be given to the
recommendations of the Fire Department and Township Engineer. At a
minimum, existing or proposed sources of water supply for fire
protection purposes shall be located and available within 2,000 feet of
the existing or proposed building(s) as measured along the road and
driveway serving the site.
B. Where there are adequate water resources and favorable topographic
features on a site to develop a pond to provide water storage for fire
protection, provisions may be made for such a facility. The minimum
storage capacity for a pond shall be 120,000 gallons except where the
Board finds that this is not feasible because of topographic or other site
constraints.
C. Combined stormwater retention/fire protection ponds are encouraged.
D. Underground water storage tanks shall have a capacity of at least
30,000 gallons.
E. All fire protection facilities, including tanks installed below ground
level, shall be located adjacent to or in close proximity to a driveway,
parking area, or other all-weather access lane or road and a suitable
location shall be provided for a Fire Department pumper truck to draft
water. Plans for ponds used for fire protection shall include an allweather
access lane as well as a suitable location for a pumper to draft
water directly from the pond.
F. All underground storage tanks shall be covered with at least three feet
of earth. In areas of high water table, the tank shall be installed with
anti-flotation footings and straps. Based upon the recommendations of
the Fire Department, the Board may require the installation of a
permanent sign on the site, no greater than two square feet, to indicate
the location of the tank.
G. All underground storage tanks shall be constructed of fiberglass,
concrete, or other noncorrosive materials and shall be installed in
§ 225-88 HARDING CODE § 225-88
1:292
accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. All underground
tanks shall include the following:
(1) An access manhole.
(2) Riser connections which shall be capable of producing 1,500
gallons per minute for a minimum of 75% of the tank capacity.
(3) A refilling system in accordance with Fire Department
requirements.
(4) A suction hydrant with six-inch NST threads located at an elevation
no higher than 12 feet above the bottom of the tank.
H. Upon recommendations of the Fire Department and Township Engineer,
the Board may approve alternate arrangements for fire protection,
including but not limited to dry water lines and hydrants installed close
to active water lines if, in their opinion, such arrangements would
constitute an acceptable source of water meeting the intent of this
chapter.
I. The fire protection system shall be installed or constructed and fully
operational prior to the issuance of a building permit in connection with
the approved site plan.
J. The property owner shall be responsible for fire protection system
maintenance, including but not limited to the maintenance of proper
water levels in water storage tanks and clear access to fire protection
facilities for the Fire Department.
§ 225-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-88
1:293

ARTICLE XVII
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
[Amended 8-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4-92; 9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 11-99;
6-4-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03; 11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04; 4-20-2005
by Ord. No. 5-05; 11-17-2010 by Ord. No. 08-10]
§ 225-89. Purpose; definitions; administration.
A. Purpose. The general purpose of this article is to promote the public
health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the Township by
controlling soil erosion, sedimentation and related environmental
damage from housing, commercial, utility, highway and other
construction activities which cause water runoff, soil disturbance,
destruction or removal of ground cover or plant life, all resulting in offsite
sediment damage. The specific purposes of this article are to
require adequate provisions for:
(1) Surface water retention, drainage, and disposal.
(2) Protecting exposed soil surfaces during and after construction.
(3) Maintaining the useful life of reservoirs by preventing
sedimentation.
(4) Preventing dangers to life and property from flooding resulting
from excessive water runoff and clogging of drainage structures.
(5) Preserving for recreational use of water bodies for swimming and
fishing by preventing stagnation.
(6) Enhancing the recycling of wastewater by maintaining sufficient
flows in streams and rivers to maintain oxygen levels.
(7) Preventing toxic materials, nitrates and pesticides from entering
public and private water supplies.
(8) Reducing public expenditures for repair of public facilities
resulting from soil erosion and sedimentation.
(9) Conserving the taxable value of property by enhancing the
environmental character of the Township.
B. Definitions. In the interpretation and enforcement of this article, the
following words, terms and phrases shall include the meanings given
herein, unless otherwise specifically stated.
APPLICANT — A person or any other legal entity requesting permission
to engage in land disturbance activity.
APPROVED PLAN — A plan to control soil erosion and sedimentation,
which has been approved by the proper Township authority.
BOARD — Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, as appropriate.
§ 225-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-89
1:295
CRITICAL AREA — A sediment-producing highly erodible or severely
eroded area.
CUT — A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been
removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below the original
ground surface to the excavated surface.
DIVERSION — A channel with or without a supporting ridge on the
lower side constructed across or at the bottom of a slope.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of land surface by water,
wind, ice or gravity.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug, quarried,
uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical location of the existing ground
surface prior to excavating or filling.
FARM CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan which provides for the use
of land, within its capabilities and treatment, within practical limits,
according to a chosen use to prevent further deterioration of soil and
water resources.
FINISHED GRADE — The final grade or elevation of the ground surface
conforming to the proposed design.
GRADING — Any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling, or any
combination thereof, and the land in its cut or filled condition.
LAND — Any ground, soil or earth, including marshes, swamps,
drainageways and areas not permanently covered by water, within the
Township.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving clearing, grading,
transporting, or filling and any other activity which causes land to be
exposed to the danger of erosion.
MULCHING — The application of plant residue or other suitable
materials to the land surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place
and aid in establishing plant cover.
PLAN CERTIFICATION — A certificate issued to perform work under
this article.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of
origin by air, water or gravity as a result of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — That area formed by a barrier or dam built at a
suitable location to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or other materials.
SEDIMENT POOL — A reservoir space allotted to the accumulation of
submerged sediment during the life of a structure.
SITE — Any lot or parcel of land.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material which can be
readily excavated.
§ 225-89 HARDING CODE § 225-89
1:296
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT or DISTRICT — A governmental
subdivision of this state denominating the Morris County Soil
Conservation District which encompasses the Township, organized in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:24-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan which fully
indicates necessary land treatment measures, including a schedule of
the timing for their installation, which will effectively minimize soil
erosion and sedimentation during and after the development of a site.
Such measures shall be equivalent to the standards provided herein.
STANDARDS — Such specifications and standards for soil erosion and
sediment control in New Jersey as promulgated by the State Soil
Conservation Committee in the Department of Agriculture established
pursuant to the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act.66
STRIPPING — Any activity which removes or significantly disturbs
vegetated or otherwise stabilized soil surface, including clearing and
grubbing operations.
TOWNSHIP AUTHORITY — The Township Engineer, and such other
departments, employees, officials or consultants as have been
authorized by the Township Committee to approve plans required by
this article.
VEGETATIVE PROTECTION — The stabilization of erosive or sedimentproducing
areas by covering the soil with permanent seeding,
producing long-term vegetative cover; short-term seeding, producing
temporary vegetative cover; or sodding, producing areas covered with
a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river,
creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully,
ravine or wash in which water flows in a definite direction or course,
either continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel,
bed and banks, and any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by
reason of the overflow of floodwater.
C. Administration.
(1) Applicability. A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be
approved by a Board prior to preliminary major site plan approval,
minor subdivision approval or preliminary major subdivision
approval. The measures of the approved soil erosion and sediment
control plan shall accompany the sketch plat for a minor
subdivision and shall be incorporated into the final plat or site plan
and final construction drawings for a major subdivision or major
site plan. The Board shall review and make a decision on all soil
erosion and sediment control plans within a period of 30 days of
submission of a complete application unless, by mutual agreement
in writing between the Board and the applicant, this period is
66.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
§ 225-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-89
1:297
extended for an additional 30 days. Failure of the Board to make
a decision within such period or such extension thereof shall
constitute approval. The applicant shall be provided with written
notice of such decision by the Township Engineer (or other
authorized municipal official). A copy of such decision, including
the name of the applicant, the site location by street address and
block and lot number and the proposed land use, shall be sent
to the Morris County Soil Conservation District. The municipality
shall also make available such other information as may be
required by the District.
(2) Board approval. The soil erosion and sediment control plan or any
major amendment shall be approved by the Board in the manner
and form according to the regulations hereafter set forth. The
Board, in approving a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan,
may impose lawful conditions or requirements designated or
specified on or in connection therewith and may require that such
conditions or requirements, and the satisfaction thereof, be made a
part of all improvement and maintenance agreements to be
executed with the Township, and the securities to be posted in
connection therewith. These conditions and requirements shall be
provided and maintained as a condition to the establishment,
maintenance and continuance of any use or occupancy of any land
or structure thereon.
(3) Minor amendments. Amendments to a soil erosion and sediment
control plan required as the result of conditions arising in the field
during construction may be approved by the Township Engineer
upon written request to him or her, and such approval as may be
given by said Engineer shall be communicated in writing by the
Engineer to the Board notifying the Board of the nature and reason
for the change.
(4) Major amendments: amendments that would require the applicant
to go back to the Board for further approval or that would
substantially expand the limit of disturbance.
(5) Any project involving land disturbance of one acre or more must
comply with the requirements of the New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJDPES) Stormwater Phase II,
NJ0088323, requirements. The Township Authority shall review
and approve the plan, which shall then be referred to the District
for administration and further action.
(6) Review. The Board may refer soil erosion and sediment control
plans to the District or such other local, county, state or federal
agency (including the Natural Resources Conservation Service of
the Department of Agriculture) as may be particularly qualified to
review said plan, and no approval of the Board shall be given until
after receipt and recommendation thereof. All public facility
§ 225-89 HARDING CODE § 225-89
1:298
§ 225-90. Application procedure; required data; general design
principles.
projects shall be submitted to the District for review, certification
and enforcement.
(7) The Township Authority or his or her designee shall provide reports
to the District as required by N.J.A.C. 2:90-11(g) or any
amendments thereto.
(8) Grading permit. Where subdivision approval or site plan approval is
not required and 5,000 square feet or more of land is proposed to
be cleared, graded, transported, filled or otherwise disturbed and
the proposed work is not otherwise exempt from the requirements
of this article, under § 225-93 a grading permit shall be required. A
separate application shall be required for each grading permit.
Plans, specifications and time schedules shall be submitted with
each application for a grading permit, together with the application
fee set forth in Chapter 171. The plans shall be prepared and duly
signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the State
of New Jersey.
A. Application procedure.
(1) No land area within the Township shall be cleared, graded,
transported, filled or otherwise disturbed by any person or legal
entity for purposes, including but not limited to the construction of
buildings or roads, the filling of land, the removal of natural
resources, the mining of materials and the development of
recreational facilities, including golf courses, unless:
(a) The proper Township authority has received and approved a
plan to provide for soil erosion and sediment control for such
land consistent with this article, and issued a valid land
disturbance permit for such land area.
(b) There has been a valid grading permit issued by the Township
Engineer; or
(c) The disturbance activity is exempted under § 225-93.
(2) Without limiting the effect of the preceding subsection, no
preliminary site plan or preliminary subdivision application shall be
granted approval by a Board unless the application includes a soil
erosion and sediment control plan in accordance with the
standards provided for herein. No approval for occupancy of any
building will be granted unless all necessary soil erosion control
measures have been completed in accordance with this chapter.
The applicant shall bear the final responsibility for the installation
and construction of all required soil erosion and sediment control
measures according to the provisions of this article.
§ 225-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-90
1:299
B. Data required. The applicant must submit a soil erosion and sediment
control plan for the entire site. The plan shall contain:
(1) Measures for soil erosion and sediment control, which must meet
or exceed the specifications and standards for soil erosion and
sediment control in New Jersey promulgated by the State Soil
Conservation Committee in the Department of Agriculture
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:24-1 et seq.
(2) A schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates
and the sequence of installation of planned erosion and sediment
control measures as related to the progress of the project, and the
time of exposure of each area prior to the completion of such
measures.
(3) The location and description of existing natural and man-made
features on and surrounding the site and including general
topography and soil characteristics and a copy of the soil
conservation district soil survey, where available.
(4) The location and description of proposed changes to the site and a
sketch of the proposed development.
(5) All proposed revisions of data required shall be submitted for
approval.
C. General design principles. In the preparation and implementation of a
soil erosion and sediment control plan, the following principles of
design shall be adhered to:
(1) Control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed site
plan involving land disturbance, including road and utility
installations, as well as to the protection of individual lots.
(2) Measures shall be instituted to prevent or control soil erosion and
sedimentation, and such measures shall be in operation during all
stages of development.
(3) The smallest practicable area of land shall be exposed at any one
time during development, and stripping of vegetation, grading or
other soil disturbance shall be done in a manner which will
minimize soil erosion and the duration of the disturbance.
(4) Work shall be performed in stages where necessary.
(5) The construction or installation of improvements such as
diversions, sediment basins and similar structures required to
prevent soil erosion and sedimentation shall be required prior to
the start of construction or on-site grading or disturbance.
(6) Permanent improvements, such as roads, catch basins, curbs and
the like, shall be installed or constructed and completed as soon as
possible.
§ 225-90 HARDING CODE § 225-90
1:300
§ 225-91. Maintenance; maintenance guarantee; fees.
(7) Temporary diversions and outlets shall be constructed or installed
to accommodate the increased runoff caused by the changed soil
and surface conditions during development.
(8) Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps shall
be installed to remove sediment from runoff waters.
(9) Sediment shall be retained on the site to the maximum extent
feasible.
(10) Stormwater runoff shall be minimized and retained on the site
wherever practicable by the construction-suitable stormwater
management features.
(11) Drainage provisions shall accommodate increased runoff resulting
from modified soil and surface conditions during and after
development or disturbance.
(12) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and
protected.
(13) Permanent final plant cover or lawn or ground cover shall be
installed on any site prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. In the event that such permanent final plant cover
cannot be installed because of conditions of weather, the
installation thereof shall be enforced by appropriate provisions in a
bond or other security and improvement agreements. If permanent
protection and cover has not been and cannot be installed,
temporary measures in accordance with the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey as promulgated by the
State Soil Conservation Committee must be installed until such
time as permanent measures can be installed.
(14) Either temporary seeding, mulching, plant cover or other suitable
stabilization measures shall be used to protect exposed critical
erosion areas during construction or other land disturbance.
A. Maintenance. All necessary soil erosion and sediment control measures
installed under this article shall be adequately maintained by the
applicant and all subsequent owners of the property on which such
measures have been installed, until the possibility of soil erosion and
sediment pollution no longer exists.
B. (Reserved)67
C. Fees. Each application for approval of a soil erosion and sediment
control plan shall be accompanied by a fee and required escrow deposit
in accordance with Chapter 171. The applicant shall pay the costs of the
67.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, Maintenance guarantee, was repealed 6-11-2018 by
Ord. No. 12-18.
§ 225-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-91
1:301
§ 225-92. Inspections; enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Township Engineer,
who shall also inspect or require adequate inspection of the work carried
out pursuant to this article. If the Township Engineer finds any existing
conditions not as stated in the applicant's erosion and sediment control
plan and application, he or she may refuse to approve further work and
may require necessary erosion and sedimentation control measures to be
promptly installed and may require modifications to the plan when, in his or
her judgment, such are necessary to properly control erosion and sediment.
He or she may also seek other penalties as provided in § 225-94. The
applicant shall be required to have the approved or certified soil erosion
and sediment control plan on the site during construction.
§ 225-93. Exemptions; appeals.
Township Engineer's review of plans and inspections of the control
measures in accordance with the contract for his/her work in the
Township.
A. Exemptions. The following activities are specifically exempt from this
article:
(1) Any soil disturbance where less than 5,000 square feet of land area
will be disturbed.
(2) Construction of a new single-family dwelling unit on a lot where
demolition of an existing dwelling is not proposed and the lot was
not subject to any Planning Board or Board of Adjustment approval
since January 1, 1976.
(3) Grading of land or cultivation of soil for agricultural or horticultural
purposes. To be exempt, the applicant must submit proofs that the
land is in use for such purposes. Such proofs shall include a
farmland preservation plan, right-to-farm protections, farmland
assessment, farm management plan, or other proofs deemed
appropriate by the Township. The Township Authority shall
determine if such proofs demonstrate an agricultural or
horticultural activity that is exempt from this article, or if the
activity is subject to this article. Grading in excess of 5,000 square
feet that is related to the construction of agricultural structures is
not exempt unless the disturbance has been incorporated into a
farm conservation plan approved by the District. If the grading of
land or cultivation of soil is consistent with a farm conservation
plan that has been approved by the District, such activities shall be
deemed exempt.
B. Appeals.
(1) Request for reconsideration. Any person aggrieved by a decision or
action of the Township Authority or Board shall first submit a
§ 225-91 HARDING CODE § 225-93
1:302
§ 225-94. Violations and penalties; stop orders; revocation of
permit; injunctive relief.
written request for reconsideration to the Township Authority
within 10 working days of the action taken. The Township Authority
shall review the request and make a determination within 35
calendar days of the request unless additional time is mutually
agreed upon by the Township Authority and the aggrieved person.
The Township Authority's determination shall be in writing.
(2) To appeal the determination of the Township Authority, the
aggrieved person shall subsequently petition the State Soil
Conservation Committee within 10 working days of the final
determination by the Township Authority. The appeal process
before the Committee shall be governed by established procedures
at N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.16.
A. Monetary. Any person or legal entity who violates any of the provisions
of this article or any standard promulgated pursuant to this article, or
who fails to comply with the provisions of a certified plan, or who fails to
comply with any applicable provisions of this article, shall be liable to a
penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $3,000 to be collected in a
summary proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law
(N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.68). The Superior Court, County District Court
and Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce said Penalty
Enforcement Law. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day
during which it continues shall constitute an additional separate and
distinct offense.
B. Stop orders; revocation of building permits or certificate of occupancy;
injunctive relief. In the event of a failure to comply with any condition or
regulation or provision of an approved soil erosion and sediment control
plan of this article, the Building Inspector or the Township Engineer,
either on his or her own initiative or upon recommendation of the
Board, shall revoke any building permit or permits or certificate or
certificates of occupancy, as the case may be, issue such stop order or
orders, as the case may be, and seek to enjoin any such failure or
violation through a court of competent jurisdiction, or take such other
steps as may be authorized and permitted by law to correct such
violation or enforce implementation of such approved plan. A formal
report of compliance with the provisions of the approved plan for soil
erosion and sediment control must be filed with the municipal agent
authorized to issue certificates of occupancy. A copy of this report shall
be sent to the Morris County Soil Conservation District.
68.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 to 2A:58-9 were repealed by L.1999, c. 274, § 4. See now
N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.
§ 225-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-94
1:303

ARTICLE XVIII
Steep Slopes
[Added 11-17-2010 by Ord. No. 8-10]
§ 225-95. Slope classifications; grading; clearing and development
restrictions; development standards.
Applicants for a grading permit and all applicants for minor subdivision,
preliminary major subdivision, or preliminary major site plan approval with
respect to property located in the R-1 and RR Zone Districts, shall
demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this section.
A. Slope classifications. Land within the Township shall be classified into
the following slope classes:
0% to 7.9%
8% to 11.9%
12% to 15.9%
16% to 19.9%
20% to 24.9%
25% to 29.9%
30% and greater
B. For classification purposes, slope areas shall be computed for the
various slope categories in Subsection A above between two-foot or
five-foot contours in accordance with § 225-90B(3) above. The percent
of slope (rise in feet per one-hundred-foot horizontal run) shall be
established by measurement of run perpendicular to the contours.
C. No soil or vegetation shall be disturbed nor shall any building or
structure be erected, constructed or substantially enlarged unless and
until it can be demonstrated by information, plans and other
documentation furnished by an applicant that the requirements of this
article are met.
D. Grading, clearing, and development restrictions.
(1) No grading, clearing, or development shall be permitted in areas
with slopes exceeding 25% except as provided in Subsection
D(1)(a) and (b) below.
(a) As necessary for roads, driveways, or utility crossings.
(b) When the grading is not associated with roads, driveways or
utility construction and the total graded area of the land with
slopes exceeding 25% is the lesser of 1% of the total lot area or
1,500 square feet.
(c) A subsurface sewage disposal system is not a utility for the
purposes of this section.
§ 225-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-95
1:305
(2) No grading shall be permitted within 20 feet of the perimeter of a
side or rear property line, except as necessary for the construction
of roads, driveways, sight distance requirements, or the installation
of utilities.
(3) The area permitted to be graded on a lot shall be computed in the
following manner:
(a) Calculate the land area proposed for grading within each slope
class on the site in square feet.
(b) Multiply the land area proposed to be graded in each slope
class by the applicable slope adjustment factor listed below.
The result is the adjusted graded area.
Slope Category Slope Adjustment Factor*
0% to 7.9% 1.0
8% to 11.9% 1.5
12% to 15.9% 2.6
16% to 19.9% 3.8
20% to 24.9% 5.5
25% to 29.9% 7.5
30% and greater 8.6
NOTES:
* The Slope Adjustment Factor is directly related to the
Topographic Factor (LS) expressed in the Universal Soil Loss
Equation developed by the Natural Resources Conservation
Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
(c) The adjusted graded area for each slope category shall be
summed to determine the total adjusted graded area which
shall not exceed the limitation set forth in Subsection D(4)
hereinbelow.
(4) In no event shall the total adjusted graded area exceed 80% of the
lot area.
(5) If the total adjusted graded area proposed is in excess of that
allowed above, the applicant may investigate alternative lot
grading concepts including the use of retaining walls, innovative
building types that relate to slope conditions, or the relocation of
the proposed use within the site to avoid disturbance of steeply
sloping areas. No grading permit, subdivision, or site plan shall be
approved unless the applicant demonstrates compliance with the
provisions of this article.
E. Special standards for development in sloping areas.
§ 225-95 HARDING CODE § 225-95
1:306
(1) Wherever possible, roads and driveways shall be planned to follow
the natural terrain.
(2) Whenever road, driveway or utility improvements are proposed in
areas containing slopes in excess of 25%, a landscape plan for
revegetating the disturbed areas after construction shall
accompany any application for minor subdivision approval,
preliminary subdivision or site plan approval, or if such approval is
not required, prior to the issuance of a grading permit.
(3) All slopes of 25% or greater shall be protected from disturbance
except as permitted in this article.
(4) A slope transition buffer strip of 25 feet in width shall be
established adjacent and parallel to all slopes of 25% or greater. To
the extent feasible, this area shall remain free of all structures,
parking areas, driveways or utility improvements except as may be
incidental to and approved pursuant to this article.
(5) A slope area of 25% or greater or a slope transition area adjacent
thereto which is a man-made or minor isolated topographic
condition, may be disturbed in accordance with a grading plan
approved pursuant to this article, provided that the disturbance
will not result in significant modification to the drainage pattern of
the area or the visual character of the property. Permanent changes
to grades or clearing activities shall be limited in accordance with
Subsection D(1) above.
§ 225-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-95
1:307

ARTICLE XIX
Flood Damage Prevention
§ 225-96. General provisions.
A. Statutory authority. The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in
the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), the New Jersey
Flood Hazard and Control Act (N.J.S.A. 58:16A-1 et seq.), and N.J.S.A.
40:48-1 et seq. delegated the responsibility to local governmental units
to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, including regulations relating to the use of land in
flood-prone areas. [Amended 11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
B. Findings.
(1) The flood hazard areas of the Township of Harding are subject to
periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(2) These flood losses may be aggravated by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazard, which increase flood
heights and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, may
cause damage in other areas. Structures and other uses that are
inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise inadequately
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
(3) The Federal Insurance Administration has identified areas of
special flood hazard within the Township of Harding for the
purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program on maps
hereinafter identified and incorporated in this article.
C. Definitions and word usage. Unless specifically defined in § 225-5,
words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give
them the meanings they have in common usage and to give this article
its most reasonable application.
D. Applicability. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard
within the Township of Harding.
E. Abrogation; greater restrictions to prevail. This article is not intended
to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or
deed restrictions. However, where this article and any other ordinance,
easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
F. Interpretation of provisions. In the interpretation and application of this
article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements.
§ 225-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-96
1:309
§ 225-97. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 225-98. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended 11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
The areas of special flood hazard are identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled the "Flood
Insurance Study for the Township of Harding (FIS)" and the "Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)," dated December 6, 2001, which study and
map may be amended from time to time. The Flood Insurance Study and
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the Township of Harding.
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
G. Warning disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required
by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by
man-made or natural causes. Nothing in this article shall be construed
to imply that land located outside the areas of special flood hazard or
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damage. This article shall not create liability on the part of the
Township of Harding, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Insurance Administration for any flood damage that results from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which may result in
substantial increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters.
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage.
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
F. Preserving natural stormwater detention areas.
§ 225-96 HARDING CODE § 225-98
1:310
Flood Insurance Rate Map are on file in the office of the Township Clerk,
Kirby Hall, Blue Mill Road, New Vernon, New Jersey, and are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article.
§ 225-99. Development permit; application.
A. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, moved, extended,
converted, altered or used without full compliance with the terms of
this article and other applicable regulations.
B. As to any lot which lies wholly or partially within any area of special
flood hazard established in § 225-98, a special flood hazard
development permit shall be obtained from the Planning Board
pursuant to this article prior to each of the following: [Amended
8-2-1982 by Ord. No. 4-82]
(1) The issuance of a construction permit where any portion of the
proposed construction, including driveways or utilities, is within
the special flood hazard area;
(2) The grant of minor or major subdivision approval;
(3) The grant of site plan approval;
(4) The grant of a conditional use;
(5) The issuance of a grading permit or a tree removal permit; or
(6) The grant of a use variance; provided, however, that if a special
flood hazard development permit has previously been issued after
consideration of the same development plans under any of the
above applications, it shall not be necessary to obtain another such
special flood hazard development permit.
C. Application for permit.
(1) An application for a special flood hazard development permit shall
be made to the Planning Board on forms available in the office of
the Township Clerk, Kirby Hall, Blue Mill Road, New Vernon, New
Jersey, and may include, but not be limited to, plans drawn to scale
showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the lot
and flood hazard area in question; existing or proposed structures,
fill, storage of materials and drainage facilities; and the location of
the foregoing. An application shall be accompanied by the
applicable fees in accordance with Chapter 171 of this Code.
(2) Specifically, the following information is required:
(a) The elevation of the lowest floor, including the basement, of all
structures, by reference to the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum of 1929 (NGVD).
§ 225-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-99
1:311
§ 225-100. Administrative agency designated. [Amended 8-2-1982
by Ord. No. 4-82]
The Planning Board is hereby appointed to administer and implement this
article by granting or denying special flood hazard development permits
and applications in accordance with its provisions, and is hereby
empowered to designate a committee of the Planning Board to so act on its
behalf. Any reference contained in this article to the Planning Board shall
be deemed to be a reference to a committee of the Planning Board if the
Planning Board designates such a committee to so act.
§ 225-101. Powers and duties of administrative agency.
The duties of the Planning Board shall include, but not be limited to:
(b) The elevation to which any structure has been floodproofed, by
reference to NGVD.
(c) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential
structure meet the floodproofing criteria in § 225-104B(2).
(d) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development.
(e) The items specified in Checklist C (see Article IX). [Added
9-4-2002 by Ord. No. 11-02]
A. Reviewing all applications for special flood hazard development permits
so as to determine:
(1) Whether the permit requirements of this article have been
satisfied.
(2) Whether all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior
approval is required, provided that conditional approvals may be
granted in accordance with the provisions of § 225-108.
(3) Whether the proposed development is located in a floodway. If
located in a floodway, the Planning Board shall assure that the
encroachment provisions of § 225-104 are met.
B. When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in
accordance with § 225-98, Basis for establishing areas of special flood
hazard, obtaining, reviewing and reasonably utilizing any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source in order to administer § 225-104B(1), Residential construction,
and § 225-104B(2), Nonresidential construction. [Amended 4-6-1987
by Ord. No. 2-87]
C. Obtaining and maintaining information as follows:
§ 225-99 HARDING CODE § 225-101
1:312
§ 225-102. Exceptions; procedure.
(1) Obtaining from each applicant and recording as-built drawings
showing the elevation of the lowest floor, including the basement,
of all new or improved structures and whether or not the structure
contains a basement. Such as-built drawings shall be signed and
sealed by a licensed professional engineer. [Amended
11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
(2) For all applications, including new or substantially improved
floodproofed structures:
(a) Verifying and recording the actual elevation, by reference to
NGVD.
(b) Maintaining the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 225-99C(2)(c).
(3) Maintaining for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this article.
D. With respect to any proposed alterations of watercourses:
(1) Notifying adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submitting evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Requiring that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
E. Making interpretations where needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and the
actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in § 225-102.
A. The Planning Board shall hear and decide applications for exceptions
from the requirements of this article. In passing upon such applications,
the Planning Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of this article and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(3) The susceptibility of any proposed structure and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.
§ 225-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-102
1:313
§ 225-103. Conditions for exceptions.
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
development to the community.
(5) The necessity to a structure or use of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use, which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Master Plan and
floodplain management program of that area. [Amended
11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, streets and bridges.
B. Upon consideration of the above-mentioned factors and the purposes of
this article, the Planning Board may attach such conditions to the
granting of exceptions as it may deem necessary to further the
purposes of this article.
C. The Planning Board shall maintain the records of all applications for
exceptions, including technical information, and report the grant of any
exceptions to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
A. Exceptions may be granted for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon the recommendation of the Harding Township Historic
Preservation Commission and a finding by the Planning Board that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and the exception is the
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure. [Amended 11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
B. Exceptions shall not be granted within any designated floodway if any
increase in water surface elevation during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge would result. [Amended 8-2-1982 by Ord. No. 4-82]
§ 225-102 HARDING CODE § 225-103
1:314
§ 225-104. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
C. Exceptions shall only be granted upon a determination that the
exception is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief from the requirements of this article.
D. Exceptions should only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(2) A determination that failure to grant the exceptions would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(3) A determination that the granting of an exception will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense; create nuisances; cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in § 225-102; or conflict
with existing local laws or ordinances.
E. Any applicant to whom an exception is granted shall be given written
notice that the structures will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following
standards are required:
(1) Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements
shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
of the structure.
(2) Construction materials and methods. All new construction and
substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and
utility equipment resistant to flood damage. All new construction
and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods
and practices that minimize flood damage.
(3) Utilities. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate inflow and infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems; new and replacement sanitary
sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate inflow
and infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from
the systems into floodwaters; and on-site waste disposal systems
shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from
them during flooding, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and
air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
[Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 2-87]
§ 225-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-104
1:315
(4) Subdivision, site plan and conditional use proposals. All
subdivision, site plan and conditional use proposals involving any
land located in an area of special flood hazard shall be consistent
with the need to minimize flood damage; all such proposals shall
have public utilities and facilities such as, but not by way of
limitation, sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed so as to minimize flood damage; all such proposals
shall have adequate drainage provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood damage; and base flood elevation data shall be provided for
all proposed development. [Amended 12-9-1991 by Ord. No.
8-91]
(5) Enclosure openings. For all new construction and substantial
improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must
either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
[Added 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 2-87]
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
(6) Anchoring manufactured homes. All manufactured homes shall be
anchored to resist floatation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces. [Added 11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
B. Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood
elevation data have been provided as set forth in § 225-98 or in
§ 225-101B, the following standards are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including the basement, at an elevation no lower than one
foot above the base flood elevation.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including the basement,
at an elevation no lower than one foot above the level of the base
§ 225-104 HARDING CODE § 225-104
1:316
§ 225-105. State agency's approval required.
flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water.
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the Planning Board as set forth in § 225-99C(2)(c).
[Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 2-87]
(3) All manufactured homes to be located or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is not
less than one foot above the base flood elevation. [Added
11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
C. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§ 225-98 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the high velocity of floodwaters which
carry debris and potential projectiles, and cause soil erosion, the
following provisions apply: [Amended 8-2-1982 by Ord. No. 4-82;
11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 19-01]
(1) Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development, shall be prohibited unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that the encroachment shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(2) All such new construction and substantial improvements shall fully
comply with § 225-104.
(3) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation has
been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
0.2 foot at any point.
A. No structure or substantial alteration within an area which would be
inundated by the one-hundred-year design flood of any nondelineated
stream shall be made, rebuilt or renewed by any person without the
approval of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
§ 225-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-105
1:317
§ 225-106. Time period for action on permit applications. [Amended
9-2-1982 by Ord. No. 4-82]
The Planning Board shall grant or deny a special flood hazard development
permit within 45 days of the submission of a complete application to the
Secretary of the Planning Board or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant; provided, however, that whenever a special
flood hazard development permit is requested for purposes of subdivision,
site plan, use variance or conditional use approval, the Planning Board shall
grant or deny a special flood hazard development permit within the time
required for it or the Board of Adjustment to act on any pending application
for approval of such subdivision, site plan, use variance or conditional use
or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
§ 225-107. Promulgation of additional rules and regulations.
[Amended 8-2-1982 by Ord. No. 4-82]
The Planning Board may adopt such rules and regulations as may be
reasonable to implement the provisions of this article.
§ 225-108. Conditional approval.
In the event that the project, development or work proposed by the
applicant for a special flood hazard development permit requires approval
by a governmental agency other than the Planning Board, the Planning
Board shall, in appropriate instances, condition its approval upon the
subsequent approval of such governmental agency; provided, however, that
the Planning Board shall make a decision on any application for a special
flood hazard development permit within the time period provided in
§ 225-106 or within an extension of such period as has been agreed to by
the applicant, unless the Planning Board is prevented or relieved from so
acting by operation of law.
and without complying with such conditions as the Department may
prescribe for preserving such area and providing for the flow of water
therein to safeguard the public against danger from waters impounded
or affected by such structure or alteration.
B. No application for development as defined in the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., for a structure within any area which
would be inundated by the one-hundred-year design flood of any
nondelineated stream or for a change in land use within a delineated
floodway or any state-administered and -delineated flood -ringe area,
when such change would require Department approval, may be granted
by any municipality to any person without application to and approval
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to
the Flood Hazard and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.
§ 225-105 HARDING CODE § 225-109
1:318
§ 225-109. Appeals. [Amended 12-9-1991 by Ord. No. 9-91]
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Board as to any matters
pertaining to this article may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of
New Jersey as provided in the Rules of Court.
§ 225-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-109
1:319

ARTICLE XX
Great Swamp Watershed Environmental Protection
[Added 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 5-98; amended 3-19-2003 by Ord. No.
5-03]
§ 225-110. Great Swamp Watershed environmental protection.
A. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to any of the following within the
Great Swamp Watershed Overlay Zone:
(a) Application for preliminary and final site plan approval.
(b) Application for preliminary and final subdivision approval.
(c) Application for minor subdivision approval.
(2) This article shall be applied to achieve its purposes to the extent
reasonable and practical with respect to modifications of previously
developed sites consistent with the nature and extent of such
modifications.
B. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued pursuant to this article are to be
considered an integral part of development approvals under the
subdivision and site plan review process and do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals
for activities regulated by other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, and general welfare. This article is not intended to
interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or
regulation, statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of
this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any
other article, ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law,
whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards
shall control.
C. Great Swamp Watershed Environmental Protection Area. Lands
included in the Great Swamp Watershed Environmental Protection Area
and the preservation requirements associated with those lands are as
follows:
(1) Lands within the wetlands and standard transition areas of
freshwater wetlands associated with the Great Swamp watershed's
state open waters. Trees, shrubs, grasses and other existing
vegetation within wetlands and standard transition areas of
freshwater wetlands located along state open waters located in the
Great Swamp watershed shall not be disturbed except in
accordance with a valid permit or transition area waiver issued by
§ 225-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-110
1:321
NJDEP, pursuant to the New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:7A-1.1 et seq.).
(2) Lands proximate to the top of channel banks of state open waters.
Trees, shrubs, grasses and other live vegetation within 50 feet of
the top of the channel bank of any state open water within the
Great Swamp watershed shall not be disturbed unless it is
determined by the municipal approving authority that there is no
alternative to the proposed project design which would eliminate or
further minimize the disturbance. In the event it is necessary to
cross the stream corridor with a road, driveway, or utility line,
damage to vegetation shall be mitigated by planting trees or shrubs
of similar species at similar land cover densities at other locations
along the stream corridor as approved by the approving authority.
(3) Additional lands within 100 feet of any stream. Any land areas, in
addition to those described above, that lie within 100 feet of any
intermittent or perennial stream within the Great Swamp
watershed shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible to
serve as a natural buffer area to the stream. No roads, except those
necessary to cross the stream corridor, no commercial parking
areas, and no fuel storage tanks shall be located within this area.
D. Conservation easements.
(1) Conservation easements shall be established for all areas as
follows:
(a) Freshwater wetlands and transition areas.
(b) Lands within 50 feet of the top of the channel bank of any state
open water.
(c) Stream encroachment areas.
(d) Unique environmentally sensitive areas, if required pursuant
to § 225-74D(3) for subdivisions or § 225-78 for site plans.
(2) The boundaries of all required conservation easements shall be
permanently marked in the field by concrete monuments and posts
composed of a long-lasting material and designed in accordance
with the drawing in Appendix A.69 All conservation easement
markers shall bear a plaque or other inscription satisfactory to the
Township Engineer that indicates the presence of a conservation
easement. The locations of all boundary markers and the type of
post (e.g., wood or other material) to be installed shall be approved
by the Board as part of the preliminary approval proceedings and
shown on the approved preliminary plans. [Amended 3-17-2004
by Ord. No. 4-04]
69.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-110 HARDING CODE § 225-110
1:322
(3) Prior to the grant of any final approval, the applicant shall provide a
plan showing the approved boundaries and monuments/posts for
all required conservation easements, which plan shall be updated
to show all existing conditions on the property as of the time of final
approval. The accuracy of this plan shall be confirmed prior to
execution of any easements.
(4) Any required conservation easement shall be consistent with the
form contained in Appendix B70 of this Land Use and Development
Chapter, except as may be modified and/or adjusted by the Board
based on the particular circumstances of a specific development
application and property.
70.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 225-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-110
1:323

ARTICLE XXI
Tree Conservation
[Added 5-16-2001 by Ord. No. 11-01]
§ 225-111. Tree conservation.
A. Findings and purposes.
(1) The Township Committee does hereby find that the indiscriminate,
uncontrolled and excessive destruction, removal and cutting of
trees upon lots and tracts of land within the Township results in
increased costs and difficulty in controlling stormwater runoff and
flooding potential, increased soil erosion, decreased fertility of soil
and increased dust, and a loss of privacy. It is the purpose of this
article to mitigate the degradation of Harding Township's natural
resources, to maintain the Township's rural landscape, to promote
surface water retention, proper drainage and stormwater quality,
and the protection of exposed soil surfaces, by regulating the
removal of certain mature trees. The standards and procedures
established herein are intended to furnish guidelines for the Tree
Conservation Officer, Township Engineer, Shade Tree Advisory
Committee, Planning Board and Board of Adjustment in connection
with the issuance of permits for certain tree cutting and removal,
subject to the exemptions listed below, and in evaluating tree
removal and landscape plans as part of the subdivision and site
plan approval process, in order to promote the safety, public health,
convenience and general welfare of the Township.
(2) It is the intent of this article to protect the rural character and
natural resources of the Township, consistent with the goals and
objectives of the Master Plan. This article is not intended to restrict
homeowners from removing dead or diseased trees or vegetation,
conducting routine pruning of trees or other maintenance
procedures in areas of overgrown vegetation. Landowners are
encouraged to seek guidance from the Shade Tree Advisory
Committee prior to removing large specimen trees or other historic
vegetation.
B. Applicability and exemptions.
(1) Applicability. Subject to the exemptions listed in Subsection B(2)
below, the provisions of this article shall be applied as follows:
(a) Vacant undeveloped land. No tree shall be cut down or
removed from vacant undeveloped land without first obtaining
a permit from the Tree Conservation Officer. When tree cutting
or removal is proposed on a lot or tract of land for which a
subdivision or site plan application has been approved, the
permit shall only be issued in conformance with the approved
plan.
§ 225-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-111
1:325
(b) Developed land; nonresidential. No tree shall be cut down or
removed from land developed for nonresidential purposes
without first obtaining a permit from the Tree Conservation
Officer. When tree cutting or removal is proposed on a lot or
tract of land for which a site plan application or amended site
plan application has been approved, the permit shall only be
issued in conformance with the approved plan.
(c) Previously developed land; residential or nonresidential
property. Any residential or nonresidential land that has an
existing structure and where an application for demolition for
complete removal of any existing residential structure has
been filed with the Township, such property shall be treated as
vacant undeveloped land pursuant to Subparagraph B(1)(a)
herein and the provisions of Subsection B(1)(a) shall apply to
such properties. [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 08-1671]
(d) Creation of a tree conservation area. In accordance with the
zoning provisions governing the R-1, RR, R-2, R-3 and R-4
Zones (see Part 3, Zoning), there shall be a tree conservation
area required along all perimeter property lines of any lot
within the R-1, RR, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zones, within which no
tree measuring six inches or greater in diameter at a point 4 1/
2 feet above the ground shall be cut down or removed without
first obtaining a permit therefor in accordance with the
standards and procedures of this article. The width of the tree
conservation area in each zone shall be as follows: [Amended
5-16-2001 by Ord. No. 11-01; 4-3-2002 by Ord. No. 4-02;
11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04; 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
08-16]
[1] In the R-1 and RR Zones, the tree conservation area shall
comprise the area along all perimeter property lines
within:
[a] Fifty feet of any road, whether public or private.
[b] Twenty-five feet of all other property lines.
[2] In the R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zones, the tree conservation area
shall comprise the area along all perimeter property lines
for a distance equal to 1/2 of the minimum required
building setback (front, side and rear yards), but not less
than four feet. See Part 3, Zoning, for specified distances
for each zone.
[3] The flag staff portion of a flag lot shall be subject to these
restrictions [see Subsection B(2)(d), exemption for
driveway access].
71.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection B(1)(c) as Subsection
B(1)(d).
§ 225-111 HARDING CODE § 225-111
1:326
(2) Exemptions. The cutting and removal of trees shall be permitted
without first obtaining a permit therefor in connection with:
(a) The clearing of woodlands on a commercial farm which meets
the criteria of N.J.S.A. 4:1C-9. [Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord.
No. 15-01]
(b) Trees located on land owned by the federal, state or county
government or agencies/departments thereof; the provisions of
this article shall apply to lands owned by the Township of
Harding and the Harding Township Board of Education.
(c) Trees required to be cut down or removed in connection with
the installation or maintenance of public utility lines or
facilities, approved private waste disposal systems or private
wells provided that such installation has been approved by the
Harding Township Board of Health and/or the Township
Engineer, as appropriate. [Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No.
02-13; 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 08-16]
(d) Trees required to be cut down or removed to provide access to
property in accordance with an approved driveway permit,
subdivision plat or site plan. [Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord.
No. 02-13]
(e) Trees located in commercial orchards or nurseries.
(f) The emergency removal of trees that are diseased, severely
damaged or that pose an immediate hazard to person or
property provided that a tree removal application is filed
within five business days of the actual tree removal.
[Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 08-16]
(g) The removal, by the owner or tenant of lands lying within the
Township of Harding, of dead, dying or structurally unsound
trees or tree conditions which are likely to endanger the lives
and/or property of persons using public streets or property of
the Township of Harding, within 30 days after receipt of
written notice from the Tree Conservation Officer and/or
Zoning Officer, to remove same. [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 08-16]
C. Permit procedures and appeal process. Whenever a permit is required
in connection with tree removal pursuant to Subsection B(1) above, said
permit shall be obtained from the Tree Conservation Officer in
accordance with the procedures set forth below and the requirements
and standards of this article. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the
Tree Conservation Officer may appeal his decision to or may request a
variance from the Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a
or 70c, respectively, except in the case of a variance request in
conjunction with a subdivision or site plan under the jurisdiction of the
Planning Board, whereupon the Planning Board shall hear and decide
§ 225-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-111
1:327
said variance request pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60. [Amended
12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 08-16]
(1) Any person desiring to cut down or remove any tree or trees which
are subject to the provisions of this article shall file application
therefor with the Tree Conservation Officer on a form to be
provided for said purpose and shall pay the application fee and
escrow (if required) set forth in Chapter 171, Fees. Said application
shall identify the lot or tract of land upon which the tree or trees
are located, disclose the name and address of the owner, tenant or
duly authorized agent of said owner or tenant and set forth with
sufficient specificity for purposes of identification the location of
the tree or trees sought to be cut down or removed and the reasons
for the request.
(2) The filing of an application shall constitute the applicant's consent
to the Tree Conservation Officer, the Township Engineer and the
Shade Tree Advisory Committee for entry upon the land for
purposes of inspection. The Tree Conservation Officer or, at his
request, the Township Engineer and/or the Shade Tree Advisory
Committee, shall inspect the site as to the tree or trees sought to be
cut down or removed, the drainage and other physical conditions
existing on the property and adjoining properties.
(3) Within three days after an application and the application fee (if
required) have been received by the Tree Conservation Officer, he
shall mail a copy of the application to the Shade Tree Advisory
Committee for the review and advice of said Committee. If the Tree
Conservation Officer has not received the written comments of said
Committee within 15 days after the filing of the application, he
shall proceed to make his decision on the application without the
advice of said Committee.
(4) The Tree Conservation Officer may, in his discretion, forward the
application to the Township Engineer for his review and
recommendations in accordance with the standards of this article.
(5) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection C(6) below, within 15
days of the filing of an application, the Tree Conservation Officer
shall endorse his decision upon the application and, in the case of
partial or complete disapproval, shall set forth the basis for such
decision. Any application approved, in whole or in part, shall
automatically become a permit in accordance with the terms of said
endorsement. Any permit not acted upon within one year from the
date of such approval shall automatically expire.
(6) Upon the filing of any application for the cutting or removal of trees
located on any lot or tract for which an application for subdivision
or site plan review is required to be submitted to the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment, the applicant shall furnish the Tree
Conservation Officer with a copy of the subdivision plat or site plan
§ 225-111 HARDING CODE § 225-111
1:328
therefor, and the Tree Conservation Officer may withhold his
endorsement pending receipt of written notice of the Board's
action with respect to such subdivision or site plan application.
Within five days of the receipt of notice of the Board's decision on
said subdivision or site plan, the Tree Conservation Officer shall act
upon the application as provided above. The permit shall only be
issued in accordance with the approved subdivision or site plan.
D. Standards for permit issuance. To the greatest extent practicable, large
trees, tree rows and hedgerows should be preserved. In addition, the
following factors shall be taken into consideration in determining
whether to issue a permit for tree cutting or removal:
(1) Whether the area where such tree or trees are located will be
occupied by a building or structure, a driveway or recreation area,
a roadway, an equestrian (bridle) trail, a drainage right-of-way,
sewer line, septic system or well, or whether it is reasonably
necessary to regrade the area in relation to any of the foregoing,
and further provided that such regraded areas shall be restored
and landscaped with suitable ground cover, shrubbery and/or trees
after construction.
(2) Whether the area where such tree or trees are to be cut down or
removed is consistent with the approval of any required subdivision
or site plan by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment and any
conditions pertaining thereto.
(3) Whether the cutting or removal would change existing drainage
patterns.
(4) Whether the cutting or removal would allow soil erosion or
increase dust.
(5) Whether the cutting or removal would constitute a significant
change in the screening between existing or proposed buildings on
adjoining lots.
(6) Whether the cutting or removal would constitute a horticulturally
advantageous thinning of an existing overgrown area, taking into
consideration the tree species, size and health of the trees to be
removed.
(7) Whether the cutting or removal would impair the growth and
development of the remaining trees on the applicant's property or
adjacent property.
(8) Whether the area where such tree or trees are located has a
depression or fill of land which is deemed injurious to such tree or
trees or other trees located nearby.
(9) Whether the presence of such tree or trees is likely to cause
hardship or will endanger the public or the owner of the property
§ 225-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-111
1:329
on which the tree or trees are located or an adjoining property
owner or for some other adequate reason within the intent of this
article.
(10) Any planned tree replacement or other landscape plan for
revegetating cleared areas.
E. Display of permit; right of entry. [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
08-16]
(1) The applicant shall prominently display on the site the tree removal
permit issued. Such permit shall be displayed continuously while
trees are being removed or replaced or work done as authorized on
the permit and for 10 days thereafter.
(2) As a condition for the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall
agree in writing to the entry onto his/her premises by the Tree
Conservation Officer, or at his request, the Township Engineer and/
or the Shade Tree Advisory Committee Chair of the Township as
necessary to effectuate the provisions of this chapter, and such
entries shall be deemed lawful. Failure to allow such entry shall be
unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall
constitute failure to display the permit as required herein.
§ 225-111 HARDING CODE § 225-111
1:330
Part 3
Zoning
ARTICLE XXII
General Zoning Provisions
§ 225-112. Zones enumerated.
§ 225-113. Zone boundaries and Zoning Map. [Amended 12-12-1988
by Ord. No. 11-88; 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90; 10-28-1991;
1-6-1992; 8-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4-92; 8-9-1993 by Ord. No. 9-93;
12-29-1993 by Ord. No. 15-93; 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 6-96;
4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 2-98; 6-19-2002 by Ord. No. 7-02; 4-2-2003
by Ord. No. 3-03; 6-16-2004 by Ord. No. 9-04; 11-3-2004 by Ord. No.
22-04; 9-19-2007 by Ord. No. 9-07; 11-7-2007 by Ord. No. 13-07]
The boundaries of the zoning districts in the Township are established in
a map entitled "Harding Township Zoning Map" bearing the date of its
original adoption on April 2, 2003, and the date and ordinance number of
A. The territory of the Township shall be divided into the following zones:
[Amended 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 6-96; 7-21-1997 by Ord. No.
4-97; 6-16-2004 by Ord. No. 9-04; 11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04;
7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 06-18; 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 05-19]
R-1 Residence Zone
R-2 Residence Zone
R-3 Residence Zone
R-4 Residence Zone
AH Affordable Housing Zone
TH-1 Townhouse Zone 1
AHO-1 Affordable Housing Overlay Zone 1
AHO-2 Affordable Housing Overlay Zone 2
B-1 Historic Village Business Zone
B-2 Business Zone
OB Office Building Zone
PL Public Land Zone
RR Rural Residential Zone
PRN-RC Planned Residential Neighborhood - Residential Cluster Zone
Great Swamp Watershed Overlay Zone
B. The Great Swamp Watershed Overlay Zone is hereby established as a
Special Area pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:21-3.5. [Added 4-20-1998 by Ord.
No. 2-98]
§ 225-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-113
1:331
any subsequent revision duly enacted by ordinance, which map is hereby
made a part of this chapter.
A. The boundary lines of the R-2 Residence and B-2 Business Zones shall
be either road lines or lines drawn parallel thereto and 200 feet
therefrom, except that:
(1) All lots, tracts or parcels of land in the triangular area
circumscribed by Routes 202 and 287 and the Morris Township -
Harding Township boundary lines (except those lots in said
triangular area which are included in the R-3 Zone, PL Zone and
the PRN-RC Zone) are included in the R-2 Zone.
(2) All lots in Block 18 abutting Blue Mill Road, south side, from the
boundary of the R-3 Zone on Millbrook Road and the R-3 and B-1
Zones on Village Road are included in the R-2 Zone.
(3) The R-2 district boundary shall follow property lines for all lots
fronting on Orchard Drive and shall include all of Lot 25 in Block
17.
B. The boundary lines of the R-3 and R-4 Residence and B-1 Historic
Village Business Zones shall be either road lines or lines drawn parallel
thereto and 150 feet therefrom, except that:
(1) All lots in the R-3 Zone abutting on Jenks Road, Jenks Court,
Bockoven Lane, Blackwell Place, Blackwell Avenue and Sand
Spring Road north of Interstate 287 are located entirely in the R-3
Zone.
(2) All of Lots 1 and 2 and the portions of Lots 5 and 6 in Block 18 that
are not included in the B-1 Zone are located in the R-3 Zone.
(3) All of Lot 2 in Block 45 is located in the R-4 Zone.
(4) All of Lots 57, 58, 60, 61, 61.01 and 61.02 in Block 17 and all of Lots
3, 3.01, 4 and 7 in Block 18 shall be designated B-1 and shall have
the zoning boundary line coincident with the rear property line as
such lots were constituted on June 1, 1987.
C. The Great Swamp Watershed Overlay Zone shall encompass all lands
situated within the watershed of the Great Swamp as depicted on the
aforementioned Harding Township Zoning Map as may be revised from
time to time, and incorporated herein by reference.
D. The Harding Township Zoning Map shall hereby be amended as follows:
Block 23.02, Lot 5 shall be rezoned from R-2 Residence Zone to the
TH-1 Townhouse Zone 1. [Added 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 06-18]
E. The Harding Township Zoning Map shall hereby be amended as follows:
Block 46.01, Lot 7, shall be rezoned to include the B-2 Business Zone
and the AHO - 1 Affordable Housing Overlay 1 Zone. Block 32, Lots
1.02, 4, 9.01, 9.02; Block 33.03, Lots 3.02, 4, 8, 18, 19; and Block 46.01,
§ 225-113 HARDING CODE § 225-113
1:332
§ 225-114. Demolition delay on historic buildings. [Added 4-2-2003
by Ord. No. 4-03]
Lots 8, 9, 9.01, 10 and 13.02 shall be rezoned to include the B-2
Business Zone 2, OB Office Building Zone, and R-1 Residence Zone and
the AHO-2 Affordable Housing Overlay 2 Zone. [Added 1-28-2019 by
Ord. No. 05-19]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this § 225-114 is to assist implementation of
the historic preservation element of the Master Plan, to provide
guidance in achieving preservation of historic resources in the
Township and to advance the following purposes:
(1) To promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure
and welfare of the citizens of the Township and its visitors and to
promote civic pride in the Township's historic resources.
(2) To foster private reinvestment in the historic districts and sites and
balance the purposes of historic preservation with current needs.
(3) To encourage preservation of sites of historic, archaeological,
cultural, social and architectural significance.
(4) To encourage the continued use of historic sites and to facilitate
their appropriate reuse.
(5) To maintain and promote an appropriate and harmonious setting
for existing historic resources within the Township.
(6) To recognize and preserve historic resources in the Township as an
essential element of the Township's character and identity which
contributes to the reputation of the Township as a place of beauty
and architectural value.
B. Definitions. In addition to the definitions set forth in § 225-5, the
following definitions shall apply in this § 225-114:
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A document issued by the
Historic Preservation Commission confirming their review of any
proposed demolition.
DEMOLITION — For the purposes of this section, shall mean the
destruction of greater than 35% of the floor area of any building which
is designated as an historic building or located within an historic
district identified in the then-current Harding Township Master Plan.
The moving of such a building from its location shall be deemed to be
demolition for purposes of this section.
C. Referral of application for demolition permit. Applications for a
demolition permit must be made to the Construction Official. For all
buildings within an historic district or otherwise identified as historic
buildings in the Township's Master Plan, the Construction Official shall
forward a copy of the complete application for demolition to the
§ 225-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-114
1:333
Historic Preservation Commission within 15 days of the receipt of the
application. On all matters referred to the Commission which require
approval or action by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, the
recommendation of the Commission shall be advisory only, which may
be approved, disapproved or amended by such Board.
D. Certificate of appropriateness: when required. A certificate of
appropriateness shall be required to be obtained from the Historic
Preservation Commission before a demolition permit is issued for any
building which is designated as an historic building or located within an
historic district identified in the then-current Harding Township Master
Plan.
E. Exemptions. This section shall not apply to:
(1) Changes to the interior of a building.
(2) Changes to the exterior of a building which constitute maintenance
and repair of the building.
(3) Demolition of buildings pursuant to the Township's power of
condemnation or by order of the Township Construction Official for
reasons of health and safety.
(4) Buildings constructed after 1945.
F. Procedures for review.
(1) All applicants shall complete an application form. Application forms
shall be made available in the office of the Construction Official.
Applications shall be filed with the Construction Official.
(2) Each application may be accompanied by sketches, drawings,
photographs, descriptions, the property survey and other
information, if available, and shall include current and archival
photographs of the interior and exterior of the building and
drawings to document the condition of the building. The
Commission may require the subsequent submission of such
additional materials as it reasonably requires to make an informed
decision.
(3) The Commission shall reach a decision on an application and
submit its report to the Construction Official within 45 days of
referral of same by the Construction Official. Nothing herein shall
prohibit an extension of time by mutual agreement of the applicant
and the Commission.
(4) Informational meetings/conceptual review. Persons considering
action that requires a certificate of appropriateness, as required by
this section, are encouraged to request an informal informational
meeting with the Commission prior to submitting a formal
application for a certificate of appropriateness. Requests for such
informational meetings can be made to the Construction Official,
§ 225-114 HARDING CODE § 225-114
1:334
who will contact the Chairman of the Commission. The Commission
shall hold such informational meetings within 30 days of receipt
of such request. The purpose of an informational meeting is to
review the standards of appropriateness and the procedures for
obtaining a certificate of appropriateness. Neither the applicant
nor the Commission shall be bound by any informational meeting
or conceptual review.
(5) Application review.
(a) An applicant shall be required to appear or to be represented
at the Commission's meetings when the application for a
certificate of appropriateness is considered. The Commission
may take action in the absence of the applicant.
(b) The Historic Preservation Commission shall issue a certificate
of appropriateness to the applicant if it finds the permit
application appropriate to the historic district or site and in
conformity with the criteria set forth in this section. The
Commission shall issue a denial of a certificate of
appropriateness to the applicant if it finds the permit
application inappropriate to the historic district or site or not
in conformity with the criteria set forth in this section.
(c) When an application is approved, the Commission shall
forthwith issue a certificate of appropriateness. Failure to
report within a forty-five-day period shall be deemed to
constitute a report in favor of the proposed demolition and
without conditions. In the event that the applicant has
consented to an extension of time for consideration of the
certificate, the extension of time shall be transmitted to the
Construction Official, and the demolition permit shall not be
issued during the period of time of the extension.
(d) The owner shall post the certificate of appropriateness on a
conspicuous spot on the site visible to the public during the
entire demolition process.
(e) A certificate of appropriateness shall be valid for a period of
two years from date of its issue unless reasonable extensions
are requested by the applicant or the Commission and agreed
to by both parties.
G. Posting and publication of proposed demolition. When an application
for a demolition permit is filed, notice of proposed demolition shall be
posted on the premises of the building in a location that is clearly
readable from the street. In addition, the applicant shall publish a
notice in the official newspaper of the Township within 10 days of an
application for a demolition permit.
H. Criteria for review. In regard to an application to demolish or move an
historic building, the following matters shall be considered:
§ 225-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-114
1:335
(1) Its historic, architectural, cultural and aesthetic significance.
(2) Its current and potential use for those purposes currently
permitted by the Township's Zoning Ordinance or for the use
proposed.
(3) Its importance to the Township and the extent to which its
historical or architectural value is such that its removal would be
detrimental to the integrity of the historic property or district and
the public interest.
(4) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be reproduced
or could be reproduced only with great difficulty.
(5) The extent to which its retention would increase property values,
attract students, writers, historians, artists and artisans,
encourage study and interest in American history, stimulate
interest and study in architecture and design, educate citizens in
American culture and heritage or make the Township a more
attractive and desirable place in which to live.
(6) The impact of its removal upon an historic district.
(7) The structural soundness and integrity of the building and the
economic feasibility of restoring or rehabilitating the building so as
to comply with the requirements of the applicable building codes.
(8) If there are any compelling reasons for not retaining the building at
its present site, the proximity of the proposed new location and its
accessibility to residents of the Township, and the probability of
significant damage to the building as a result of the relocation.
(9) The compatibility, nature and character of the current and the
proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the intent and
purposes of this section and whether the proposed new location is
visually compatible in accordance with the standards set forth
herein.
I. Decision after review. The Historic Preservation Commission shall
review the application for demolition based on the criteria outlined
above. Its report may:
(1) Approve demolition without conditions.
(2) Stipulate conditions, including, but not limited to, documentation
of the building prior to demolition and/or confirmation of the
applicant's consent to the removal and reuse of certain important
features of the historic building.
(3) In the event that the Commission disapproves an application to
demolish an historic building, the owner shall, nevertheless, as a
matter of right, subject to the provisions of Subsection J below, be
§ 225-114 HARDING CODE § 225-114
1:336
§ 225-115. Nonconforming structures and uses.
entitled to raze or demolish such building, provided that all of
the other demolition requirements of the Township have been fully
met.
J. Demolition postponed for nine months. If the Historic Preservation
Commission determines that demolition is not appropriate, the
Commission may postpone issuance of the demolition permit for a
period not in excess of nine months from the date of denial by the
Commission of a certificate of appropriateness. During this period of
time, the Historic Preservation Commission may consult civic groups
and public agencies to ascertain if there is some other means of
preserving the building. The Historic Preservation Commission is
empowered to work out with the owner feasible plans for preservation
of the building where moving or demolition thereof would be a
significant loss to the public, the Township, the streetscape and the
neighborhood. Moving of such buildings shall be encouraged as an
alternative to demolition.
A. Any nonconforming use or structure existing on the effective date of
Ordinance No. 3-67 or any amendment thereto may be continued upon
the lot or in the structure so used, and any such structure may be
restored or repaired in the event of partial destruction thereof.
B. A nonconforming use or structure may not be enlarged, extended or
altered except that a single-family dwelling or structure associated with
a single-family residential use, that is nonconforming only with respect
to setback limitations, may be enlarged if the addition conforms to all of
the zoning regulations of the district in which it is located. [Amended
5-20-2009 by Ord. No. 3-09]
C. The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other person
interested in any land upon which a nonconforming use or structure
exists may apply in writing for the issuance of a certificate certifying
that the use or structure existed before the adoption of the ordinance
which rendered the use or structure nonconforming. The applicant
shall have the burden of proof. Application pursuant hereto may be
made to the Boards Administrator within one year of the adoption of the
ordinance which rendered the use or structure nonconforming or at any
time to the Board of Adjustment. The Boards Administrator may charge
a fee for such certification. Denial by the Boards Administrator shall be
appealable to the Board of Adjustment. Every certificate issued
pursuant to this subsection shall include a description of the nature and
extent of the nonconformity in sufficient detail to establish a record that
will be available in the event that questions may arise as to subsequent
enlargement or expansion of the nonconforming use covered by the
certificate. Copies of every such certificate issued by the Boards
Administrator shall be forwarded to the Board of Adjustment and the
Planning Board. Copies of every such certificate issued by the Board of
§ 225-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-115
1:337
§ 225-116. General regulations. [Amended 7-21-1997 by Ord. No.
4-97]
Adjustment shall be forwarded to the Boards Administrator and the
Planning Board. [Amended 9-5-2001 by Ord. No. 17-01]
D. A structure or use which does not conform to the ordinance
requirements by reason of one or more variance grants, rather than by
reason of an ordinance change, shall be subject to the same regulations
as are applicable to a nonconforming structure or use. [Added
5-9-1988 by Ord. No. 6-88]
A. Compliance with regulations. No building, structure or lot shall be used
and no building or structure shall be erected or altered except in
conformity with the regulations applicable to the zone in which such
building or lot is located.
B. Substandard lots. [Amended 6-5-2002 by Ord. No. 6-02; 3-15-2006
by Ord. No. 7-06; 10-17-2007 by Ord. No. 12-07]
(1) Requirements as to lot size shall not be applied so as to prevent the
erection of a one-family dwelling on any lot less than the required
size created on or before the effective date of Ordinance 3-67 or as
subsequently approved by the Board as part of a subdivision.
[Amended 5-20-2009 by Ord. No. 3-09]
(2) Flag lots created on or before May 6, 1985, shall be considered
conforming lots for the purposes of satisfying minimum frontage
requirements.
(3) Any lot in the R-1 or RR Zone with frontage of at least 250 feet but
less than 300 feet, created on or before May 6, 1985, shall be
considered a conforming lot with respect to minimum frontage
requirements, provided that the lot is not subdivided so as to
decrease its lot frontage.
C. Principal buildings or structures. Except where expressly permitted,
each lot shall contain no more than one principal building or structure.
If there is more than one building or structure situated on a lot, the
residence shall be deemed the principal building or structure.
[Amended 11-20-2000 by Ord. No. 6-00]
D. Limitations applicable to accessory buildings and structures, including
but not limited to: recreation structures, pools, decks, fences and
energy-related structures. [Amended 3-20-2000 by Ord. No. 3-00;
9-5-2001 by Ord. No. 17-01; 10-21-2009 by Ord. No. 11-09]
(1) Accessory buildings and structures shall be located behind the
front facade of the principal building or structure situated on the
same lot. It is the intent of this restriction that accessory buildings
and structures not be perceived as being in front of the principal
building.
§ 225-115 HARDING CODE § 225-116
1:338
(2) All children's play structures, play houses, and tennis or other nontemporary
recreation courts shall comply with all of the setback
limitations of the zone in which the lot is situated.
(3) Swimming pools and pool aprons or decks or patios attached
thereto or associated therewith shall comply with all of the setback
limitations of the zone in which the lot is situated.
(4) Building steps, decks, patios, and terraces shall comply with all of
the setback limitations of the zone in which the lot is situated,
except that pathways or walkways shall be exempt from setback
limitations.
(5) No fence, wall or pillar, regardless of its height, shall be
constructed within 25 feet of the center line of a road or within any
recorded road right-of-way. [Amended 10-19-2015 by Ord. No.
05-15]
(6) Energy-related structures, including but not limited to solar panels,
windmills or turbines, generators, and air conditioning equipment,
shall comply with all of the setback and height limits of the zone in
which the lot is situated, except as provided in § 225-116P. This
limitation shall not apply to the installation of utility transformers,
switches and similar utility equipment required to provide
underground utility services to a lot or lots. [Amended
11-16-2011 by Ord. No. 12-11]
E. Split lots. When a lot contains land in two zones, the structures and
uses within each zone shall conform to all the requirements of that
zone; provided, however, that the land in the other zone may be
included in determining whether all minimum requirements are met. In
a lot which is split between a residential zone and a nonresidential
zone, no structure or use within the residential zone portion of the lot
may be accessory to any nonresidential structure or use within the
nonresidential zone portion of the lot and the lot area within the
residential zone portion shall not be included for purposes of
determining lot coverage and the floor area ratio with respect to
nonresidential structures and uses. [Amended 9-5-2001 by Ord. No.
17-01]
F. Lots divided by municipal boundaries. Where a Township boundary line
divides a lot, a building permit may be issued for that portion of the
building to be erected within the Township on such lot, provided that
the lot, viewed without regard to the location of the boundary line,
complies with the lot size requirements of this Part 3, Zoning, and there
is also compliance with the use and bulk regulations of this chapter.
G. Corner lots and lots with more than one road frontage. With respect to
yard requirements, corner lots or lots with frontage on more than one
road shall be subject to front yard setback requirements for all portions
of the lot having frontage on a road. Rear yard setback requirements
§ 225-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-116
1:339
shall apply to the remaining yard areas that do not have road frontage.
[Added 11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 13-99]
H. Building height shall be measured in accordance with the definition of
"height of building" contained in § 225-5 of this chapter. Except as
indicated below, the maximum height of buildings permitted in each
zone shall include all portions of the roof such as dormers, turrets,
domes and other architectural features. [Amended 9-21-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-11; 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 04-16]
(1) Residential uses. Chimneys, radio and television antennas, and
satellite receivers located upon or attached to a roof of a structure
used for, or accessory to, a residential dwelling may extend an
additional eight feet above the top of the roof. In all residential
zones cupolas, spires, belfries and domes are permitted to be
located upon or attached to a roof of a principal structure and shall
comply with the following:
(a) The permitted structures may extend not more than 10 feet
above the maximum permitted building height.
(b) Weathervanes and similar attachments may extend above a
cupola, spire, belfry or dome, limited to no greater than three
feet above said appurtenance.
(c) The number of permitted rooftop structures shall not exceed
three for the principal dwelling.
(d) The structure shall not be lighted, it shall not be habitable
space and shall not house mechanical equipment for any
purpose; except mechanically or electrically operated louvers
for ventilation are permitted.
(e) The total area occupied by such rooftop structures shall not
exceed 150 square feet or 10% of the total roof area at plan
view, whichever is smaller.
(2) Nonresidential uses. Mechanical equipment, water towers,
chimneys, radio and television antennas, satellite receivers, and
like appurtenances located upon or attached to the roof of a
structure used for nonresidential purposes may extend an
additional eight feet above the top of the roof. In the B-2 and OB
Zones, mechanical equipment may extend an additional 10 feet
above the top of the roof.
(3) Houses of worship. Spires, belfries and domes constructed as part
of a house of worship may extend to a maximum of 60 feet above
the average preconstruction or finished grade, whichever is lower.
(4) Barns. The height of a barn shall be limited as follows:
(a) A barn located in the RR and R-1 Zone that is used exclusively
for agricultural purposes and/or for keeping/boarding horses
§ 225-116 HARDING CODE § 225-116
1:340
shall be limited in height to 35 feet. Cupolas, spires, belfries
and domes are permitted to be located upon or attached to a
roof subject to the provisions listed in Subsection H(1)(a) to (d)
above.
(b) The permitted structures may extend not more 10 feet above
the maximum permitted building height. A barn that is not
used exclusively for agricultural purposes and/or for keeping/
boarding horses shall comply with the height limitations for
accessory structures in the zone in which it is situated. In all
residential zones cupolas, spires, belfries and domes are
permitted to be located upon or attached to a roof subject to
the following:
[1] Weathervanes and similar attachments may extend above
a cupola, spire, belfry or dome, limited to no greater than
three feet above said appurtenance.
[2] The structure shall not be lighted, it shall not be habitable
space and shall not house mechanical equipment for any
purpose, except that mechanically or electrically operated
louvers for ventilation are permitted.
(5) The height limitations of this subsection shall not apply to public
buildings.
I. No aviation facilities. An aviation facility, such as an airport, heliport,
helipad or landing strip, shall not be considered a permissible accessory
use for purposes of this Part 3, Zoning, and is prohibited in all zones in
the Township.
J. Compliance with bulk standards. The following shall be applicable to all
lots in all zoning districts: [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
10-17-2007 by Ord. No. 12-07]
(1) Upon application for a subdivision, site plan or building permit,
each lot shall comply with the minimum lot size, minimum setbacks
and other applicable requirements of the zoning district in which
the property is situated.
(2) When calculating minimum lot size requirements, as well as lot
coverage and building area limitations, lot size shall not include the
area of any land between road lines or the land area comprising the
flag staff portion of a flag lot.
K. Great Swamp Watershed Overlay Zone. Site improvements within any
subdivision of land or site plan for residential development undertaken
within the area designated as the Great Swamp Watershed Overlay
Zone shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
applicable special area standards of this chapter and the applicable
provisions of the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards,
N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq. [Added 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 2-98]
§ 225-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-116
1:341
L. Right to farm. Farming or the operation of a commercial farm shall be a
permitted use in all zones subject to the conditions and standards set
forth in this chapter. [Amended 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 7-00]
(1) The owner or operator of a commercial farm which conforms to the
agricultural management practices recommended by the State
Agriculture Development Committee and adopted pursuant to the
provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act, P.L. 1968, c. 410
(N.J.S.A. 52:14B-1 et seq.), or whose specific operation or practice
has been determined by the appropriate county board, or if no
county board exists, the State Agriculture Development
Committee, to constitute a generally accepted agricultural
operation or practice, and all duly adopted applicable federal or
state statutes, rules and/or regulations, and which does not pose a
direct threat to public health and safety may:
(a) Produce agricultural and horticultural crops, trees and forest
products, livestock and poultry and other commodities as
described in the Standard Industrial Classification for
agriculture, forestry, fishing and trapping.
(b) Process and package the agricultural output of the commercial
farm.
(c) Provide for the operation of a farm stand or farm market in
zoning districts where permitted as a principal use or as a
conditional use, including the construction of a building or
structure for such purpose and parking areas in conformance
with the applicable standards and conditions of this chapter.
(d) Replenish soil nutrients and improve soil tilth.
(e) Control pests, predators and diseases of plants and animals.
(f) Clear woodlands using open and other burning techniques,
install and maintain vegetative and terrain alterations and
other physical facilities for water and soil conservation and
surface water control in wetland areas.
(g) Conduct on-site disposal of organic agricultural wastes.
(h) Conduct agriculture-related educational and farm-based
recreational activities, provided that the activities are related
to marketing the agricultural or horticultural output of the
commercial farm.
(i) Engage in any other agricultural activity as determined by the
State Agriculture Development Committee and adopted by rule
or regulation pursuant to the provisions of the Administrative
Procedures Act, P.L. 1968, c. 410 (N.J.S.A. 52:14B-1 et seq.).
(2) Accessory uses and structures. All uses and structures customarily
incidental to farming, agriculture and/or the operation of a
§ 225-116 HARDING CODE § 225-116
1:342
commercial farm and which are conducted in conformance with the
above-cited agricultural management practices shall be permitted
accessory uses in all zones, including but not limited to:
(a) The use of irrigation pumps and equipment.
(b) The application of manure, chemical fertilizers, insecticides,
pesticides and herbicides.
(c) Installation of soil and water conservation practices in
accordance with a conservation plan approved by the Morris
County Soil Conservation District.
(d) Transportation of slow-moving equipment over roads within
the Township.
(e) Utilization of tractors and other necessary equipment.
(f) The employment of farm laborers.
(g) The creation of noise, dust, odors and fumes inherently
associated with such uses.
(h) The conducting of farm practices (excluding operation of farm
markets) at any and all times when necessary.
(i) The raising and keeping of farm animals, including pets,
pastoral farm animals (dairy and beef cattle, sheep and goats),
swine, fowl, horses, ponies and mules, provided that proper
sanitation standards, fencing or enclosures and proper
setbacks from adjoining properties are established.
(3) The manufacture, cultivation or farming of marijuana is prohibited.
[Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 15-18]
M. Tree conservation. The provisions of Article XXI, Tree Conservation,
shall be applicable to all zoning districts and shall be administered
pursuant to the provisions of § 225-111. [Added 5-16-2001 by Ord.
No. 11-01]
N. Steep slope development. All development activity on any lot within the
R-1 and RR Districts shall comply with the steep slope development
regulations in § 225-95. [Added 3-23-2011 by Ord. No. 02-11]
O. Dry well requirements. The construction of new roofed areas, patios
and recreation courts shall be subject to dry well installation
requirements to the extent required by § 225-186A and § 225-187,
subject to the waiver provisions in § 225-184. [Added 3-23-2011 by
Ord. No. 02-11]
P. Emergency generators. Notwithstanding the provisions of
§ 225-116D(6), emergency generators may be located outside the
building envelope on lots in the RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and B-2 Zoning
§ 225-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-116
1:343
Districts subject to the following: [Added 11-16-2011 by Ord. No.
12-11]
(1) These provisions only apply to emergency generators having: a
rated generating capacity not exceeding 20 kilowatts; a footprint,
including the pad, not exceeding 20 square feet; and a height not
exceeding four feet.
(2) The emergency generator shall not be located in front of the
principal building on the lot.
(3) No portion of the emergency generator and pad may be located
more than 20 feet from the principal structure on the lot.
(4) The emergency generator shall not be located within the required
tree conservation area on a lot in the RR, R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4
Zoning District as follows:
(a) RR and R-1 Zones:
[1] Minimum side and rear setbacks: 25 feet.
[2] Minimum front setback: 50 feet (but not in front of the
principal structure).
(b) R-2 Zone:
[1] Minimum side setback: 10 feet.
[2] Minimum rear setback: 12.5% of the lot depth up to 25
feet.
[3] Minimum front setback: 25 feet (but not in front of the
principal structure).
(c) R-3 Zone:
[1] Minimum side setback: five feet.
[2] Minimum rear setback: 12.5% of the lot depth up to 12.5
feet.
[3] Minimum front setback: 17.5 feet (but not in front of the
principal structure).
(d) R-4 Zone:
[1] Minimum side setback: four feet.
[2] Minimum rear setback: 12.5% of the lot depth up to 12.5
feet.
[3] Minimum front setback: 12.5 feet (but not in front of the
principal structure).
§ 225-116 HARDING CODE § 225-116
1:344
§ 225-116.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 15-18]
(5) The emergency generator shall have minimum setbacks in the B-2
Zone of 25 feet from all lot lines (but not in front of the principal
structure).
(6) The emergency generator shall be appropriately screened/buffered
by nondeciduous plantings (subject to seasonal planting timing
limitations) and/or a fence so as to minimize visibility from all lot
lines from which the setback is less than the minimum applicable to
buildings and structures.
Q. Gates, pillars, and posts constructed adjacent to driveways shall satisfy
the following requirements: [Added 10-19-2015 by Ord. No. 05-15]
(1) The placement of driveway gates, pillars and posts shall be no less
than 40 feet from the edge of pavement on the opposite side of the
roadway, public or private, to which the driveway is connected.
When measuring the distance to a gate, the distance shall be the
minimum distance permitted by the gates' swing path. Posts no
larger than four inches by four inches when used solely to support
gate control devices or intercoms shall be no less than 11 feet from
the nearest edge of roadway pavement.
(2) The space between driveway gates, pillars and posts shall provide a
minimum clear width of 20 feet. Fences adjoining, abutting or
connected to driveway gates, pillars and posts shall not interfere
with the area required for the turning radii of the Township's
emergency apparatus.
(3) No part of a fence, driveway gate, pillar or post may be located
within a public right-of-way. This restriction includes, but is not
limited to, any keypad or other type of gate controller or intercom
or similar appurtenance.
(4) Fences shall be set in accordance with § 225-116D(5) of the Code.
(5) All gates controlled by a security feature must have a keyless entry
system for EMS vehicles. This feature shall be tested and approved
by the Township Police Department prior to final inspection by the
Construction Department.
(6) Exterior lighting fixtures mounted on any post, pillar, or gate shall
comply with Chapter 233 of the Code.
A. Where a use is not specifically permitted in a zone district, it is
prohibited. This proscription may not be altered, modified or varied,
except through amendment of this chapter. No deviation may be
authorized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) or § 7-33C(1)(c) and (d) of
this Code.
§ 225-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-116.1
1:345
B. Marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana production or manufacturing
facilities, marijuana testing facilities and retail marijuana stores,
whether for medicinal or recreational purposes, and such facilities or
stores that manufacture, sell or dispense marijuana related
paraphernalia, are prohibited in all zone districts.
§ 225-116.1 HARDING CODE § 225-116.1
1:346
ARTICLE XXIII
Signs
§ 225-117. Illuminated signs. [Amended 12-9-1996 by Ord. No.
8-96]
§ 225-118. Prohibited sign features.
No sign shall contain features which:
A. Illuminated signs, wherever permitted, shall not be illuminated by
means of any flashing, occulting or moving light, nor shall any sign be
erected which either mechanically, by shimmering or any other means,
gives the appearance of a flashing, occulting or moving light. Unless
stipulated as nonilluminated, all signs permitted in this chapter may be
illuminated in accordance with the standards set forth in this
subsection.
B. No internally illuminated signs shall be permitted in any zoning district.
Illumination shall be from an indirect source only, such as a spotlight or
by means of backlighting. Backlighted signs shall be constructed so
that the lighting itself is not directly visible and so that it shines upon
the building at a level sufficient only to display the sign's features. Any
lighting fixtures mounted on the sign or in the vicinity thereof for such
purposes shall be installed so as to be shielded or unobtrusive to avoid
glare and/or hazards to pedestrians and motorists.
C. No sign shall contain or be illuminated by the use of neon tubes except
as necessary for backlighted signs and, in any event, no neon tubes
shall be visible.
D. Any illuminated sign shall be designed and installed such that the light
produced shines only upon the premises where they are located;
exterior lighting shall be shielded where necessary to avoid glare or
other hazards to motorists, pedestrians or adjoining properties. To the
extent feasible, exterior sign lighting shall be directed so that such
illumination is confined primarily to the sign features and not portions
of the building facade unrelated to the sign.
E. For all nonresidential uses, regardless of the zoning district in which
the property is situated, sign illumination shall be limited to the hours
of operation of the business or use of the property, or shall be
terminated by 10:00 p.m., whichever is later.
A. Purport to be or resemble official traffic signs or signals or which bear
the words "stop," "go slow," "caution," "danger," "warning" or similar
words; or which by reason of size, location, movement, content,
coloring or manner of illumination may be confused with or construed
as a traffic control device; or which obstruct from view any pedestrian
or vehicular traffic or any street sign or signal.
§ 225-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-118
1:347
§ 225-119. Special sign requirements.
B. Advertise or publicize an activity, use, business, product, real estate or
service not located or conducted on the premises upon which such
signs are located except for real estate open house directional signs.
C. Emit smoke, visible vapor, particles, sound or odor or use exposed
incandescent bulbs or neon tubes or use mirrors or other similar
reflecting devices as further stipulated in § 225-117 above.
D. Are located in a public right-of-way or approved sight easement except
as may be approved by the Board of Adjustment or Planning Board or a
subcommittee thereof having site plan approval powers.
E. Consist of banners, posters, flags (except United States flags),
pennants, ribbons, streamers, strings of light bulbs (except seasonal
decorations) and spinners.
F. Are portable or temporary, such as sandwich boards or signs fixed on a
movable stand, not permanently embedded in the ground or supported
by other objects, mounted on wheels or on a movable vehicle or
temporary structure, except for real estate open house directional
signs. No motor vehicle of any type shall be parked on any property so
as to be construed as an advertisement of the business of said premises.
G. Are located, painted on or affixed to trees, benches, water towers,
storage tanks, smokestacks, utility poles or other similar structures.
[Amended 10-16-2002 by Ord. No. 13-02]
H. Are placed on a flat roof or above the roof peak of a building or
structure or project from the facade of a structure as an overhang.
Facade signs shall not protrude from the building wall more than one
foot.
I. Are attached to or placed on merchandise or materials stored or
displayed outdoors and visible from a public street or other public area.
J. Contain changeable copy, except business directories, churches,
schools, public buildings, museum signs, gas price signs and except as
provided in § 225-120C(2)(g). [Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No.
13-90]
A. Measurement of sign area.
(1) The square footage of a sign consists of the space within a single
continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of such sign. Such
perimeter shall not include any structural framing elements lying
outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of
the display. Structural framing or supports for signs shall only be as
large as is necessary to support the sign.
(2) Cutout letters, numbers, and logos or other sign features supported
independently on a facade sign shall be measured by the smallest
§ 225-118 HARDING CODE § 225-119
1:348
rectangle which encompasses all of the letters, numbers, logos or
other sign features.
(3) Freestanding, hanging, facade or window signs which have no
background shall be measured by the smallest rectangle which
encompasses the total display, exclusive of any supporting
members used solely for such purpose.
(4) Signs consisting of opaque or translucent backgrounds and having
cutout displays shall be measured by the outside dimensions of the
background.
(5) Freestanding signs carrying the same message on two sides shall
be considered a single sign, provided that the two sides are parallel
and of the same size. In the case of multifaceted signs, the area
shall cumulatively include all the faces of the sign.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, no facade or buildingmounted
sign on a building intended for a single tenant shall be of such
width so as to exceed 25% of the width of the building facade upon
which it is located.
C. The construction materials of signs erected or constructed for
nonresidential uses shall be chosen to complement the architecture and
building materials of the building on which it is located or to which it is
related, as well as the surrounding buildings.
D. Termination of use. At the termination of any nonresidential use for
which a sign(s) has been erected or constructed on the premises, the
permission to display such sign(s) associated with such use shall
terminate. Signs shall be removed from any location where the sign no
longer relates to an activity conducted on the premises by the property
owner and at the owner's expense within 30 days following the
termination of use of the property. In the event that the sign is not
removed within said 30 days, the Township may remove the sign at the
expense of the property owner and for this amount the Township shall
have a lien in the amount of the removal cost.
E. Construction signs. One temporary nonilluminated sign is permitted
identifying the name of the property owners and/or the block and lot
identifying the property where construction, alteration or the repair of
buildings and/or accessory structures is taking place. The area of the
sign shall not exceed two square feet (288 square inches) and the
maximum height (to the top of the sign) shall not exceed four feet above
ground level. No sign shall be located closer than eight feet from the
roadway pavement. All such signs shall be removed upon completion of
work. A permit shall be obtained from the Construction Official prior to
installation of any construction sign. [Amended 10-16-2002 by Ord.
No. 13-02]
F. Real estate signs.
§ 225-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-119
1:349
(1) Temporary nonilluminated signs advertising the sale, rental or
leasing of the premises on which they are located shall be
permitted, provided that such signs shall be removed within 30
days of the closing of the sale of the premises or execution of a
lease agreement, as the case may be, and further provided that the
size and number of all such signs shall comply with the limitations
specified below:
(a) In the R-1, RR, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zones, no sign shall exceed five
square feet and no sign shall be installed so as to exceed a
maximum height (to the top of the sign) of three feet above
ground level. Only one sign per lot shall be permitted, except
that in the case of a lot served by a common or shared driveway
or unnamed private road serving more than one dwelling, one
sign may be placed at the driveway or road entrance and one
additional sign may be placed at the property for sale.
[Amended 12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96; 10-16-2002 by
Ord. No. 13-02; 11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04]
(b) In the B-1 Zone, no sign shall exceed six square feet. Only one
sign per lot shall be permitted.
(c) In the B-2 and OB Zones, no sign shall exceed eight square
feet. Only one sign per each unrelated business entity shall be
permitted, provided that the combination of all such signs shall
not exceed 24 square feet.72
(d) In the PRN-RC Zone, no sign shall exceed five square feet. Only
one sign per lot or unit shall be permitted, except that, if a lot
or unit does not front on a public road, one such additional sign
may be located at the main entrance of the development. The
installation of signs shall be governed by the bylaws of any
homeowners' association, if stricter than these standards. On
vacant land or in new developments, one sign advertising the
sale or lease of the premises on which it is located shall be
permitted, not to exceed 12 square feet in area. Such a sign
shall be no closer than eight feet from the edge of the roadway
pavement.
(2) No person shall display a real estate "for sale" or "for lease" sign to
be used in connection with nonresidential property unless such
person shall have first obtained a permit therefor from the
Construction Official. A permit is not required to display a "for sale"
or "for lease" sign in connection with residential property.
(3) Open house signs. One separate, temporary, nonilluminated sign
advertising an open house event for the sale or lease of real estate
may be placed on the subject premises in addition to any real estate
72.Editor's Note: Original Subsection F(1)(d), regarding signs in the F, R and C Zones, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 225-119 HARDING CODE § 225-119
1:350
§ 225-120. Sign limitations by zone district.
In addition to the other provisions of this article, the following regulations
shall apply to the installation of signs in each respective zone:
sign already situated thereon, provided that said sign is situated
on the property no more than two days prior to the planned open
house event, and provided further that said sign is removed
immediately thereafter (not later than 6:00 p.m.). All such signs
shall not exceed five square feet in area. Directional signs may only
be installed on the same day as the event and must be removed
immediately thereafter (not later than 6:00 p.m.). The placement
of signs hereunder shall be governed by the bylaws of any
homeowners' association if stricter than these standards.
G. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment may require the installation of additional traffic
and/or public safety signs pursuant to the powers of site plan and
subdivision approval and/or in conjunction with the review and
approval authority of the County of Morris and the New Jersey
Department of Transportation.73
A. R-1, RR, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Residence Zones. [Amended 12-9-1996 by
Ord. No. 8-96; 11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04]
(1) One identification sign per lot shall be permitted not exceeding two
square feet in area, upon which may be displayed the name of the
occupant(s) of the premises, the street number and the name by
which the premises are designated, but such sign shall contain no
advertising. A sign identifying a farm or the sale of farm products
grown on the premises may exceed two square feet, but in no event
shall it exceed four square feet, and only one such sign shall be
permitted per lot in lieu of the sign specified in the first sentence of
this subsection.
(2) No internally illuminated signs shall be permitted, whether
temporary or permanent. Illumination shall be from an indirect
source only. Any lighting fixtures mounted on a sign or in the
vicinity thereof for such purposes shall be installed so as to be
shielded or unobtrusive to avoid glare and/or hazards to
pedestrians and motorists.
(3) No signs other than those hereinabove specified shall be permitted.
(4) No permit shall be required for the installation of any signs in
accordance with residential uses within these zones.
B. B-1 Business Zone.
73.Editor's Note: Original Subsection H, providing real estate sign penalties, which followed
this subsection, is now located at § 225-3I.
§ 225-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-120
1:351
(1) For residential uses, signs may be erected on the premises in
accordance with the regulations in Subsection A above.
(2) For business uses, one identification sign per lot shall be permitted,
not exceeding 10 square feet in area, upon which may be displayed
the name of the business, building or other name by which the
premises are designated, but such sign shall contain no
advertising. If such sign is freestanding, it shall be located no
closer than five feet from the edge of the pavement of the roadway,
but in no event may any such sign be located within the public
right-of-way. Any such sign shall be constructed so that no portion
of the sign exceeds a height of five feet above ground level.
(3) In addition to the above, each separate business within a building
may display one sign, not to exceed two square feet, identifying the
business, number or street, but such sign shall contain no
advertising. Such sign shall be affixed to the principal building in
which the business is located. For businesses located wholly above
the first floor, two such signs may be displayed, one at the first floor
level of the building and one at the entrance to the business above
the first floor.
(4) No sign affixed to a building shall project above or to the sides of a
building, as any form of overhang.
(5) No internally illuminated signs shall be permitted, whether
temporary or permanent. Illumination shall be from an indirect
source only. Any lighting fixtures mounted on a sign or in the
vicinity thereof for such purposes shall be installed so as to be
shielded or unobtrusive to avoid glare and/or hazards to
pedestrians and motorists. [Amended 12-9-1996 by Ord. No.
8-96]
(6) A permit shall be obtained for any business sign from the
Construction Officer.
(7) No sign shall be painted directly on a wall and no sign shall be
permitted in any window area within the B-1 Zone, except that the
hours of operation and credit card acceptance decals may be
attached or adjacent to the principal doorway of a business if, in
total, they do not exceed 1 1/2 square feet.
(8) No signs other than those hereinabove specified shall be permitted.
C. B-2 Business Zone.
(1) For residential uses, signs may be erected on the premises in
accordance with the regulations in Subsection A above.
(2) For business signs, whether erected on a lot or structure or affixed
or painted on a building wall, the following requirements shall
§ 225-120 HARDING CODE § 225-120
1:352
apply, and a sign permit shall be obtained from the Construction
Officer:
(a) On a lot with one business, there shall be permitted one
freestanding double-faced sign not in excess of 16 square feet
or not more than two individual signs (affixed to the building)
which shall not in the aggregate exceed 24 square feet.
[Amended 12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96]
(b) On a lot with multiple businesses, there shall be permitted one
freestanding double-faced sign not in excess of 16 square feet,
limited to an overall height of eight feet, on which may be
listed a directory of all the businesses situated on said lot, and
not more than two individual signs for each separate business
or proprietorship (affixed to the building in which such
business or proprietorship is located) containing the name of
such business or proprietorship, which shall not in the
aggregate exceed 12 square feet. [Amended 5-21-2003 by
Ord. No. 10-03]
(c) All signs shall refer only to uses on the premises, shall be no
closer than five feet from the edge of the pavement of the
roadway (but in no event may any such sign be located within
the public right-of-way) and shall not create a traffic hazard.
Sign structures shall not extend higher than the principal
building on the premises. Sign lighting shall not be of the
flashing, occulting or moving type, shall not create glare and
shall be only white in color.
(d) Each parking area shall be permitted one entrance sign, one
exit sign and one sign indicating the parking area for each
business or proprietorship, each of which shall be unlighted
and not in excess of three square feet in area. [Amended
12-9-1991 by Ord. No. 8-91]
(e) Each business or proprietorship shall be permitted three
additional signs attached to the building, each of which shall
be unlighted for the purpose of describing the goods or
services sold by said business or proprietorship, and shall not
exceed four square feet in area.
(f) Each business or proprietorship shall be permitted one
unlighted sign attached or adjacent to the principal doorway of
said business or proprietorship for the purpose of specifying
the business hours of said business or proprietorship and
credit card information, which shall not be in excess of three
square feet in area.
(g) In addition to the sign(s) permitted pursuant to Subsection
C(2)(a) of this section, above, one additional unlighted
freestanding double-faced sign shall be permitted per lot,
§ 225-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-120
1:353
whether such lot contains one business or multiple businesses.
Such sign shall not exceed five square feet in area, nor shall
it be installed so as to exceed five feet in height from ground
level unless topographic conditions, as determined by the
Construction Official, would preclude its visibility. In such
instances, the maximum height shall be 10 feet above ground
level at the installation point. Such sign may contain
interchangeable elements or changeable copy and shall
otherwise comply with all of the provisions of this Part 3,
Zoning. [Added 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 13-90]
(h) No signs other than those hereinabove specified shall be
permitted.
D. OB Office Building Zone.
(1) For residential uses, signs may be erected on the premises in
accordance with the regulations in Subsection A of this section,
above.
(2) For office and business uses, signs may be erected on the premises
in accordance with the regulations in Subsection C of this section,
above.
E. AH Affordable Housing Zone. One double-faced ground-mounted
freestanding sign not to exceed 16 square feet per side shall be
permitted to identify the development. Illumination shall be from
ground-mounted lights only. Additional nonilluminated signs may be
erected on the site as needed to identify development facilities, building
and/or unit locations, parking restrictions, and traffic circulation.
[Added 4-20-2005 by Ord. No. 5-0574]
F. PL Public Land Zone. All signs erected or installed in this zone shall
comply with Subsection A of this section, above, except that a permit
shall first be obtained from the Construction Officer.
G. PRN-RC Planned Residential Neighborhood Residential Cluster Zone.
(1) Signs shall not be in the road right-of-way or obstruct sight
distance on a road or driveway.
(2) For single-family detached dwelling units, signs may be installed in
accordance with the requirements of the R-1, RR, R-2, R-3 and R-4
Residence Zones. [Amended 11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04]
(3) For units within a planned residential neighborhood or residential
cluster, each tenant and/or owner shall be permitted either one
identification sign not exceeding two square feet in area or such
signs as are allowed pursuant to the planned residential
neighborhood regulations, if any, whichever is more restrictive.
74.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection E, regulating signs in the F,
R and C Farm, Recreation and Conservation Zone.
§ 225-120 HARDING CODE § 225-120
1:354
Shielded illumination is permitted for such signs, but such
illumination may not exceed 25 watts. [Amended 8-10-1992 by
Ord. No. 4-92]
(4) No signs other than those hereinabove specified shall be permitted.
H. Conditional uses. Signs for conditional uses shall conform to the
applicable requirements of this article except as may be specifically
provided for conditional uses.
§ 225-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-120
1:355

ARTICLE XXIV
R-1 Residence Zone
§ 225-121. Use regulations.
A. Primary uses. No building, structure or premises shall be used, erected
or altered except for the following permitted uses:
(1) One single-family private dwelling per lot.
(2) Farming. [Amended 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 7-00]
(3) Boarding stables for horses on lots of 10 acres or more.
B. Accessory uses are permitted but strictly limited to the following:
(1) Home occupations shall be permitted in accordance with the
following standards:
(a) The principal use of the premises shall be residential.
(b) The person engaged in such home occupation shall be a
resident on the premises.
(c) There shall be no nonresident partners, employees or helpers
working on the premises and no more than one business visitor
at any one time.
(d) Such home occupation may be pursued in the principal
dwelling or in a secondary building which is accessory to the
principal building, provided that the area to be used in
conjunction with such home occupation shall be no more than
the lesser of:
[1] Twenty-five percent of the total floor area of all structures
on the lot; or
[2] Five hundred square feet, unless all structures in which
said home occupation is conducted are located at least 200
feet from all property lines, in which event 750 square feet
shall be allowed.
(e) The pursuit of such home occupation shall not generate traffic
in greater volume than would normally be experienced in a
residential neighborhood.
(f) No equipment or process shall be used in such home
occupation which creates noise, glare, fumes, odors, electrical
interference or other nuisance factors detectable to the normal
senses or to radio or television sets off the lot.
(g) No sign shall be utilized to identify the home occupation and
there shall be no identification of such home occupation upon
§ 225-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-121
1:357
any mailbox located upon the premises, driveway or street
right-of-way.
(h) It is the intent of this section that the residential character of
the Township's residential/rural zones be retained, and that the
privacy, quality and serenity of residential properties be
protected. There shall be no external modification of buildings
or property, no conduct of visible or audible activities, or use of
property that would violate this intent.
(i) In the event that more than one home occupation is conducted
on the premises, all of the limitations of this Subsection B(1)
shall apply as if only one such home occupation is being
conducted thereon.
(2) Accessory residences. In the R-1 and RR Zones only, and not in any
other zone, on lots of six acres or more, one accessory residence
may be established in accordance with the applicable conditional
use provisions contained in Article XXXVII. No accessory building
or structure shall be used as a residence unless it meets the
applicable criteria and conditions contained in said Article XXXVII.
[Amended 6-5-2002 by Ord. No. 6-02; 11-3-2004 by Ord. No.
22-04]
(3) In the R-1 zone, an affordable accessory residence, as defined in
this chapter, may be established on a lot comprised of at least five
acres in accordance with the provisions of Article XLII. [Added
6-10-2009 by Ord. No. 5-09]
C. Accessory structures. Accessory structures are permitted but strictly
limited to the following:
(1) Detached garages or carports.
(2) Utility, tool or wood sheds.
(3) Barns and farm outbuildings.
(4) Pumps or spring-houses.
(5) Swimming pools and pool houses.
(6) Tennis courts and platform tennis courts.
(7) Studios and workshops.
(8) Greenhouses.
(9) Dog houses or other animal structures. [Amended 3-20-2000 by
Ord. No. 3-00]
(10) Stables.
(11) Children's playhouses, excluding treehouses.75
§ 225-121 HARDING CODE § 225-121
1:358
§ 225-122. Bulk regulations.
(12) Energy-related structures including but not limited to solar panels,
windmills or turbines, generators, and air-conditioning equipment.
[Added 10-21-2009 by Ord. No. 11-09]
A. Minimum lot size: three acres in area.
B. Minimum area to be free of development constraints. The lot shall be of
such size and shape that its building envelope shall contain an area
square in shape and at least 100 feet on each side. Such area shall be
free of: [Amended 7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 2-94; 11-13-1995 by Ord.
No. 8-95; 3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 4-04; 4-20-2005 by Ord. No.
5-05]
(1) Easements that restrict development; and
(2) Wetlands, wetland transition areas, open water bodies or courses
and any required setback from all such areas, as approved by
NJDEP; and
(3) Special flood hazard areas (FEMA-designated one-hundred-year
special flood hazard areas).
(4) In addition, the difference in elevation between diagonal corners of
the one-hundred-foot-by-one-hundred-foot square shall not exceed
21 feet as measured by a field survey. A lot with a one-hundred-foot
square within the building envelope which is not free of such areas
and elevation differences, and which was lawfully approved and
created prior to July 11, 1994, is to be considered a conforming lot
with respect to this provision. A lot for which a building envelope
contained a rectangular area at least 100 feet long and at least 50
feet wide on May 6, 1985, is to be considered as a conforming lot
with respect to all of the requirements of this subsection.
C. Maximum building area. The maximum permitted building area shall be
as follows (see Subsection F for additional restrictions): [Amended
2-8-1999 by Ord. No. 2-99]
(1) Three percent of lot area for lots where any structures are set back
less than 150 feet from the front lot line or road line; or
(2) Four percent of lot area, provided that all structures are set back a
minimum of 150 feet from the front lot line or road line, except that
for flag lots, the minimum setback to all lot lines shall be 100 feet.
(3) Accessory structures constructed prior to 1945 shall not be
included in the calculation of building area as set forth above,
except that any portion of a building used as an accessory
75.Editor's Note: Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(12), regarding satellite antenna
receivers in the R-1 Zone, as amended 10-3-1994 by Ord. No. 7-94, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 4-04.
§ 225-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-122
1:359
residence shall be included in the calculation of building area,
and further provided that any such accessory structure shall be
included in the calculation of building area and shall be limited as
set forth above if it has been enlarged or relocated on the property
since 1944. [Added 2-6-2002 by Ord. No. 1-02; amended
10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 06-13]
(4) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in connection with a development
application, the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, as
applicable, may authorize exclusion from the calculation of building
area barns and other accessory structures that contribute to the
Township's rural character. Any future enlargement, relocation or
significant exterior alteration, not including repair or maintenance
activities, of any such accessory structure shall require the entire
accessory structure to be included in the calculation of building
area absent a new determination that the accessory structure as
modified will continue to contribute to the Township's rural
character. [Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 06-13]
D. Maximum height of buildings and structures.
(1) Maximum height of the main building: 35 feet and not more than
2 1/2 stories.
(2) Maximum height of the accessory buildings and structures: 25 feet.
E. Minimum square feet in the main dwelling: 1,200 square feet of livable
floor area space measured at the first-floor level, exclusive of porches
and garages.
F. Minimum setbacks. All structures must be set back at least 100 feet
from any lot line or road line except as modified by the building area
limitations set forth below: [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97]
(1) The minimum setback from the front lot line or road line to all
structures shall be increased to 150 feet when the total building
area on the lot exceeds 3,920 square feet.
(2) In the case of a lot having frontage on more than one road, the
minimum front setback restriction shall apply to all portions of the
lot having frontage on a road.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection F(1) above, in the
case of a flag lot, the minimum setback distance for the front, side,
and rear yards shall be 100 feet. [Added 2-8-1999 by Ord. No.
2-99]
G. Minimum lot frontage: 300 feet. [Amended 6-4-2003 by Ord. No.
12-03; 10-17-2007 by Ord. No. 12-07]
H. Maximum lot coverage: 10%. [Added 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 16-01]
§ 225-122 HARDING CODE § 225-123
1:360
§ 225-123. Supplementary regulations. [Amended 12-12-1988 by
Ord. No. 11-88; 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 4-89]
§ 225-124. (Reserved)
A. Families per dwelling: one.
B. Off-street parking. No motor vehicle, except a private passenger car, no
tractor, no trailer, no semitrailer, no omnibus and no boat, any of which
exceeds 20 feet in overall length or 8,000 pounds in unladen weight,
shall be parked on a lot, unhoused so as to be visible from a public road
or in the front yard.
C. Tree conservation area. In accordance with the provisions of § 225-111,
Tree conservation, there shall be a tree conservation area required
along all perimeter property lines within which no tree measuring eight
inches or greater in diameter at a point 4 1/2 feet above the ground
shall be cut down or removed without a permit therefor except in
accordance with the exemptions provided in § 225-111B(2). The width
of the tree conservation area shall be as follows: [Added 5-16-2001 by
Ord. No. 11-01; amended 9-5-2001 by Ord. No. 17-01; 4-3-2002
by Ord. No. 4-02]
(1) Fifty feet along any portion of the lot bordering a road, whether
public or private.
(2) Twenty-five feet along all other property lines. The flag staff portion
of a flag lot shall be subject to this restriction [see
§ 225-111B(2)(d), exemption for driveway access].
§ 225-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-124
1:361

ARTICLE XXV
R-2 Residence Zone
§ 225-125. Use regulations.
No building or structure shall be erected or altered and no premises shall
be used except for the following permitted uses:
§ 225-126. Bulk regulations.
A. Any primary or accessory use or structure permitted in the R-1
Residential Zone, but not including any use or structure specifically
permitted only in the R-1 and RR Zone. [Amended 10-21-2009 by
Ord. No. 12-09]
B. A boardinghouse or rooming house for not more than two paying
boarders. [Amended 10-3-1994 by Ord. No. 7-94]
A. Minimum lot size: 30,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 120 feet.
C. Maximum building area.
(1) For lots located entirely within the R-2 Zone, the maximum building
area shall be 8% of the lot area but not more than 3,000 square
feet.
(2) For lots located in both the R-2 and R-1 Zones, the maximum
building area shall be limited as follows:
(a) For lots having an area equal to two acres or less, the
maximum building area shall be 5% of the lot area, but not
more than 3,000 square feet.
(b) For lots having an area greater than two acres, the maximum
building area shall be 3% of the lot area where any structures
are set back less than 150 feet from the front lot line or road
line, or 4% of the lot area, provided that all structures are set
back a minimum of 150 feet from the front lot line or road line.
If the total building area exceeds 3,920 square feet, all
structures on the lot shall be set back a minimum of 150 feet
from the front lot line or road line. [Amended 12-6-1999 by
Ord. No. 14-99; 9-5-2001 by Ord. No. 17-01]
(3) Accessory structures constructed prior to 1945 shall not be
included in the calculation of building area as set forth above,
provided, however, that any enlargement of such a preexisting
structure shall be counted in the calculation of building area and
shall be limited as set forth above. [Added 3-20-2000 by Ord. No.
3-00]
D. Maximum height of buildings and structures.
§ 225-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-126
1:363
§ 225-127. Supplementary regulations.
§ 225-128. (Reserved)
(1) Maximum height of main building: 35 feet and no more than 2 1/2
stories.
(2) Maximum height of accessory buildings and structures: 25 feet.
E. Minimum square feet in dwelling: 1,000 square feet of livable floor area
space measured at the first-floor level, exclusive of porches and
garages.
F. Front yard. All structures must be set back at least 50 feet from any
front lot line or road line. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97]
G. Side yards. The width of each side yard must be at least 20 feet, and the
aggregate of both side yards must be at least 40% of the lot width.
H. Rear yard: a minimum depth of 25% of lot depth, up to 50 feet from any
rear lot line or road line. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97]
I. Minimum lot frontage: 120 feet.
A. Families per dwelling: one.
B. Off-street parking regulations are the same as those in the R-1
Residence Zone. [Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 4-89]
C. Tree conservation area. In accordance with the provisions of § 225-111,
Tree conservation, there shall be a tree conservation area required
along all perimeter property lines within which no tree measuring eight
inches or greater in diameter at a point 4 1/2 feet above the ground
shall be cut down or removed without a permit therefor except in
accordance with the exemptions provided in § 225-111B(2). The width
of the tree conservation area shall be 1/2 of the minimum required
front, side and rear yards, as follows: [Added 4-3-2002 by Ord. No.
4-02]
(1) Front: 25 feet.
(2) Side: 10 feet.
(3) Rear: 12.5% of lot depth, up to 25 feet. [Amended 6-4-2003 by
Ord. No. 12-03]
(4) The flag staff portion of a flag lot shall be subject to these
restrictions [see § 225-111B(2)(d), exemption for driveway access].
§ 225-126 HARDING CODE § 225-128
1:364
ARTICLE XXVI
R-3 Residence Zone
§ 225-129. Use regulations.
Use regulations are the same as those in the R-2 Residence Zone.
§ 225-130. Bulk regulations.
A. Minimum lot size: 15,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 85 feet.
C. Maximum building area. Whether the lot is wholly within the R-3 Zone
or is split between R-3 and any other zone, the maximum building area
shall be based upon the size of the entire lot and be limited by both the
percentage and square footage restrictions in accordance with the
schedule hereinbelow: [Amended 2-6-2002 by Ord. No. 1-02]
Lot Size
Maximum
Building
Area
(percent)
Maximum
Building Area
(square feet)
Less than 15,000 square feet 15% 1,500
15,000 to 37,500 square feet 10% 2,250
37,501 to 87,120 square feet (2
acres)
6% 2,500
More than 2 acres but less than 3
acres
3% 3,000
3 acres or greater Comply with
§ 225-122C
(R-1 Zone)
The maximum
square footage
limit is not
applicable, except
that if the total
building area
exceeds 3,920
square feet, all
structures shall be
set back a
minimum of 150
feet from the front
lot line or road line
D. Maximum height of buildings and structures:
(1) Maximum height of main building: 35 feet and not more than 2 1/2
stories.
§ 225-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-130
1:365
§ 225-131. Supplementary regulations.
§ 225-132. (Reserved)
(2) Maximum height of accessory buildings and structures: 25 feet.
E. Minimum square feet in dwelling: 750 square feet of livable floor area
space measured at the first-floor level, exclusive of porches and
garages.
F. Front yard. All structures must be set back at least 35 feet from any
front lot line or road line. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97]
G. Side yards. The width of each side yard must be at least 10 feet, and the
aggregate width of both side yards must be at least 20% of the lot
width.
H. Rear yard. A minimum depth of 25% of the lot depth, up to 25 feet from
any rear lot line or road line. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
9-97]
I. Minimum lot frontage: 85 feet.
A. Families per dwelling: one.
B. Off-street parking regulations are the same as those in the R-1
Residence Zone. [Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 4-89]
C. Tree conservation area. In accordance with the provisions of § 225-111,
Tree conservation, there shall be a tree conservation area required
along all perimeter property lines within which no tree measuring eight
inches or greater in diameter at a point 4 1/2 feet above the ground
shall be cut down or removed without a permit therefor except in
accordance with the exemptions provided in § 225-111B(2). The width
of the tree conservation area shall be 1/2 of the minimum required
front, side and rear yards, as follows: [Added 4-3-2002 by Ord. No.
4-02]
(1) Front: 17.5 feet.
(2) Side: five feet.
(3) Rear: 12.5% of lot depth, up to 12.5 feet. [Amended 6-4-2003 by
Ord No. 12-03]
(4) The flag staff portion of a flag lot shall be subject to these
restrictions [see § 225-111B(2)(d), exemption for driveway access].
§ 225-130 HARDING CODE § 225-132
1:366
ARTICLE XXVII
R-4 Residence Zone
§ 225-133. Use regulations.
Use regulations are the same as those in the R-2 Residence Zone.
§ 225-134. Bulk regulations.
§ 225-135. Supplementary regulations.
A. Minimum lot size: 9,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 65 feet.
C. Maximum building area. The maximum building area shall be limited to
15% and 2,100 square feet. In the case of lots split between the R-4
Zone and any other zone, any building, or portion thereof, located
within the other zone shall comply with the building area limitations of
said zone. [Amended 2-6-2002 by Ord. No. 1-02]
D. Maximum height of buildings and structures:
(1) Maximum height of main building: 35 feet and not more than 2 1/2
stories.
(2) Maximum height of accessory buildings and structures: 25 feet.
E. Minimum square feet in dwelling: 750 square feet of livable floor area
space measured at the first-floor level, exclusive of porches and
garages.
F. Front yard. All structures must be set back at least 25 feet from any
front lot line or road line. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97]
G. Side yards. The width of each side yard shall be at least four feet, and
the aggregate width of both side yards must be at least 20% of the lot
width.
H. Rear yard. A minimum depth of 25% of the lot depth, up to 25 feet from
any rear lot line or road line. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
9-97]
I. Minimum lot frontage: 65 feet.
A. Families per dwelling: one.
B. Location of accessory structures. Accessory structures may occupy the
required rear yard area up to a maximum height of 15 feet, so long as
they are at least 10 feet away from the main building upon the same lot
and at least four feet from the property line. The rear yard area
occupied by such accessory building shall, however, be included in
§ 225-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-135
1:367
computing the maximum percentage of the lot area which may be built
upon. [Amended 10-21-2009 by Ord. No. 12-09]
C. Off-street parking regulations are the same as those in the R-1
Residence Zone. [Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 4-89]
D. Tree conservation area. In accordance with the provisions of § 225-111,
Tree conservation, there shall be a tree conservation area required
along all perimeter property lines within which no tree measuring eight
inches or greater in diameter at a point 4 1/2 feet above the ground
shall be cut down or removed without a permit therefor except in
accordance with the exemptions provided in § 225-111B(2). The width
of the tree conservation area shall be 1/2 of the minimum required
front, side and rear yards, but not less than four feet, as follows:
[Added 4-3-2002 by Ord. No. 4-02]
(1) Front: 12.5 feet.
(2) Side: four feet.
(3) Rear: 12.5% of lot depth, up to 12.5 feet. [Amended 6-4-2003 by
Ord. No. 12-03]
(4) The flag staff portion of a flag lot shall be subject to these
restrictions [see § 225-111B(2)(d), exemption for driveway access].
§ 225-135 HARDING CODE § 225-135
1:368
ARTICLE XXVIII
AH Affordable Housing Zone, TH-1 Townhouse Zone 1, AHO-1
Affordable Housing Overlay Zone 1 and AHO-2 Affordable Housing
Overlay Zone 2
[Added 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 7-96; amended 11-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 13-99; 5-21-2008 by Ord. No. 6-08; 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 06-18]
§ 225-136. Use regulations: AH Affordable Housing Zone.
No building, structure or premises shall be used, erected or altered except
for the following principal and accessory uses:
§ 225-137. Density and bulk regulations: AH Affordable Housing
Zone.
A. Principal permitted use. On a site consisting of at least five acres,
affordable housing shall be permitted in single-family, two-family or
multifamily dwellings, including a residential dwelling for an on-site
resident manager. All dwellings shall be designed as complete
individual living units containing a kitchen, at least one full bathroom,
and the bedroom mix in accordance with these regulations.
B. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Garages and off-street parking facilities.
(2) Administrative offices for an on-site resident superintendent,
property manager, or Township personnel.
(3) Sewage treatment facilities, including one or more pumping
stations serving the principal use.
(4) Storage and maintenance areas or buildings.
(5) Storage areas for solid waste and recycling.
A. Maximum gross residential density: four units per acre.
B. Minimum open space: 20% of the site area.
C. Maximum height of all principal structures: 35 feet.
D. Maximum height of detached accessory structures: 25 feet.
E. Setbacks. No structure shall be located within 50 feet of a public road
right-of-way line, an adjoining residential lot or residential zoning
district.
F. Minimum frontage on a public road: 50 feet.
G. Minimum distance between principal buildings: 20 feet, except that the
distance may be reduced by the Planning Board in connection with site
plan approval in cases where buildings are at angles to one another.
§ 225-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-137
1:369
§ 225-137.1. Use regulations: TH-1 Townhouse Zone 1.
No building, structure or premises shall be used, erected or altered except
for the following principal and accessory uses:
H. Minimum distance between principal and accessory buildings: 15 feet.
I. Maximum number of units per building: eight units.
J. Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards.
K. Bedroom distribution. Affordable housing shall be designed so as to
incorporate the following bedroom distribution:
(1) The combination of efficiency and one-bedroom units shall be at
least 10% but not more than 20% of the total number of affordable
units.
(2) At least 30% of all affordable units shall contain two bedrooms.
(3) At least 20% of all affordable units shall contain three bedrooms.
(4) In determining bedroom distribution, fractions shall be rounded to
the nearest whole number.
A. Principal permitted use: A maximum ninety-six-unit inclusionary
development shall be permitted. The market rate units shall be singlefamily,
twin house and/or townhouse dwellings as defined in § 225-5,
Definitions, of the Township land development ordinance. The
affordable units may be permitted as either townhouses or stacked
flats. A residential dwelling in a townhouse or multifamily structure
may include an on-site resident manager. All dwellings shall be
designed as complete individual living units containing a kitchen, at
least one full bathroom and the bedroom mix in accordance with these
regulations. Sixteen dwelling units shall be designated as affordable
housing units and shall comply with the affordable housing regulations
set forth in this chapter, including any supplemental regulations and
requirements. The affordable units may be for sale or rental and shall
be integrated into the development as stacked flats as generally
reflected on the concept plan which is attached to the executed first
amended and restated settlement agreement as Exhibit A.
B. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Garages and off-street parking facilities.
(2) Administrative offices for an on-site resident superintendent,
property manager, or Township personnel.
(3) Sewage treatment or conveyance facilities, as appropriate,
including one or more pumping stations serving the principal use.
(4) Storage and maintenance areas or buildings.
§ 225-137 HARDING CODE § 225-137.1
1:370
§ 225-137.2. Density and bulk regulations: TH-1 Townhouse Zone 1.
(5) Storage areas for solid waste and recycling.
(6) Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to the principal
use such as fencing and signs.
C. Steep slopes. The provisions of Article XVIII, Steep Slopes, do not apply
in the TH-1 Townhouse Zone 1.
A. A maximum of 96 units, of which 16 units shall be affordable.
B. Minimum open space: 20%.
C. Maximum height of all principal structures: 45 feet/three stories.
D. Maximum height of detached accessory structures: 15 feet, except that
a community center for the development may have a maximum height
of 25 feet.
E. Maximum impervious coverage: 55%.
F. Building setbacks: Minimum perimeter setback shall be 20 feet, except
that any setback to a municipal boundary may be reduced to 10 feet.
G. Minimum distance between principal buildings: 20 feet, except that the
distance may be reduced by the Planning Board in connection with site
plan approval in cases where buildings are at angles to one another.
H. Minimum distance between principal and accessory buildings: 15 feet.
I. Maximum number of units per building and building length: 10 units
with a maximum building length of 192 feet.
J. Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards.
K. Landscaping buffers: Minimum perimeter landscape buffer is five feet,
except that it shall be 10 feet when adjacent to a single-family use or
zone.
L. There shall be no means of ingress or egress to or from Blackwell
Avenue or to and from Sand Spring Road.
M. Affordability controls:
(1) All affordable units shall include the required bedroom distribution
and be governed by controls on affordability and affirmatively
marketed in conformance with the UHAC regulations or any
successor regulation, with the exception that in lieu of 10% of
affordable units in rental projects being required to be at 35% of
median income, 13% of affordable units in such projects shall be
required to be at 30% of median income, and all other applicable
law.
§ 225-137.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-137.2
1:371
§ 225-138. AHO-1 Affordable Housing Overlay 1 Zone. [Added
1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 05-19;77 amended 8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
14-19]
(2) Each affordable unit created in this zone shall remain subject to
affordability controls for a period of at least 30 years from the date
that a certificate of occupancy is issued for each of the affordable
units and in accordance with applicable law, pursuant to the terms
of the UHAC compliant deed restriction(s) to be filed for such units
in the form approved by the Township of Harding's Administrative
Agent.
N. Concept plan: The site plan shall be generally consistent with the
concept plan attached as Exhibit A to the first amended and restated
settlement agreement, dated February 12, 2018, by and between the
Township of Harding and S/K Mt. Kemble Associates, LLC.76
A. Purpose. The purpose of the AHO-1 Affordable Housing Overlay 1 Zone
is to permit the construction of special needs housing on Block 46.01,
Lot 7, in the B-2 Business Zone. This implements a portion of the
Township's adopted Housing Element/Fair Share Plan. The underlying
zoning remains in effect and any use permitted in the B-2 Zone
continues to be permitted.
B. Principal permitted use. No building, structure or premises shall be
used, erected or altered except for the following principal and
accessory uses: income-restricted special needs housing. The
underlying B-2 uses continue to be permitted.
C. Accessory uses permitted.
(1) Garages and off-street parking facilities.
(2) Administrative offices for an on-site resident superintendent,
property manager, or Township personnel.
(3) Sewage treatment or conveyance facilities, as appropriate,
including one or more pumping stations serving the principal use.
(4) Storage and maintenance areas or buildings.
(5) Storage areas for solid waste and recycling.
(6) Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to the principal
use, such as fencing and signs.
D. Bulk and supplementary regulations. The B-2 bulk regulations in
§§ 225-146 and 225-147 shall apply, except that the minimum side yard
76.Editor's Note: Said documents are on file in the Township offices.
77.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 225-138, Affordable housing
regulations.
§ 225-137.2 HARDING CODE § 225-138
1:372
§ 225-139. AHO-2 Affordable Housing Overlay 2 Zone. [Added
1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 05-1978]
setback shall be 30 feet and the minimum rear yard setback shall be 50
feet.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the AHO-2 Affordable Housing Overlay 2 Zone
is to provide mechanisms for partially addressing the Township's
affordable housing obligation consistent with the adopted Housing
Element/Fair Share Plan. The overlay zone permits mixed-use
development with either a 15% or 20% affordable housing set-aside in
the southern portion of the B-2 Business Zone, OB Office Building Zone,
and R-1 Residence Zone along Route 202/Mount Kemble Avenue. The
underlying zoning remains in effect and any use permitted in the
underlying zones continues to be permitted. The properties subject to
the AHO-2 Affordable Housing Overlay 2 Zone are shown on the
amended Zoning Map of the Township of Harding.
B. Principal permitted uses. No building, structure or premises shall be
used, erected or altered except for the following principal and
accessory uses: mixed-use inclusionary development with commercial
ground floor uses permitted by B-2 Business Zone. Commercial ground
floor uses permitted by the underlying zoning shall be required. Up to
two floors of residential development shall be permitted subject to the
density provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the appropriate
inclusionary zoning set-aside. The sites may be developed through
adaptive reuse of the existing buildings, adaptive reuse and expansion
of existing buildings, or the demolition and construction of new mixeduse
buildings. The uses of the underlying zones continue to be
permitted.
C. Accessory uses permitted.
(1) Garages and off-street parking facilities.
(2) Administrative offices for an on-site resident superintendent,
property manager, or Township personnel.
(3) Sewage treatment or conveyance facilities, as appropriate,
including one or more pumping stations serving the principal use.
(4) Storage and maintenance areas or buildings.
(5) Storage areas for solid waste and recycling.
(6) Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to the principal
use, such as fencing and signs.
D. Maximum residential densities.
78.Editor's Note: this ordinance also repealed former § 225-139, Supplemental regulations
and requirements, as amended 5-21-2008 by Ord. No. 6-08.
§ 225-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-139
1:373
(1) The following blocks and lots may be developed at a maximum
density of six units per acre for lots under two acres; eight units per
acre for existing lots or assembled lots that are parcels two acres or
more in size:
(a) Block 32, Lots 1.02, 4, 9.01 and 9.02;
(b) Block 46.01, Lots 8 and 9.01;
(c) Block 33.03, Lots 3.02, 4, 8, 18, and 19.
(2) The following blocks and lots may be developed at a maximum
density of eight units per acre for sale projects or 10 units per acre
for rental projects:
(a) Block 46.01, Lots 9 and 10; and
(b) Block 46.01, Lot 13.02.
E. Bulk and supplementary regulations.
(1) Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 140 feet.
(3) Maximum building height: three stories and 37.5 feet above mean
grade.
(4) Minimum setbacks: 50 feet from any lot line.
(5) Maximum total lot coverage: 45%.
(6) Section 225-147, Supplementary standards, for the B-2 Zone shall
apply.
F. Affordable housing requirements. An affordable housing set-aside of
20% for sales projects and 15% for rental projects is required.
§ 225-139 HARDING CODE § 225-139
1:374
ARTICLE XXIX
B-1 Historic Village Business Zone
[Amended 12-12-1988 by Ord. No. 11-88; 4-10-1989 by Ord. No
4-89; 12-9-1996 by Ord. N. 8-96; 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97;
3-20-2000 by Ord. No. 2-00; 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 7-00;
11-19-2003 by Ord. No. 19-03; 4-21-2004 by Ord. No. 8-04;
4-20-2005 by Ord. No. 5-05; 6-15-2005 by Ord. No. 10-05; 3-15-2006
by Ord. No. 7-06; 11-16-2011 by Ord. No. 13-11]
§ 225-140. Purpose of the B-1 Historic Village Business Zone.
§ 225-141. Permitted uses.
In the B-1 Historic Village Business Zone, no building, structure or premises
shall be used, erected, or altered except for the following permitted uses:
A. Purpose. The intent of the B-1 Historic Village Business Zone is to
provide for a mix of residential and small-scale neighborhood and
family-oriented business and service uses compatible with the historic,
compact, and pedestrian-friendly village development pattern that is
characteristic of New Vernon Village. The entire B-1 Historic Village
Business Zone is included in the New Vernon Historic District and the
designated New Vernon Redevelopment Area. There is no public water
supply or public wastewater disposal (sewer) system in New Vernon
Village. All uses must rely on private wells and must meet on-site
wastewater disposal (septic system) requirements approved by the
Harding Township Board of Health. The requirements and limitations
stipulated herein are intended to carry out the policies and standards
set forth in the New Vernon Village Redevelopment Plan, adopted by
Ordinance 6-03, as may be supplemented from time to time.79 It is also
the intent of this article that, to the extent feasible, the integrity of
historic or contributing buildings listed in the Historic Survey for the
New Vernon Historic District be retained in their historic setting and
that new development be undertaken in a manner compatible with the
character of the New Vernon Historic District.
B. Encouraging redevelopment. The Township of Harding encourages
redevelopment within the B-1 Historic Village Business Zone.
Applicants are requested to contact the Township Administration for
assistance and to participate in the Township's small business initiative.
A. Residential uses:
(1) A single-family dwelling, which may include accommodation for up
to two boarders.
(2) A rental dwelling as an accessory and subordinate use on the same
lot as a single-family dwelling.
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 302, Art. I, New Vernon Village Redevelopment Plan.
§ 225-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-141
1:375
(3) A two-family dwelling, also known as a "duplex" or "twin house"
(see definitions, § 225-5).
(4) Residential dwellings shall be permitted in conjunction with
nonresidential uses in the same building or on the same lot.
B. Nonresidential uses:
(1) Business, administrative and professional offices.
(2) Businesses that provide retail sales and services.
(3) Banks and other businesses that provide insurance, financial or
investment services.
(4) Public and quasi-public offices or facilities, including a post office,
library, educational institution, and a senior citizens' activity
center.
(5) Delicatessens, coffee shops, and restaurants, in accordance with
the following limitations:
(a) The total number of seats for patrons shall be limited by the
capacity of the site to accommodate water supply and satisfy
waste disposal requirements to service all uses on the
premises in compliance with Board of Health regulations.
(b) Outdoor dining shall be permitted in accordance with the
following additional limitations:
[1] The number of seats provided for patrons outside the
building shall be limited to 1/3 of the total seating
permitted on the premises for patrons.
[2] Outdoor dining shall be permitted in front of a building
only if situated on a covered porch or attached patio.
[3] Outdoor dining shall be permitted to the side or rear of a
building; provided, however, that after 6:00 p.m., outdoor
dining shall only be permitted in these areas if there is no
adjacent residence within 50 feet of the outdoor dining
area.
[4] The placement of tables, benches and chairs outside the
building shall comply with all setback and buffer
requirements. Bench seating shall be calculated on the
basis of one seat for every 25 inches.
[5] Umbrellas shall be permitted.
[6] There shall be no outdoor food preparation, cooking or
storage.
§ 225-141 HARDING CODE § 225-141
1:376
§ 225-142. Prohibited uses.
The following uses shall be prohibited in the B-1 Historic Village Business
Zone:
[7] All outdoor dining areas shall be kept free of debris and
solid waste, except in appropriate containers. All outside
waste containers shall be emptied periodically as
necessary and in any event by the close of business each
day.
(c) The service of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in
accordance with the terms of any license, or if the
establishment is not licensed, the business owner may allow
patrons to bring their own beverages in conformance with any
applicable state or municipal regulations.
C. Accessory buildings and structures. Accessory buildings and structures
that are incidental to the principal use(s) shall be permitted. All
accessory buildings and structures, including garages, sheds and
storage buildings, shall comply with yard setbacks, floor area ratio
limitations and buffer requirements. With the exception of HVAC and
energy-related structures or generators, no accessory building or
structure shall be located closer than 10 feet to any other structure. No
accessory building or structure shall exceed 25 feet in height.
D. Mixed uses. Mixed uses (residential and nonresidential uses) are
encouraged, but not mandated, and shall be permitted in the same
building or on the same lot in order to encourage the retention and
development of residential uses within the B-1 Historic Village Business
Zone.
E. Multiple uses/buildings on a lot. Notwithstanding the provisions of
§ 225-116C of this chapter, multiple uses and multiple buildings shall be
permitted on the same lot, provided that all of the requirements of this
article are met.
F. Storage of vehicles. No lot or parcel of land shall be used as a storage
area for commercial vehicles, except in connection with a permitted
use, and provided it is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of
the property and does not provide a means of advertising or signage.
G. Storage of products. The storage of products within a building in
connection with a permitted use shall be allowed, provided that such
storage is clearly subordinate and incidental to the primary permitted
use.
H. Hours of operation for nonresidential uses. The daily hours of operation
for any nonresidential use in the B-1 Historic Village Business Zone
shall not be prior to 6:00 a.m. or later than 9:00 p.m. Delicatessens,
coffee shops and restaurants shall cease food service by 9:00 p.m., but
may remain open until 10:00 p.m.
§ 225-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-142
1:377
§ 225-143. Bulk regulations.
A. Franchised fast-food restaurants shall be prohibited.
B. No drive-thru facility, window service, or service to patrons in a motor
vehicle shall be permitted in connection with any business. The
limitations of this section, however, shall not be construed so as to
prohibit the installation of a banking institution's ATM machine,
provided that such ATM machine shall only be accessible to
pedestrians, and, further, that the installation of an ATM machine meets
all of the other applicable requirements of this article, including the
limitation on hours of operation stipulated above.
C. No warehousing shall be permitted, except that the enclosed storage,
as an accessory use, of products sold on the premises shall be permitted
in accordance with § 225-141G above.
D. No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
E. The outdoor display of goods shall be limited to the front porch or
attached patio in accordance with applicable safety considerations.
F. No flea markets shall be permitted.
A. Minimum lot size: 9,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 65 feet.
C. Height of principal buildings.
(1) Minimum height: 1 1/2 stories, with two floors above the basement
or slab on grade.
(2) Maximum height: 2 1/2 stories and not more than 35 feet.
D. Front yard. All structures must be set back at least 20 feet from any
front lot line or road line.
E. Side yards. The width of each side yard must be at least six feet, and the
aggregate width of both side yards must be at least 20% of the lot
width. All side yards shall remain unimproved with structures or paved
surfaces but shall be fully landscaped with evergreen plantings of
nursery stock on average at least five feet in height so as to serve as a
buffer to adjoining properties. Whenever parking spaces adjoin the
minimum side yard, the minimum side yard dimension shall be
increased to eight feet to accommodate any vehicle overhang. A
satisfactory surface treatment for the vehicle overhang area shall be
provided so as to minimize any adverse impact on the landscaped area.
Where a side lot line abuts a residence zone or Public Land Zone, the
side yard area shall be increased consistent with the buffer
requirements set forth in this article.
§ 225-142 HARDING CODE § 225-143
1:378
§ 225-144. Off-street parking and loading, pedestrian pathways,
lighting and waste disposal.
It is the intent of this section to require a minimum of off-street parking
on individual sites so as to minimize impervious coverage and mitigate the
F. Rear yard: a minimum depth of 10% of the lot depth or 15 feet,
whichever is greater, from any rear lot line or road line.
G. Minimum lot frontage: 65 feet.
H. Floor area ratio. Except as indicated below, the maximum permitted
floor area ratio for all uses shall be 15%.
(1) Incentive for historic preservation. The maximum permitted floor
area ratio shall be limited to 20% in connection with the
redevelopment of a site which includes the retention or restoration
of a principal building that is listed in the Township's Historic
Survey as historic or as contributing to the historic character of the
New Vernon Historic District, provided its historic integrity is
maintained.
(2) Incentive for affordable housing. The maximum permitted floor
area ratio shall be limited to 20% in connection with the
redevelopment of a site that includes a residential dwelling
intended for rent or for sale to a low- or moderate-income
household meeting state-regulated affordability standards and
requirements. All affordable housing shall be developed and
occupied in compliance with state rules and regulations and shall
be subject to a recorded deed restriction and/or agreement with
the Township of Harding demonstrating compliance with
applicable regulations to ensure affordability controls.
(3) Basement space devoted exclusively to storage, HVAC or other
mechanical equipment shall not be counted in the calculation of
floor area ratio, provided that such areas are not used in the
conduct of business activities or for habitation.
I. Building area. The maximum permitted building area for all uses shall
be 15%.
J. Maximum total lot coverage: 50%.
K. Buffers. Wherever a lot abuts a residential zone or Public Land Zone, a
minimum fifteen-foot-wide landscaped buffer shall be provided along
the lot line adjoining such zone. The buffer shall remain unimproved,
except that said buffer shall be fully landscaped with evergreen
plantings of nursery stock quality averaging at least five feet in height
throughout the area. This requirement may be waived or modified by
the Board where satisfactory evidence is provided to demonstrate that
existing vegetation adequately serves as a buffer. This requirement
shall apply only to nonresidential uses.
§ 225-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-144
1:379
negative impact that large parking lots would have on the character of the
New Vernon Historic District. Shared parking arrangements are strongly
encouraged.
A. Off-street parking requirements. All off-street parking areas shall be
placed behind the front setback line or front elevation of the building
located closest to the road, whichever is located a greater distance from
the road line. Off-street parking on individual sites shall be provided for
various uses as follows:
(1) Office (including medical/dental): 2.2 spaces per 1,000 square feet
of floor area.
(2) Retail/service: 2.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area.
(3) Bank: 3.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area.
(4) Post office: 3.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area.
(5) Deli/coffee shop/restaurants: 3.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
floor area.
(6) Residential uses shall comply with the New Jersey Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS).
B. Shared parking arrangements. The Board may waive some or all of the
parking otherwise required by Subsection A above where an applicant
can demonstrate that adequate parking is available in a shared parking
arrangement with other uses or in connection with municipally
sponsored parking. The Board shall take into consideration, among
other factors, the nature of the business activity, the projected
vehicular trip generation of the proposed use(s), the physical proximity
and relationship of the shared parking arrangement to the proposed
use(s), the current usage of the alternative parking site, and whether it
is reasonably accessible to pedestrians in relation to the proposed
business.
C. Loading and delivery facilities. Adequate provision shall be made for
loading areas for nonresidential uses where needed in connection with
business operations. No permanent space devoted to a loading area
shall be located within the front yard or in front of the building façade
located closest to the street, and all loading areas shall be screened
from view from the public street and from adjoining residential uses.
The Board may require fencing, landscaping, or sound-abatement
techniques to minimize the transmission of noise. There shall be no
loading or delivery activities undertaken at any business establishment
prior to 6:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
D. Pedestrian pathways. Pedestrian pathways may be constructed and
maintained on each lot within the B-1 Historic Village Business Zone in
accordance with the adopted New Vernon Village Redevelopment Plan,
as amended and/or supplemented by ordinance.
§ 225-144 HARDING CODE § 225-144
1:380
E. Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be shielded such that it will not create
glare or shine on adjoining properties. For nonresidential uses, after
9:00 p.m. (10:00 p.m. for food service establishments), only that
lighting deemed by the Board to be necessary for security and
emergency purposes shall be permitted to remain on.
F. Waste disposal. All refuse disposal and recycling areas, generators, airconditioning
units, and any other special utilities or equipment related
to any buildings on the site shall be placed behind the front facade of
the principal building or, in the case of multiple principal buildings, the
building located closest to the street, and all shall be appropriately
screened from view. Refuse disposal and recycling areas shall be
enclosed with a solid wood fence at least six feet in height but not
higher than eight feet. The Board may, at its sole discretion, approve
landscaping in lieu of or in addition to fencing to satisfy the screening
requirement for refuse disposal areas.
§ 225-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-144
1:381

ARTICLE XXX
B-2 Business Zone
§ 225-145. Use regulations.
In the B-2 Business Zone, no building, structure or premises shall be used,
erected or altered except for the following permitted uses:
A. Retail sales or services of the following:
Antiques
Artwork
Banks
Clothing
Drugs and pharmaceuticals
Dry goods
Farm produce, including agricultural and horticultural products, sold
as part of a farm stand or farm market. [Added 12-27-2000 by Ord.
No. 7-00]
Florists
Food
Furniture refinishing
Gifts
Home appliances
Home and farm hardware
Interior decorators
Ladies' hairdressing and men's barbershop
Liquor: off-premises consumption only, except that on-premises
consumption shall be permitted as an accessory use in a restaurant
seating a minimum of 40 persons
Music and musical instruments
Nursery products
Repair of home appliances, including lawn and garden tools, but not
including the repair of licensed motor vehicles
Restaurants: food consumed within the building and not specialty
food stands which do not regularly serve complete meals
Savings and loan institutions
Shoe repair
Small-scale recreation uses such as ballet dancing or classes, yoga,
fencing, gymnastics, and weight-lifting or exercise classes
Sporting goods, including cameras
Swimming pool supplies
§ 225-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-145
1:383
§ 225-146. Bulk regulations.
§ 225-147. Supplementary regulations.
Tailor: not including the washing and/or dry cleaning of clothing on
the premises
Tobacco
Watch repairs
B. Professional office buildings as provided in the B-1 Business Zone.
C. Single-family private dwellings, including a home occupation as a
permitted accessory use.
A. Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet in area.
B. Minimum lot width: 140 feet.
C. Maximum floor area ratio: 8.5% for all uses. For lots containing land in
two or more zones, see § 225-116E. [Amended 12-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 8-96]
D. Maximum height of each building: 25 feet measured at the mean grade
at the front elevation of the building and not more than two stories; and
if the grade at any other elevation of the building is below the mean
grade at the front elevation, 37 1/2 feet measured at the mean grade of
said other elevation and not more than three stories; provided,
however, that the roof of the building shall not extend higher than the
maximum permitted height at the front elevation. The only additional
height which may be used above the foregoing maximum building
height shall be 10 feet for mechanical equipment, which must be set
back at least 10 feet from all sides of the building and screened so as
not to be visible. The front elevation shall be deemed to be the side of
the building facing Route 202.
E. Minimum setbacks. All structures must be set back at least 50 feet from
any lot line or road line, except that with respect to the rear yard of lots
on the west side of Route 202, all structures must be set back at least
75 feet from the rear lot line or road line. [Amended 11-10-1997 by
Ord. No. 9-97]
F. Maximum total lot coverage: 30% of the lot area for all uses. For lots
containing land in two or more zones, see § 225-116E. [Amended
12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96]
G. Minimum lot frontage: 140 feet.
A. Access. Entrances shall be designed for the movement of traffic with
full regard to safety.
B. Parking.
§ 225-145 HARDING CODE § 225-147
1:384
(1) Parking shall be limited to the side and rear yards with a setback
from lot and road lines of not less than 20 feet. [Amended
11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97]
(2) Off-street parking areas. [Amended 12-12-1988 by Ord. No.
11-88; 12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96]
(a) Off-street parking areas shall be established to provide
adequately for employee and customer parking. Parking shall
be required as follows:
[1] For retail business uses, one space for every 200 square
feet of building floor area devoted to retail business space,
excluding permanent storage space.
[2] For office uses, one space for every 250 square feet of
building floor area, excluding covered parking and
permanent storage space.
[3] For restaurants, one space for every three seats.
(b) Off-street parking areas shall be permanently paved in
accordance with the standards contained in Chapter 346,
except that, in connection with site plan approval, the Planning
Board may, in its discretion, relax such pavement standards
upon making one or more of the following findings:
[1] The type or intensity of expected vehicular traffic does not
require strict compliance with such pavement standards;
[2] The soil and terrain of the premises do not require strict
compliance with such pavement standards; or
[3] The interests of the Township would best be served by not
requiring strict compliance with such pavement standards.
(c) The minimum standards for pavement thickness shall be as
specified in § 225-84C(2).
(d) In addition to the parking areas required to be improved as set
forth above for retail and office uses, there shall be provided
and reserved on the site an area of sufficient size to
accommodate additional parking spaces in the event that any
portion of the existing building floor area is converted to retail
or office space from storage or other areas not originally used
for business or office purposes and for which improved parking
has not been provided. The reserved area shall be of sufficient
size to accommodate parking based on the standards set forth
above for retail and office uses, and shall be included in the
calculation and limitation of total lot coverage in the event that
it is improved in the future. Conversion of such portions of the
building to retail or office space and the full improvement of
§ 225-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-147
1:385
such reserved parking areas shall not be undertaken without
first obtaining site plan approval.
C. Storage. No outside storage or display of any equipment (other than
vehicles licensed by the State of New Jersey for use on public roads, the
number of which shall be determined as part of the site development
plan), materials, products or supplies whatsoever shall be permitted,
except that nursery and agricultural products may be displayed out of
doors.
D. Lighting. Exterior lighting shall not create glare and shall be only white
in color. No flashing, occulting or moving lights shall be permitted.
[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 4-89]
E. Drainage. All designs for storm drainage shall comply with Township
standards.
F. Sewerage. Sewer facilities shall conform to the standards of the Board
of Health.
§ 225-147 HARDING CODE § 225-147
1:386
ARTICLE XXXI
OB Office Building Zone
§ 225-148. Use regulations.
In the OB Zone, no building, structure or premises shall be used, erected or
altered except for the following permitted uses:
§ 225-149. Bulk regulations.
A. Office buildings for executive, engineering or administrative purposes.
B. Professional office buildings as provided in § 225-142A(6).80
C. Licensed nursing homes. Such use shall comply with the following
standards: [Amended 11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 13-99]
(1) No building shall be closer than 50 feet to any other building on the
same lot.
(2) There shall be provided off-street parking of at least one space of
200 square feet for every two beds therein, plus one such space for
each staff member and employee, based on the maximum number
on duty at any one time.
D. Retail sales or service uses permitted in the B-2 Business Zone, but only
to the depth of 200 feet measured from the side line of Mt. Kemble
Avenue and subject to the bulk and supplementary regulations of this
article.
E. Single-family private dwellings, including a home occupation as a
permitted accessory use.
A. Minimum lot size: three acres in area.
B. Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
C. Maximum floor area ratio: 16 1/2%.
D. Maximum building height: 25 feet measured from the mean grade at
the front elevation of the building and not more than two stories; and if
the grade at any other elevation of the building is below the mean grade
at the front elevation, 37 1/2 feet measured from the mean grade of said
other elevation and not more than three stories; provided, however,
that the roof of the building shall not extend higher than the maximum
permitted height at the front elevation. The only additional height
which may be used above the foregoing maximum building height shall
be 10 feet for mechanical equipment, which must be set back at least 10
feet from all sides of the building and screened so as not to be visible.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 225-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-149
1:387
§ 225-150. Supplementary regulations.
The front elevation shall be deemed to be the side of the building facing
Route 202.
E. Minimum setbacks. All structures must be set back at least 50 feet from
any lot line or road line. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97]
F. Maximum total lot coverage: 45% of lot area, including the lot area
occupied by all outside parking, driveways, aisles, sidewalks and
similar areas that are improved, other than open or landscaped areas,
whether or not required.
G. Minimum lot frontage: 250 feet.
A. Parking.
(1) Parking shall be limited to the side and rear yards with a setback
from property lines of not less than 20 feet.
(2) Off-street parking regulations are the same as set forth in
§ 225-147B(2) for the B-2 Business Zone. [Amended 12-9-1991
by Ord. No. 8-91]
B. Storage, lighting, drainage and site development plan regulations are
the same as for the B-2 Business Zone. [Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord.
No. 4-89]
§ 225-149 HARDING CODE § 225-150
1:388
ARTICLE XXXII
PL Public Land Zone
§ 225-151. Public land regulations. [Amended 3-17-2004 by Ord.
No. 4-04; 4-20-2005 by Ord. No. 5-05]
In the PL Public Land Zone, the following uses shall be permitted:
administrative buildings and installations, libraries, historical buildings,
cultural or community centers, public schools, parks, playfields,
playgrounds, conservation purposes, recreational uses, educational
facilities, garages to house municipal equipment, or any other public uses,
buildings and structures. In order to preserve historic structures on sites
in the Public Land Zone, the Township Committee may authorize the
renovation and adaptive reuse of existing buildings or properties for use
as office space, museums, or for hosting social functions, cultural or
community events and may arrange for a resident caretaker. In authorizing
such renovation or reuse of buildings or properties, the Township
Committee shall ensure that adequate arrangements are made for off-street
parking, on-site traffic circulation and security.
§ 225-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-151
1:389

ARTICLE XXXIII
RR Rural Residential Zone81
[Added 11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04]
§ 225-152. Use and bulk regulations. [Amended 10-17-2007 by Ord.
No. 12-07]
§ 225-153. Flag lots. [Added 10-17-2007 by Ord. No. 12-0782]
Flag lots may be created in the RR Zone in accordance with the
requirements of this section. These provisions are intended to foster greater
variety in lot sizes and configurations, to minimize the visibility of new
development and its impact on the streetscape through the use of shared
driveways, and to lessen the need for substantial road improvements, tree
removal, and impervious coverage.
A. Primary uses. All permitted primary uses shall be the same as the R-1
Zone.
B. Accessory uses. All permitted accessory uses, including an affordable
accessory residence, shall be the same as the R-1 Zone. [Amended
6-10-2009 by Ord. No. 5-09]
C. Accessory structures. All permitted accessory structures shall be the
same as the R-1 Zone.
D. Minimum lot size: five acres, except in accordance with provisions for
lot-averaged subdivisions in § 225-154.
E. All other bulk requirements and restrictions shall be the same as the
R-1 Zone, except that frontage requirements for flag lots shall be
modified as provided in § 225-153.
F. All lots in the RR Zone shall be subject to the same restrictions and
limitations as the R-1 Zone with respect to the limitation of one family
per dwelling, off-street parking and the establishment of a tree
conservation area along perimeter property lines (see § 225-123).
G. Development rights for nonconforming lots. A dwelling or other
structure situated on an undersized lot located in the RR Zone may be
enlarged, altered or rebuilt, provided said enlargement, alteration or
rebuilding is in conformance with the bulk standards and limitations of
the R-1 Zone and any other applicable regulations of this chapter.
H. Flag lots split by zone lines. A flag lot situated in part within the RR
Zone and in part within another zone shall be treated as if situated
entirely within the RR Zone.
81.Editor's Note: Former Article XXX, F, R and C Farm, Recreation and Conservation Zone, as
amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 9-97 and 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 7-00, was repealed
6-16-2004 by Ord. No. 9-04.
82.Editor's Note: Original § 105-172, Bulk regulations, was incorporated into § 105-171 (now
§ 225-152) 10-17-2007 by Ord. No. 12-07.
§ 225-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-153
1:391
A. Minimum lot area.
(1) The minimum required lot area, as well as lot coverage and
building area limitations for a flag lot, shall be calculated exclusive
of the area contained in the flag staff portion of the lot.
(2) The Planning Board may permit a lot averaged subdivision meeting
the objectives listed in § 225-154A to include one or more flag lots
with a minimum lot area in accordance with the limitations set
forth in § 225-154B, exclusive of the land area contained in the flag
staff portion of the lot.
(3) The minimum lot area for a flag lot that includes an accessory
residence shall be six acres exclusive of the land area contained in
the flag staff portion of the lot.
B. Access. Each flag lot shall have access to a public or private road via a
strip of land, referred to as the "flag staff" portion of the lot, in
accordance with the requirements of this section.
(1) A single flag lot shall include a strip of land (flag staff) with access
to a road, which shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width. If the lot
has sufficient area so as to be subdividable, the flag staff shall be a
minimum of 50 feet in width. This requirement shall not apply if the
lot will be subject to a deed restriction precluding any further
subdivision that would create a new building lot.
(2) Two to four lots may be served by a flag staff, which shall be a
minimum of 50 feet in width, with a shared driveway providing
access to all lots. The flag staff shall be divided equally in fee
ownership among all the lot owners served and configured as flag
staffs to each lot (i.e., if two owners, 25 feet each; if three owners,
16.6 feet each; if four owners, 12.5 feet each). Perpetual access
easements shall be granted to the owners of all of the lots to ensure
that adequate access is provided to each.
(3) Multiple adjacent flag lots shall be prohibited unless served by a
single shared driveway.
C. Shared driveways. In order to minimize the number of new driveways
along roadways, and to lessen impervious coverage and tree removal,
any right-of-way serving two or more flag lots shall contain a shared
driveway providing access to all lots.
(1) All driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the
Township's Code requirements applicable to residential driveways.
(2) The location of each driveway and access to each flag lot shall be
approved by the Board and may not be relocated without the
Board's approval.
§ 225-153 HARDING CODE § 225-153
1:392
§ 225-154. Creative development option (lot-averaged subdivision).
The Board may approve the varying, within a subdivision, of lot sizes
otherwise required by this article (referred to as a "lot-averaged
subdivision"), provided that the following objectives and requirements are
met.
(3) A driveway serving two or more lots shall be designed with
adequate provisions for the ingress and egress of firesafety
equipment.
(4) All shared driveways and other improvements benefiting two or
more lots shall be the subject of a recorded access and
maintenance agreement among the owners of all lots deriving
access and/or benefit therefrom. The agreement shall be subject to
the review and approval of the Board Attorney prior to the signing
of any deed or filing of a plat.
D. Firesafety. Any minor subdivision involving the creation of one or more
flag lots shall comply with the provisions of § 225-75K and the minor
subdivision plat shall contain notes and/or diagrams as necessary to
verify compliance with firesafety requirements. The installation of all
required firesafety improvements shall either be completed or bonded
prior to signing the plat or deed(s) and, in any event, all firesafety
improvements shall be completed prior to the issuance of the first
building permit for any improvements.
A. Objectives. Lot-averaged subdivisions shall be designed and arranged
so as to meet the following objectives, as determined by the Board, in
connection with a subdivision application:
(1) The subdivision layout will preserve rural streetscapes and
promote the preservation of large areas of open space, especially
the highly visible areas along public roadways.
(2) The subdivision layout will promote the preservation of community
character and areas of significant community concern such as
scenic vistas, historic areas and structures and natural resources.
(3) The subdivision layout will preserve stone rows, hedgerows,
mature trees and other natural vegetation, minimize land
disturbance and promote privacy among existing and proposed
residences.
(4) The subdivision layout will establish a variety of lot sizes and foster
variety in building arrangements so as to improve the design of
new development to be more consistent with the Township's rural
characteristics.
(5) The subdivision layout will permit the placement of new roads and
buildings in a manner that is compatible with the characteristics
and environmental sensitivities of the site.
§ 225-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-154
1:393
B. Requirements. All lot-averaged subdivisions shall comply with the
following requirements:
(1) The minimum lot size shall be three acres.
(2) The overall density of development shall average at least five acres
per residential lot, based on the total size of the tract, exclusive of
land devoted to road rights-of-way.
(3) All lots larger than five acres that are part of a lot-averaged
subdivision shall be subject to a permanent deed restriction
precluding further subdivision in perpetuity except lot line
adjustments that do not create any new building lots or alter
compliance with the minimum lot size and density criteria in this
section.
§ 225-154 HARDING CODE § 225-154
1:394
ARTICLE XXXIV
PRN-RC Planned Residential Neighborhood - Residential Cluster
Zone
§ 225-155. Use regulations.
§ 225-156. Dimensional limitations.
For lots with a primary use other than as a planned development, the
dimensional limitations shall be those set forth in Article XXIV for the R-1
Zone. For areas to be used for a planned development, the applicant shall
submit a preliminary site plan application (which shall be subject to final
site plan approval), which may be accompanied by a preliminary subdivision
application if subdivision is required (subject to final subdivision approval).
The preliminary site plan shall show, in addition to the details required
as set forth in Part 2, Development Review, compliance with the following
dimensional limitations:
A. Primary uses. No building or premises shall be used, erected or altered
except for the following uses:
(1) One single-family detached dwelling on a single lot.
(2) On gross development site areas of 25 acres or more, a planned
residential neighborhood.
(3) On gross development site areas of 25 acres or more, a residential
cluster.83
B. Accessory use regulations are the same as those in the R-2 Residence
Zone, except that boarding or rooming house uses shall not be
permitted. [Amended 10-3-1994 by Ord. No. 7-94]
A. Minimum gross development site area: 25 acres.
B. Maximum residential density: four dwelling units per acre of gross
development site area.
C. Minimum common open space for active recreation: 20% of the gross
development site area.
D. Minimum diameter of circle which shall be inscribed in the open space
area: 350 feet.
E. Minimum net residential lot area:
(1) Single lot in planned residential neighborhood: 11,000 square feet.
(2) Single lot in residential cluster: 8,700 square feet.
F. Minimum lot frontage:
83.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(4), regarding farms, truck gardens, etc., which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 7-00.
§ 225-155 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-156
1:395
(1) Single lot in planned residential neighborhood: 85 feet.
(2) Single lot in residential cluster: 75 feet.
(3) Townhouse lot in planned residential neighborhood: 20 feet.
G. Maximum floor area ratio of gross development site area: 20%.
H. Maximum floor area ratio of net residential site area: 27%.
I. Maximum height of buildings and structures:
(1) Maximum height of main buildings: 35 feet and not more than 2 1/2
stories.
(2) Maximum height of accessory buildings and structures: 25 feet.
J. Minimum square feet in dwelling unit. [Amended 2-8-1999 by Ord.
No. 1-99]
Number of
Bedrooms
Minimum Total
Minimum Net
Habitable Floor
Area
(square feet)
Minimum Total
Floor Area in
Multifamily
Dwelling
(square feet)
Floor Area in
Single-Family
Detached
Dwelling
(square feet)
1 600 660 720
2 900 990 1,080
3 1,200 1,320 1,440
4 1,600 1,760 1,920
5 2,000 2,200 2,400
NOTES:
The following notes apply only to the above chart (§ 225-156J):
Note 1: Net habitable floor area includes the finished and heated
area of a dwelling unit that is fully enclosed by the inside
surfaces of walls, windows, doors and partitions, and has a
headroom of at least 6 1/2 feet, including working, living,
eating, cooking, sleeping and related household spaces on
living or working floors, such as hallways, vertical circulation,
service and storage, but excluding garages, carports, parking
spaces and unfinished attics, basements and cellars.
Note 2: In addition to net habitable floor area, minimum total floor
area includes, but is not limited to, areas for utilities,
recreation and dead storage space, but excludes parking. This
related space may be located either adjacent to habitable floor
area or in basements, attics or accessory buildings adequately
equipped for the intended purpose, and within 100 feet of the
dwelling unit served.
§ 225-156 HARDING CODE § 225-156
1:396
§ 225-157. Design standards.
K. Minimum bedroom size, exclusive of closet: 150 square feet.
L. Maximum length of any building: 160 feet.
M. Minimum setback between the line of a lot occupied by a single-family
detached dwelling existing at the time of filing the site plan application
and the nearest building in a planned development: 75 feet.
N. Minimum setback for a single-family detached dwelling from the road
line and from the boundary line of an adjoining tract of a planned
development: 25 feet.
O. Except as provided in Subsection M above, the minimum setback from
the side line: 10 feet.
P. Except as provided in Subsection M above, the minimum setback from
the rear line: 20 feet.
A. The following design standards shall apply to all dwellings and lots in a
planned development:
(1) All accessory buildings on a lot shall be included in the calculation
of floor area ratio and subject to all other dimensional limitations of
§ 225-156.
(2) Off-street parking of automobiles and other vehicles belonging to
the owner or tenant of the premises is permitted, provided that:
(a) No boat or commercial vehicle may be parked in the front yard.
(b) Any boat or commercial vehicle exceeding seven feet by seven
feet by 20 feet shall be concealed from public view by a
permanent structure.
(c) Signs on any boat or commercial vehicle may not exceed two
square feet.
(3) Pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall be provided, either
separately or together in the discretion of the Board, and shall be
separated from vehicular circulation, either in a separate right-ofway
or by curbing, grass strips, planting or other protective
barriers.
(4) Fences and walls not over seven feet in height may be erected
anywhere on a lot. A chain-link or other secure-type of fencing
shall, in the discretion of the Board, be provided on all or part of the
perimeter of a planned residential neighborhood or residential
cluster.
(5) Adequate lighting fixtures for walks, steps, parking areas,
driveways, streets and other facilities shall be provided at locations
to assure the safe and convenient use of these facilities. Fixtures
§ 225-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-157
1:397
shall be placed and designed in keeping with the character of
the project and be adequately shaded to screen the windows of
dwelling units, both on and off the site, from the direct rays of light
from the fixtures. Exterior lighting shall not create glare and shall
be only white in color. No flashing, intermittent or moving lights
shall be permitted. No bare bulb, tube or highly reflective surface
shall be visible from any window or from any point on the public
right-of-way. See § 225-85 of this chapter for further standards.
[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 4-89]
(6) Air-conditioning equipment in excess of 25,000 BTUs per hour shall
be screened for aesthetic and acoustical purposes. No other sound,
except that normally incidental to family living or other permitted
uses or property maintenance, shall be audible across a property
line, as required by Chapter 258 of this Code. [Amended
4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 4-89]
(7) All solid trash storage and disposal facilities shall be screened from
public view. [Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 4-89]
(8) All outside areas and equipment for the hanging of laundry or the
outside airing of laundry shall be screened from public view.
[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 4-89]
(9) All utilities except high-voltage electric primaries over 30,000 volts
shall be installed underground. Such primaries may be on poles,
but, if so, wires shall be placed in a vertical plane, one above the
other, without cross arms, and transformers must be either at
grade or underground. Such lines shall be located in easements at
rear property lines with road crossings kept as few and as close to
right angles as possible. [Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 4-89]
(10) Roads and other utilities shall be as specified in Article XV of this
chapter.
(11) Natural features. [Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 4-89]
(a) To the fullest extent feasible, existing natural features shall be
preserved.
(b) No permanent or intermittent natural watercourse or spring
shall be relocated or interfered with.
(c) No structure shall be located within 50 feet of the center line of
a stream.
(d) No natural vegetation shall be disturbed except in accordance
with a site plan approved by the Board, which shall specify the
maximum area within which clearing is proposed.
(e) On a sloping site, buildings should be placed on the highest
possible elevation to enjoy the best light and view, and existing
tree growth and rock outcrops should be preserved.
§ 225-157 HARDING CODE § 225-157
1:398
B. The following design standards shall apply only to planned residential
neighborhoods and residential clusters:
(1) In a planned residential neighborhood, floor areas shall be used in
a variety (as approved by the Board) of the following dwelling types
or sizes: single-family detached dwellings; residential clusters of
single lots for single-family detached dwellings; twin houses and
townhouses, provided that, in all planned residential
neighborhoods, there shall be single-family detached dwellings.
The distribution of dwelling units by size in a planned residential
neighborhood may conform to the following table, or any
modification thereof, provided that the average number of
bedrooms per unit is not less than 2.3 nor more than 2.5:
Distribution
(percent)
Size of
Dwelling
(number of
bedrooms) Building Type
25% to 30% 1 1-story townhouses, 2-story
walk-ups
25% to 30% 2 Townhouses, detached singlefamily
dwellings
25% to 20% 3 Townhouses, twin houses or
detached single-family
dwellings
25% to 20% 4 or more Detached single-family
dwellings only
(2) In a planned residential neighborhood, the aggregate floor area,
together with all required parking spaces not under a roof,
permitted on the total tract may be concentrated on portions of the
tract (the net residential site area) so as to provide permanent open
space on the remainder of the tract. [Amended 2-8-1999 by Ord.
No. 1-99]
(3) In a residential cluster of single lots for single-family detached
dwellings, the lots may be reduced in size as shown in the
dimensional limitations, but the permitted floor area, together with
all required parking spaces not under a roof, shall remain the same
as if the lots were not reduced in size and the number of lots may
not exceed that shown to be permissible in a conventional plan by a
trial sketch layout that must be submitted at the time of the filing of
the application. [Amended 2-8-1999 by Ord. No. 1-99]
(4) Wherever appropriate to the intended uses, the site plan of the
tract shall divide such uses into visually small groups by such
features as quadrangles, loops, cul-de-sacs and courts. Efforts shall
be made to have abutting structures within and without the zone of
a similar scale and type. However, to enhance the variety and
§ 225-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-157
1:399
attractiveness of the development, monotonous repetition of
elements shall be avoided. To avoid a view of more than three
identical structures from any single point on a road, the use of
curved roads, a variety of architectural design and variable
landscape layout, garden walls and gates may be required. In
townhouse buildings, no more than four units shall be in a straight
line, and no more than eight units shall be contiguous. The planes
of other straight facades shall be no more than 80 feet in length
without at least a four-foot break.
(5) Privacy within structures having more than one dwelling unit of
two or more bedrooms shall be protected by the following
provisions:
(a) Every unit must have direct access to the ground without
sharing a hallway, stairway, elevator or fire escape with
another unit.
(b) No unit or portion thereof may be placed above another unit or
portion thereof.
(c) Lateral sound protection between units shall be provided by
construction of a sound transmission barrier at least
equivalent to that of an eight-inch solid masonry wall.
(d) No window shall be visible from another in a different
structure at a distance of less than 20 feet, and no bedroom or
living room windows of one unit may look into those of another
unit a distance of less than 60 feet.
(6) When buildings are too close to each other, or too high, or when a
wing of the same building is too close to a window, the amount of
light and natural ventilation is curtailed. Light and air shall be
furnished to windows in living rooms and bedrooms in accordance
with the following schedule of minimum sky exposure, light and air,
and all other requirements of said schedule shall be met:
(a) Minimum window area shall be required in every living or
sleeping room equal to at least 10% of the floor area of such
room.
(b) Each window shall be provided with natural light and
ventilation as follows: consider the center of the window sill as
the center of a one-hundred-eighty-degree arc swung
horizontally outward from the plane face of the wall; within the
middle 60° of this one-hundred-eighty-degree arc, no
obstruction (facing the building or part thereof or a wing or
court wall of the same building) may be higher above the
window sill at any point than 1/2 its horizontal distance from
the window sill. These provisions do not apply to overhanging
eaves or canopies on the same wall as the window. They also do
not apply to second windows in a room, nor to the excess area
§ 225-157 HARDING CODE § 225-157
1:400
of windows beyond the minimum required 10% of the floor
area.
(7) Every dwelling shall be attached to a public sanitary sewer and
water system.
(8) One parking space, indoor or outdoor, 10 feet by 20 feet, shall be
provided for each bedroom and included as 200 square feet each in
floor area ratio computations. Driveway space may be used to
satisfy the parking space requirement. Parking space must be
graded, accessible and dust-free but need not be paved. No more
than 50% of the required parking spaces shall be paved, unless the
Board is satisfied with the applicant's showing of a need to pave
additional spaces. All parking areas for six or more cars shall be
concealed from public view by permanent structures, such as
masonry garden walls, landscaped earth berms or green chain link
fences screened by suitable landscaping of such height as to ensure
§ 225-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-157
1:401
§ 225-158. Open space regulations.
that cars parked therein will not be visible from nearby public
roads and walks of residences existing at the time of the
application. Garages permitted in basement areas beneath twostory
dwelling units shall not be considered a third story.
(9) The Board in site plan review may allow for an increase of 15% in
the concentration of density, or intensity of land use, within one or
more sections of the development, whether it be earlier, later or
simultaneous in the development, than in others. The Board shall
require that a greater concentration of density or intensity of land
use for any section to be developed be offset by a smaller
concentration in any completed prior stage or by an appropriate
reservation of common open space on the remaining land by grant
of easement or by covenant in favor of the Township; provided that
such reservation shall, as far as practicable, defer the precise
location of common open space until an application for final
approval is filed, so that flexibility of development can be
maintained.
(10) The Board shall establish reasonable and orderly timing schedules
on the sequence, type and number of units that may be constructed
annually as part of any planned residential neighborhood or
residential cluster. The timing schedules shall be related to the
availability of utilities, housing demand, and the adequacy of
municipal facilities, including schools, to absorb residents and
traffic loads and similar planning objectives. The timing of
construction of recreational uses before, after or at the same time
as the residential uses shall also be fixed. If the development will be
constructed over a period of years, the Board shall be satisfied as to
the sufficiency of the terms and conditions intended to protect the
interests of the public and the residents and owners of the
proposed development with respect to the total completion of the
development. The Board may require performance and
maintenance guaranties to ensure adherence to construction
schedules and plans.
C. In addition, all of the design standards set forth in Article XVI of this
chapter are hereby incorporated by reference and must be complied
with. Should there be any conflict, however, between the design
standards set forth in this § 225-157 and those set forth in Article XVI,
the standards of the former, and not the latter, shall control. [Added
8-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4-92]
A. The preliminary site plan shall show the size, shape and location of any
open space to be set aside for the use and benefit of the residents of a
planned development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
B. Design standards.
§ 225-157 HARDING CODE § 225-158
1:402
(1) Unless, by reason of the size, location, configuration or
topographical features of the tract to be developed, the Board
requires otherwise, common open space shall be provided in a
single parcel or parcels of not less than 20% of the gross
development site area and in no event less than five acres each,
with a diameter of an inscribed circle of at least 350 linear feet, and
usable for active recreation, which shall mean that such area shall
be graded not more than 3% and seeded. Recreation facilities shall
be located in an area which will not be detrimental to adjacent
property owners or residents by virtue of noise, light, glare or any
other objectionable features emanating from such a facility.
(2) The areas for detention basins and other drainage control devices
for varying water levels do not qualify as open space for active
recreational use. Parts of the gross site area having slopes in
excess of 20% or chronically wet marshland of ecological value
shall be included in the common open space for passive or
conservation purposes but shall also not qualify as the required
open space for active recreational use.
(3) Common open space for active recreation may be used for farming
and agriculture uses or may be improved with facilities for outdoor
sports consistent with the residential character of the
neighborhood, such as, but not limited to, tennis, golf, baseball,
soccer, bicycling, walking paths and the like, and accessory
buildings, such as pavilions and clubhouses. Any such buildings
shall be included with all other buildings in the development in
determining whether the development in its entirety complies with
the applicable floor area ratio. Part of the active recreation site may
also be a lake or a pond having a substantially constant water
level.84
(4) Common open space may be required to be consolidated or linked
with open space in adjacent tracts in different ownerships by filing
deed restrictions running with the land.
(5) All improvements of the common open space(s) as shown on the
approved site plan, including recreational facilities, buildings and
landscaping, shall be completed before a certificate of occupancy
will be granted for related dwelling units in a particular section.
(6) In addition, all of the design standards set forth in Article XVI are
hereby incorporated by reference and must be complied with.
Should there be any conflict, however, between the design
standards set forth in this Subsection B and those set forth in
Article XVI, the standards of the former, and not the latter, shall
control. [Added 8-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4-92]
C. Ownership and maintenance.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 225-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-158
1:403
(1) The developer shall establish an organization for the ownership
and maintenance of any common open space, private roads and offstreet
parking spaces for the benefit of owners and residents of the
development. Such open space and other property shall be held in
perpetuity by the organization subject to an open space easement,
and the developer shall reserve the right to construct necessary
and appropriate structures and facilities for active recreational or
agricultural purposes for the benefit of the owners of the lots in
such tract. Such organization shall not be dissolved and shall not
dispose of any open space, by sale or otherwise, except to an
organization conceived and established to own and maintain the
open space for the benefit of such development, and thereafter
such organization shall not be dissolved or dispose of any of its
open space without obtaining the unanimous consent of the
members of the organization and also without offering to dedicate
the same to the Township. The developer shall be responsible for
the maintenance of any such open space until such time as the
organization established for its ownership and maintenance shall
be formed and functioning and shall be required to furnish a
performance guaranty in an amount to be fixed by the Township
Engineer for such maintenance for a period of two years after the
date of acceptance of all public roads in the development.
(2) In the event that the organization shall fail to maintain such open
space in reasonable order and condition, the Township Committee
may serve written notice upon such organization or upon the
residents and owners of the development setting forth the manner
in which the organization has failed to maintain the open space in
reasonable condition and demanding that such deficiencies be
remedied within 35 days of the date of service. The notice shall also
state the date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held
within 15 days after the date of the notice. At such hearing, the
Township Committee may modify the terms of the original notice as
to deficiencies and may give an extension of time not to exceed 65
days, within which they shall be cured. If the deficiencies set forth
in the original notice or in the modification thereof shall not be
cured within said 35 days or any permitted extension thereof, the
Township Committee, in order to preserve the open space and
maintain the same for a period of one year, may enter upon and
maintain such land. Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in
the public any rights to use the open space except when the same is
voluntarily dedicated to the public by the owners. Before the
expiration of said year, the Township Committee shall, upon its
initiative or upon the request of the organization theretofore
responsible for the maintenance of the open space, call a public
hearing upon 15 days' written notice to such organization and to
the residents and owners of the development, to be held by the
Township Committee, at which hearing such organization and the
residents and owners of the development shall show cause why
such maintenance by the Township shall not, at the discretion of
§ 225-158 HARDING CODE § 225-158
1:404
§ 225-159. Findings for PRN-RC Zones prior to approval.
Prior to approval of any planned development, the Board shall find the
following facts and make the following conclusions:
the Township Committee, continue for a succeeding year. If the
Township Committee shall determine that such organization is
ready and able to maintain such open space in reasonable
condition, the Township shall cease to maintain such open space
at the end of said year. If the Township Committee shall determine
that such organization is not ready and able to maintain such
open space in a reasonable condition, the Township may, in its
discretion, continue to maintain such open space during the next
succeeding year, subject to a similar hearing and determination
in each year thereafter. The decision of the Township Committee
in any such case shall constitute a final administrative decision
subject to judicial review.
(3) The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be assessed
pro rata against the properties within the development that have a
right of enjoyment of the open space in accordance with the
assessed value at the time of the imposition of the lien and shall
become a tax lien on said properties and be added to and be a part
of the taxes to be levied and assessed thereon, and enforced and
collected with interest by the same offices and in the same manner
as other taxes.
(4) It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the common open
space to maintain, in addition to the common open space, all offstreet
parking, private roads, loading and unloading areas,
driveways, aisles, sidewalks and accessways in good condition, free
of litter and refuse, potholes, cracked pavement, ice, snow or other
seasonal hazards and obstructions. All lighting, bumpers,
markings, signs, drainage and landscaping shall be similarly kept
in workable, safe and good condition. If the owner fails to
undertake repairs after proper notification by the Construction
Official, the Township Committee may authorize repairs to be made
at the owner's expense if, in the Township Committee's opinion,
conditions constitute a hazard to the safety and welfare of
Township residents and visitors.85
(5) All documents pertaining to any neighborhood association
responsible for maintaining common open space shall be subject to
review by the Township Attorney, countersigned by the Chairman of
the Board and the Mayor, and recorded as a covenant running with
the land when the final plat is recorded by the County Clerk.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 225-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-159
1:405
§ 225-160. (Reserved)
A. Departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to the Zoning
Ordinance standards pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65c.
B. The proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common open
space are reliable, and the amount, location and purpose of the
common open space are adequate.
C. Provisions through the physical design of the proposed development for
public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the
amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment are
adequate.
D. The proposed planned development will not have an unreasonably
adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established.
E. In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, the terms and conditions intended
to protect the interests of the public and of the residents, occupants and
owners of the proposed development in the total completion of the
development are adequate.
F. Reports have been received from the appropriate Township officials,
agencies and departments.
G. The proposed sanitary public sewer system and other utilities are
adequate.
H. The proposed means to accomplish proper drainage are adequate.
§ 225-159 HARDING CODE § 225-160
1:406
ARTICLE XXXV
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
[Added 7-12-1999 by Ord. No. 8-99]
§ 225-161. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the location and placement of
wireless telecommunications facilities within Harding Township in order to
promote seamless wireless telecommunications for the benefit of the public
in accordance with the Telecommunications Act of 1996. The goals of these
requirements are:
§ 225-162. Use regulations for wireless telecommunications
antennas.
Installation of a wireless telecommunications antenna or antenna array on
an existing building or structure shall be a permitted use in all zone districts
in accordance with the requirements of this section and §§ 225-163 and
225-164, in order to encourage the use of such antennas on or in existing
structures as an alternative to the construction of towers. A wireless
telecommunications antenna or antenna array installed pursuant to this
article shall be attached to an existing building or structure in such a way
so as to minimize its visibility from public or private roads. No more than
one antenna or antenna array shall be attached to a building or structure
and not more than three antennas or antenna arrays shall be permitted on a
lot. An antenna array shall consist of no more than three antennas grouped
A. To limit the impact of wireless telecommunications towers, antennas
and facilities on residential and historic areas and on the rural
character of the Township.
B. To minimize the use of large towers by encouraging the location of
relatively small antennas on or in existing structures, especially on
public or quasi-public property (schools, churches, firehouses, etc.).
C. To locate wireless telecommunications towers in nonhistoric and
nonresidential areas where suitable existing structures to support
antennas are not available.
D. To minimize the total number of wireless telecommunications towers in
the Township.
E. To encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites rather than
construction of additional single-user towers.
F. To encourage users of wireless telecommunications facilities to
configure them in a way that minimizes adverse impact through careful
design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging
techniques.
G. To enhance the ability of the providers of wireless telecommunications
services to provide such services quickly, effectively and efficiently.
§ 225-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-162
1:407
together on a single mounting bracket. Multiple antennas or multiple arrays
of antennas attached to a single building or structure, or towers constructed
for the support of wireless telecommunications antennas, shall be permitted
only as a conditional use in accordance with the provisions of Article
XXXVII.
§ 225-163. Bulk regulations.
The following bulk regulations shall apply to wireless telecommunications
antennas that are not mounted upon towers. Wireless telecommunications
antennas mounted upon towers shall comply with the requirements of
§ 225-175.
§ 225-164. Minor site plan review. [Amended 3-17-2004 by Ord. No.
4-04]
Wireless telecommunications antennas or antenna arrays erected on or in
existing structures shall be subject to minor site plan approval from the
Planning Board. An applicant for minor site plan approval shall submit
evidence to the Board that a license for service has been obtained from
the Federal Communications Commission. If any equipment associated with
an antenna or array is determined to be visually obtrusive or insufficiently
shielded from view, the Planning Board may classify the application as a
major site plan and hold a public hearing in connection therewith.
A. Height and width. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 225-116H, the
maximum height of a wireless telecommunications antenna or antenna
array shall not extend beyond the overall height of the building or
structure to which it is attached by more than 11 feet. An antenna array
shall not exceed 12 feet in width.
B. Location. Any equipment associated with wireless telecommunications
antennas shall be located within or behind existing structures,
buildings or terrain features and shall be landscaped so as to obscure it
from view.
C. Equipment building, cabinet, or locker size limit. Any equipment that is
necessary in association with a wireless telecommunications antenna
shall be housed in a building, cabinet, or locker. If an existing building is
not available or viable to house the equipment, a cabinet or locker of no
more than 1,000 cubic feet in size may be placed on the site consistent
with Subsection B above, subject to the setback limitations of the zone
in which the property is situated. Equipment cabinets or lockers not
enclosed within a building shall not exceed 12 feet in height. A new
building constructed to house the equipment shall comply with the
setback limitations and other bulk requirements governing accessory
structures of the zone in which the property is situated.
§ 225-162 HARDING CODE § 225-164
1:408
ARTICLE XXXVI
Affordable Accessory Residence Program
[Added 6-10-2009 by Ord. No. 5-09; amended 1-28-2019 by Ord. No.
06-19]
§ 225-165. Regulations; administrative agent.
A. The following accessory apartment regulations are hereby enacted for
the purpose of providing additional opportunities for affordable housing
in the Township. All accessory apartment units shall meet the following
conditions:
(1) Accessory apartments shall comply with all applicable statutes and
regulations of the State of New Jersey in addition to local building
codes;
(2) The accessory apartment shall, for a period of at least 10 years
from the date of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the
unit, be rented only to a duly qualified (at the time of initial
occupancy) very-low-, low- or moderate-income household based
upon a rent level calculated to be affordable to such household in
accordance with the criteria set forth in the Township's Affordable
Housing Ordinance;
(3) Affordable rent levels for accessory apartments shall be calculated
to include a deduction for tenant-paid utilities (a utility allowance);
(4) There shall be a recorded deed or declaration of covenants and
restrictions applied to the property upon which the accessory
apartment is located running with the land and limiting its
subsequent rental in accordance with the foregoing requirements
for the entire term of the deed restriction;
(5) Each accessory apartment shall have living/sleeping space, a
complete kitchen and complete sanitary facilities for the exclusive
use of its occupants. It shall consist of no fewer than two rooms,
one of which shall be a full bathroom;
(6) The accessory apartment shall have a separate door with direct
access to the outdoors;
(7) The potable water supply and sewage disposal system for the
accessory apartment shall be demonstrated to be adequate;
(8) The accessory apartment shall be affirmatively marketed
throughout the Township's housing region; and
(9) In the case of an accessory apartment created illegally or without
proper permits which the property owner desires to legitimize as
an accessory apartment under this article, all of the requirements
of this article, shall apply, except that no subsidy shall be provided
by the Township.
§ 225-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-165
1:409
§ 225-166. Where permitted.
B. The Township shall designate an Administrative Agent to administer the
accessory apartment program.
(1) The Administrative Agent shall administer the accessory apartment
program, including advertising, income qualifying prospective
tenants, setting rents and annual rental increases, maintaining a
waiting list, distributing the subsidy, securing certificates of
occupancy, qualifying properties, handling application forms, filing
deed restrictions and monitoring reports and affirmatively
marketing the accessory apartment program;
(2) The Administrative Agent shall only deny an application for an
accessory apartment if the project is not in conformance with all of
the requirements of the municipal development ordinance,
including this section, or the Township's Affordable Housing
Ordinance. All denials shall be in writing with the reasons clearly
stated; and
(3) The Township shall provide at least $20,000, which may be
provided from the Township's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in
accordance with the spending plan, to subsidize the physical
creation of an accessory apartment conforming to all applicable
requirements. Prior to the grant of any subsidy, the property owner
shall enter into a written agreement with Harding Township
insuring that (i) the subsidy shall be used only to create the
accessory apartment and (ii) the apartment shall meet all
applicable requirements of the Township of Harding.
C. Applications for the creation of an accessory apartment shall be
submitted to the Administrative Agent and shall include the following:
(1) A sketch of floor plan(s) showing the location, size and relationship
of both the accessory apartment and primary dwelling or use within
the building;
(2) Rough elevations showing the modification of any exterior building
facade to which changes are proposed; and
(3) A site development sketch showing the location of the existing
dwelling and other existing structures; all property lines; proposed
addition if any, along with minimum building setback lines; the
required parking spaces for both dwelling units; and any man-made
conditions which might affect the proposal.
A. R-1 and RR Zoning Districts. An affordable accessory residence, as
defined in this chapter, shall be a permitted accessory use in the R-1
and RR Zoning Districts on lots comprised of at least five acres,
provided that all of the requirements of this article and Article XLI of
this chapter are satisfied.
§ 225-165 HARDING CODE § 225-166
1:410
(1) An affordable accessory residence may be established within or
constructed as an addition to an existing principal dwelling or
established within or constructed as an addition to an accessory
building or constructed as a new accessory building on the same lot
as a principal single-family residential dwelling.
(2) Except with respect to the minimum lot size stipulated above, the
establishment of a new dwelling to be used as an affordable
accessory residence shall comply with all of the applicable bulk
standards of the zoning district in which the property is situated.
B. All zoning districts. Notwithstanding any other accessory use
regulation in this Part 3, Zoning, in any zoning district, without regard
to the size of the lot, an existing unoccupied space previously used as
separate living quarters and which is subordinate to a principal singlefamily
dwelling or other principal use located on the same property,
may be converted to an affordable accessory residence, as defined in
this chapter, provided that all of the requirements herein and Article
XLI are met.
§ 225-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-166
1:411

ARTICLE XXXVII
Conditional Uses
[Amended 6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 6-89; 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 5-99]
§ 225-167. Purpose and delegation of powers.
§ 225-168. Application requirements.
An application for a conditional use shall be accompanied by a preliminary
site plan application and all required submissions in accordance with
applicable checklists. The application shall include the payment of
application fees for a conditional use and preliminary site plan together
with a technical review fee in accordance with Chapter 171. See also
Chapter 171 respecting the payment of deposits for inspection fees prior
to the performance of inspections of required improvements. The Planning
Board shall grant or deny the application for preliminary site plan approval
and the conditional use (which, if approved, shall be subject to final site
plan approval) within 95 days of submission of a complete application by
the applicant or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
§ 225-169. Standards for all conditional uses.
A. Harding Township is predominantly a low-density residential
community with a traditional rural character and abundant historical
and natural resources. Significant environmental characteristics such
as wetlands and flood hazard areas exist on much of the land in the
Township, which is almost wholly within the watershed of the Great
Swamp National Wildlife Refuge. The local road network is comprised
of marrow, curvilinear roadways that contribute significantly to the
Township's rural and historic character. This article is intended to make
appropriate accommodation for certain uses, activities and structures
that are necessary to serve the needs and conveniences of the residents
of the Township of Harding and the public at large. Such uses are
hereby designated as conditional uses and are subject to the standards
and requirements stipulated in this article because they may be or
become adverse to the public health, safety and general welfare if
located and operated without proper consideration of Master Plan and
zone plan goals, existing conditions, the character of the surrounding
area and the low-density residential nature of the community as a
whole. [Amended 6-20-2001 by Ord. No. 8-01]
B. The Planning Board shall have the power to approve conditional uses in
accordance with the standards and conditions set forth in this article.
A. With the exception of accessory residences in the R-1 and RR Zones, all
conditional uses shall comply with the following, as applicable:
[Amended 6-19-2000 by Ord. No. 4-00; 11-20-2000 by Ord. No.
6-00; 6-20-2001 by Ord. No. 8-01; 6-5-2002 by Ord. No. 6-02;
11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04]
§ 225-167 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-169
1:413
§ 225-170. Sign limitations for conditional uses.
Except as provided elsewhere in this article, all conditional uses shall
comply with the following restrictions concerning the installation of signs
on the premises:
(1) Except as otherwise stipulated in this article, the lot on which any
conditional use is proposed to be situated and all uses, structures
and improvements therein, shall comply with the bulk
requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is situated.
(2) All conditional uses shall be located on a lot or lots with the
required minimum frontage on a county road or state highway and
the driveway(s) serving any conditional use shall be constructed so
that access is provided from such county road or state highway. No
shared driveway or right-of-way serving one or more residential
uses shall be permitted to provide access to a conditional use.
(3) Except as otherwise stipulated in this article, no nonresidential
structure, parking area or activity shall be located within 100 feet
of an adjacent lot in a residential zone or used for residential
purposes.
(4) The Planning Board may require landscaped buffers where it
deems appropriate or where a nonresidential structure or activity
is proposed to be adjacent to a residential lot to mitigate potential
impacts. Landscaping shall be planned in a way that is consistent
with the area surrounding the site and the rural character of the
Township.
(5) The applicant shall secure a written report from the Township
Health Department as to any health or sanitary problems that may
develop or be encountered if the conditional use is granted. Such
problems shall be addressed in accordance with applicable
Township, county and/or state standards.
(6) Unless otherwise expressly permitted for a specified conditional
use, no other principal use shall be established on the same lot as
an authorized conditional use.
B. In addition to the standards in Subsection A above, all uses shall comply
with the requirements below for individual conditional uses. If there is a
conflict between any standard below and Subsection A above, the more
stringent standard shall apply.
A. One freestanding sign not to exceed 10 square feet in area shall be
permitted no closer than five feet from the edge of the roadway
pavement. If located at least 25 feet from the edge of the pavement, a
sign containing up to 16 square feet in area shall be permitted.
B. One sign not to exceed four square feet affixed to the principal
structure or the premises shall be permitted.
§ 225-169 HARDING CODE § 225-170
1:414
§ 225-171. Houses of worship. [Amended 6-20-2001 by Ord. No.
8-01]
A house of worship, as defined in § 225-5, shall be permitted in any zone
in accordance with § 225-169 subject to the conditions and standards listed
below. In addition, accessory uses customary and incidental to the principal
use of the property, including a nursery school, religious education
classrooms, day-care center, parish house, storage building(s) and outdoor
recreational areas, shall be permitted. A catering hall or similar use of the
property shall not be permitted except for catering services directly related
to and associated with religious functions and/or community nonprofit
activities held on the premises. Any lot developed or used as a house
of worship may also be developed or used as an elementary, middle or
secondary (high) school, subject to compliance with all of the requirements
applicable to the development of schools pursuant to § 225-173.
C. If illuminated, all lighting shall be from an indirect light source and
shall be shielded so as to avoid glare and shall not cause a nuisance or
hazard to pedestrians and/or motorists. No neon or internally
illuminated signs shall be permitted.
D. The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment may require such
additional traffic or safety signs as it deems necessary in accordance
with site plan review and approval.
E. Prior to the installation of any signs on the premises, a permit shall first
be obtained from the Construction Official.
F. No additional signs other than that permitted under § 225-120A shall be
permitted in connection with the establishment of an accessory
residence in the R-1 and RR Zones. [Added 6-5-2002 by Ord. No.
6-02; amended 11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04]
A. Bulk requirements. Recognizing that some residential zones in the
Township have small lot area and setback requirements applicable to
permitted uses, it is the intent of this section to allow houses of worship
in all zone districts, subject to the access and frontage limitations of
§ 225-169A(2), while requiring sufficient setbacks to ensure
appropriate buffering to adjoining uses. Lot size and frontage
dimensions for sites located in zone districts other than the R-1 and RR
Zones may need to be greater than the district minimum to
accommodate the planned development or use of the site in order to
meet the yard setback and other requirements of this section.
[Amended 11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04]
(1) Minimum lot size by zone district and uses:
(a) R-1 and RR Zones: six acres.
(b) All other zone districts: the minimum lot size requirement of
the zone district shall apply.
§ 225-170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-171
1:415
(c) If an elementary, middle or secondary (high) school is situated
on the same lot as a house of worship, the minimum lot size
shall be the combination of that required for the house of
worship stipulated herein, plus that required for a school in
accordance with § 225-173C.
(d) In addition, the applicant for a conditional use shall
demonstrate that there will be sufficient lot area to
accommodate the following on the site:
[1] All proposed buildings, including future development,
parking areas and dropoff or stacking lanes if proposed.
[2] All required setbacks.
[3] Landscaping and buffers.
[4] Stormwater management facilities.
(2) Minimum frontage requirement:
(a) For a lot located in the R-1 and RR Zones: 500 feet.
(b) For a lot situated with its frontage in a zone other than the R-1
and RR Zones: 150 feet.
(3) Minimum setbacks of buildings and structures. The following
setback requirements shall apply to all buildings and structures on
the site except a building used solely as a single-family residence.
(a) All setbacks in the R-1 and RR Zones. In the R-1 and RR Zones,
all buildings and structures shall be set back at least 200 feet
from any front, side of rear lot line or road line.
(b) Front setbacks in all other zones. In a zone other than the R-1
and RR Zones, the front setback requirement of the zone shall
apply to all buildings and structures.
(c) Side and rear setbacks in residential zones other than the R-1
and RR Zones. In a residential zone other than the R-1 and RR
Zones, all buildings and structures shall be set back at least 50
feet from any side or rear lot line.
(d) Side and rear setbacks in nonresidential zones. In a
nonresidential zone, the setback requirements of the zone
district shall apply.
(4) Maximum lot coverage: For lots located in the R-1 and RR Zones,
the maximum lot coverage shall be 15%. For lots located in any
other zone, the maximum lot coverage shall be 25%.
(5) Building arrangement and maximum height. The site may be
developed with one building or a group of buildings, provided that
all buildings and structures other than the building used for
§ 225-171 HARDING CODE § 225-171
1:416
religious worship shall be deemed to be accessory buildings and
structures which shall be located behind the front facade of the
principal building used for religious worship. It is the intent of
this restriction that accessory buildings not be perceived as being
in front of the principal building used for religious worship.
Notwithstanding the height restrictions of the zoning district in
which the house of worship is situated, the following limitations
shall apply to the height of all buildings and structures on the site:
(a) The maximum height of the building used for religious worship
shall be 35 feet and not more than 2 1/2 stories.
(b) Steeples shall not exceed 80 feet in height as measured from
the average finished grade on all sides of the building at a
distance of 15 feet from the perimeter of the building. Steeples
shall be allowed only on the building used for religious
worship.
(c) The maximum height of buildings and structures used for
religious education, community-related activities,
administration, nursery school or day-care services shall be 35
feet and not more than 2 1/2 stories.
(d) The maximum height of a single-family dwelling used solely for
residential purposes in accordance with Subsection B below
shall be 35 feet and not more than 2 1/2 stories.
(e) The maximum height of all other accessory buildings and
structures shall be 25 feet.
B. One single-family dwelling to be used solely for occupancy by the
household of an employee of the house of worship shall be permitted on
the same lot, provided that the maximum building area limitation or
floor area ratio applicable in the zone shall apply to all roofed
structures on the site, including the dwelling. If the dwelling is used
solely for residential purposes and is not used for any functions
otherwise related to the principal use of the property, the side and rear
yard setback limitations of the zone district in which it is situated shall
apply.
C. Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided and designed in
accordance with the requirements of this section and § 225-84. The
total number of parking spaces shall be based on the cumulative
amount required in connection with all uses listed below. In addition, an
application for site plan approval in connection with any required
parking area shall include an analysis of anticipated parking needs in
connection with all proposed uses and buildings developed or proposed
on the site. In particular, the applicant shall indicate the potential
simultaneous use of the property for various uses and/or functions and
shall demonstrate that sufficient parking spaces will be provided for all
anticipated uses on the site.
§ 225-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-171
1:417
(1) No parking area shall be permitted in the front yard.
(2) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
following schedule:
(a) A minimum of one space for each three seats in the building
used for religious worship shall be provided. For bench seats,
22 inches shall equal one seat.
(b) For nursery schools and/or day-care centers, a minimum of one
space per teacher or employee, plus a minimum of one space
per four children shall be provided. Sufficient area shall be
provided for car stacking in connection with dropoff or pickup
locations.
(c) Parking for elementary, middle or secondary (high) schools
shall be provided in addition to any other required parking on
the site and shall comply with § 225-173D.
(3) The Board, in its sole discretion, may permit a portion of the
required parking to remain unimproved upon a demonstration by
the applicant that the required number of spaces is in excess of the
anticipated need or is satisfied in whole or in part by the provision
of parking areas for other uses on the site (i.e., shared parking
arrangements). The unimproved area shall be reserved for future
parking and shall be displayed on the site plan as a specified
number of spaces "reserved for future parking" in the event that it
is needed in the future. The reserved area shall be included in the
calculation and limitation of total lot coverage and adequate
provisions for stormwater management shall be made in the event
such area is improved in the future. The Board may require the
future improvement of any such reserved parking area, which shall
be in accordance with site improvement standards then in effect
and subject to site plan review and approval.
(4) Parking area and driveway setbacks.
(a) In the R-1 and RR Zones, no parking area or driveway shall be
located closer to a side or rear lot line than 150 feet.
[Amended 11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04]
(b) In a residential zone other than the R-1 and RR Zones, no
parking area or driveway shall be located closer to a side or
rear lot line than 50 feet.
(c) In a nonresidential zone, side and rear setbacks applicable to
parking areas and driveways shall be the same as required for
parking areas in the zone.
D. No recreational area or playground shall be permitted in the front yard
or closer to the side or rear lot line than specified below.
§ 225-171 HARDING CODE § 225-171
1:418
(1) In the R-1 and RR Zones, no recreational area or playground shall
be located closer to a side or rear lot line than 150 feet. [Amended
11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04]
(2) In a residential zone other than the R-1 and RR Zones, no
recreational area or playground shall be located closer to a side or
rear lot line than 50 feet. [Amended 11-3-2004 by Ord. No.
22-04]
(3) In a nonresidential zone, side and rear setbacks applicable to a
recreational area or playground shall be the same as required for
parking areas in the zone.
E. Buffers.
(1) In the B-1 Zone, when the lot adjoins a residential zone or Public
Land Zone, a minimum fifteen-foot buffer shall be provided along
the lot line adjoining such zone. If wooded, the buffer shall remain
undisturbed and unimproved, or at the discretion of the Board, it
shall be fully landscaped consistent with the provisions of
§ 225-144J.86
(2) In all other zones, landscaped buffers and/or berms shall be
provided in association with any parking area, driveway,
recreational area or playground to appropriately buffer adjacent
properties. The Board may permit the retention of a wooded area to
serve as a buffer, provided that conservation restrictions
satisfactory to the Board are established to prevent the removal of
vegetation without the prior approval of the Board.
F. Hours of operation. The hours of operation for any nonreligious
activities shall be limited to the hours from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
G. There shall be no use of the premises for events generating parking
demand in excess of the approved number of parking spaces on the site
and no use of the buildings that would generate occupancy greater than
the limits allowed under the building or fire code or other applicable
regulations.
H. Site lighting. Except as necessary for security purposes, all site lighting
shall be switched off at the conclusion of activities. There shall be no
illumination for any outdoor recreational areas. Lighting posts shall not
exceed 16 feet in height.
I. Solid waste. If solid waste is stored outside, a solid waste storage area
shall be provided subject to the setback limitations applicable to
buildings and structures. All outdoor solid waste storage areas shall
include an impervious surface, provisions for recycling and shall be
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 225-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-171
1:419
§ 225-172. Public and private utility structures and improvements.
Public and private utility structures and site improvements (but not
including satellite dish facilities) shall be permitted as a conditional use in
all districts in accordance with § 225-169, provided the following conditions
are met:
§ 225-173. Public and private schools. [Amended 11-20-2000 by
Ord. No. 6-00; 2-21-2001 by Ord. No. 1-01]
Public and private day schools of elementary, intermediate or secondary
school grades (PreK-12) shall be permitted as a conditional use in all zones
enclosed with a solid fence, six feet in height, or otherwise screened
from view as approved by the Board.
J. There shall be no outdoor storage of any materials, equipment,
products or supplies except as approved by the Board as part of site
plan approval. Any outdoor storage area shall be suitably screened from
view and landscaped as determined by the Board.
K. Mechanical equipment, including equipment located on the roof of any
building, shall be concealed by structures that are integrally designed
with the building and which shall conform to the height limitations
applicable to buildings as set forth above or are otherwise shielded
from view from adjoining lots and streets and other off-site locations.
L. All fencing shall be approved by the Board as part of site plan approval.
No fence shall exceed eight feet in height, and any fence greater than
seven feet in height shall comply with applicable setback requirements.
A. Minimum lot size and all bulk requirements of the zone in which the
property is situated shall apply to the proposed use, structures and/or
improvements.
B. The proposed use, structure(s) and/or improvements are necessary in
the proposed location for the proper operation of the utility system.
C. The proposed use, structure(s) and/or improvements shall not create a
nuisance as defined in § 225-5 (see definition of "nuisance factor").
D. The design of the structure(s) and/or improvements in connection with
such facility shall, to the extent possible, have a residential appearance
and shall conform, to the extent practicable, to the general character of
the area, and be effectively buffered. All such structures and/or
improvements shall not adversely affect the safe and comfortable
enjoyment of adjoining property owners or the neighborhood.
E. Adequate and attractive fences and other safety devices shall be
provided.
F. Landscaping shall be provided including shrubs and/or trees as is
appropriate to the building(s) and use.
§ 225-171 HARDING CODE § 225-173
1:420
in accordance with § 225-169, subject to the conditions and standards listed
below. Boarding schools are not permitted. Except as permitted pursuant
to the Municipal Land Use Law, schools providing educational instruction
or day-care services to pre-kindergarten-aged children are not permitted
unless in conjunction with an elementary school or a house of worship
pursuant to this article.
A. The applicant shall submit a statement that shall indicate the grade
levels of the school, the planned pupil capacity and the maximum
potential enrollment and development of the school site.
B. An applicant seeking conditional use approval for a private school shall
demonstrate that the school's educational program includes a full
academic curriculum that is equivalent to that provided by public
schools. Supporting evidence to be submitted by the applicant shall
include copies of the duly adopted school charter, bylaws or similar
documentation relating to the school's organization and purpose. The
Board shall consider whether the school is accredited by a recognized
school association or educational organization.
C. Bulk requirements.
(1) Minimum lot size and buildable area. The minimums lot size shall
be based upon the school type and projected enrollment as follows:
(a) Elementary school (PreK through 5th grade): 10 acres, plus
one additional acre for every 100 students, or portion thereof,
based on the maximum potential enrollment.
(b) Intermediate or middle school (grades 6 through 8): 20 acres,
plus one additional acre for every 100 students, or portion
thereof, based on the maximum potential enrollment.
(c) Secondary or high school (grades 9 through 12): 30 acres, plus
one additional acre for every 100 students, or portion thereof,
based on the maximum potential enrollment.
(d) In addition to the above minimum requirements, for each
school type, there shall be within the building envelope of the
lot a minimum area, the size of which is specified herein, that is
free of wetlands and wetland transition areas, flood hazard
areas, slopes of 15% or greater and easements that preclude
development:
[1] Elementary school (PreK through 5th grade): 2.4 acres.
[2] Intermediate or middle school (grades 6 through 8): 6.4
acres.
[3] Secondary or high school (grades 9 through 12): 10.4
acres.
§ 225-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-173
1:421
(e) If there is a mix of grade levels (e.g., middle and high school),
the greater minimum lot size requirement shall apply, except
that if only one additional grade level is provided (e.g., PreK-6),
no additional acreage shall be required beyond that specified
in Subsection C(1) hereinabove.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that there will be sufficient lot
area to accommodate the following on the site:
(a) All proposed buildings, including future development, parking
areas, bus stop/dropoff lanes, etc.
(b) All required setbacks.
(c) Landscaping and buffers.
(d) Playfields and other outdoor recreational facilities.
(3) Minimum setbacks of buildings and structures.
(a) In any residential zone, all buildings and structures shall be set
back at least 200 feet from any lot line or road line.
(b) In any nonresidential zone, the setback requirements of the
zone district shall apply to the placement of all buildings and
structures.
(4) Minimum setbacks of parking areas, driveways and recreational
areas.
(a) No parking area shall be permitted in the front yard, and no
parking area shall be permitted within 150 feet of any side or
rear lot line for lots located in a residential zone or 20 feet of
any side or rear lot line for lots located in a nonresidential
zone.
(b) No driveway shall be permitted within 150 feet of any side or
rear lot line for lots located in a residential zone, except that if
the adjoining use is nonresidential, the minimum setback to the
side or rear property line shall be 50 feet. In a nonresidential
zone, no driveway shall be permitted within 20 feet of any side
or rear lot line. Sufficient area shall be provided for car
stacking to dropoff or pickup locations.
(c) No recreational area, athletic field or playground shall be
permitted in the front yard, and no recreational area, athletic
field or playground shall be permitted within 150 feet of any
side or rear lot line.
(d) Landscaped buffers and/or berms shall be provided as
necessary in association with any parking area, driveway,
recreational area, athletic field or playground to appropriately
buffer adjacent properties. The Board may permit the retention
§ 225-173 HARDING CODE § 225-173
1:422
of a wooded area to serve as a buffer, provided that
conservation restrictions satisfactory to the Board are
established to prevent the removal of vegetation without the
prior approval of the Board.
(5) Maximum lot coverage: 15% of the site.
(6) Maximum height of buildings and structures.
(a) Maximum height of principal buildings: 35 feet and not more
than 2 1/2 stories.
(b) Maximum height of accessory buildings and structures: 25
feet.
(c) Unenclosed spectator structures (outdoor seating) shall be
permitted in association with recreational/athletic fields,
provided that the height of any such structures shall not
exceed 15 feet.
(7) Minimum lot frontage: 500 feet.
D. Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided and designed in
accordance with § 225-84 and shall be based on the following:
(1) Elementary school (PreK through 5th grade): two spaces per
classroom but not less than one space for each teacher and staff or
on-site employee.
(2) Intermediate or middle school (grades 6 through 8): 1 1/2 spaces
per classroom but not less than one space for each teacher and
staff or on-site employee.
(3) Secondary or high school (grades 9 through 12): 2 1/2 spaces per
classroom but not less than one space for each teacher and staff or
on-site employee. In addition, the applicant shall demonstrate the
adequacy of parking for the student body.
(4) The Board, in its sole discretion, may permit a portion of the
required parking to remain unimproved upon a demonstration by
the applicant that the required number of spaces is in excess of the
anticipated need. The unimproved area shall be reserved for future
parking and shall be displayed on the site plan as a specified
number of spaces "reserved for future parking" in the event that it
is needed in the future. The reserved area shall be included in the
calculation and limitation of total lot coverage, and adequate
provisions for stormwater management shall be made in the event
such area is improved in the future. The Board may require the
future improvement of any such reserved parking area, which shall
be in accordance with site improvement standards then in effect
and subject to site plan review and approval.
§ 225-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-173
1:423
E. One single-family dwelling to be used solely for occupancy by an
employee (together with his or her family) of the school shall be
permitted on the same lot as the school use, provided that the maximum
building area limitation or floor area ratio applicable in the zone shall
apply to all roofed structures, including the dwelling. The dwelling shall
comply with all setback and height limitations applicable to other
principal buildings on the site.
F. The site may be developed with one building or a series of buildings in a
campus-style arrangement, and each building used for educational
instruction, administration or athletic/recreational purposes, including
a single-family dwelling, shall be considered a principal building subject
to the bulk and height limitations applicable to principal buildings.
Other buildings or structures accessory or incidental to the principal
uses, including but not limited to sheds, garages, utility buildings or
structures and storage buildings, shall comply with all setback
limitations and the height restrictions applicable to accessory buildings
and structures.
G. Use of the school premises by nonprofit community groups shall be
permitted on a limited and incidental basis only, subject to the hours of
operation limitation heroin. The site shall not be used as a conference
center unless directly related to the school use. Outdoor use of the
premises shall be limited to athletic or recreational activities. There
shall be no use of the premises for events generating parking demand in
excess of the approved number of parking spaces on the site and no use
of the buildings that would generate occupancy greater than the limits
allowed under the building or fire code or other applicable regulations.
H. Hours of operation. The hours of operation for the school and any
activities related to the school, including athletic activities,
administrative meetings, conferences and the use of the premises by
nonschool groups, shall be limited to the hours from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00
p.m.
I. Site lighting. Except as necessary for security purposes, all site lighting
shall be switched off at the conclusion of activities. Lighting posts shall
not exceed 16 feet in height. There shall be no illumination for outdoor
athletic or recreational activities.
J. Outdoor public address systems. Any proposed outdoor public address
system shall comply with all applicable Township ordinances and must
be approved by the Board as part of site plan approval. The applicant
shall demonstrate that use of the system will not have a deleterious
impact on adjoining properties.
K. Solid waste. If solid waste is stored outside, a solid waste storage area
shall be provided subject to the setback limitations applicable to
buildings and structures. All outdoor solid waste storage areas shall
include an impervious surface, provisions for recycling and shall be
§ 225-173 HARDING CODE § 225-173
1:424
§ 225-174. Township facilities.
Township parks, playgrounds, libraries and other Township-operated
governmental buildings or uses for the residents of the Township, including
firehouses and rescue squad buildings and facilities, shall be permitted
in any zone in accordance with § 225-169, provided that the following
conditions are met:
§ 225-175. Wireless telecommunications towers. [Added 7-12-1999
by Ord. No. 8-99]
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 225-116C, towers supporting wireless
telecommunications antennas and associated equipment shall be permitted
as a conditional use on any lot in the OB Zone and the B-2 Zone only
on the eastern side of Route 202, subject to the provisions and standards
enumerated below. The provisions of this section and the standards herein
shall also apply to the installation of more than one antenna or more than
enclosed with a solid fence, six feet in height, or otherwise screened
from view as approved by the Board.
L. There shall be no outdoor storage of any materials, equipment,
products or supplies except as approved by the Board as part of site
plan approval. Any outdoor storage area shall be suitably screened from
view and landscaped as determined by the Board.
M. Mechanical equipment, including equipment located on the roof of any
building, shall be concealed by structures that are integrally designed
with the building and which shall conform to the height limitations
applicable to buildings as set forth above or are otherwise shielded
from view from adjoining lots and streets and other off-site locations.
N. All fencing shall be approved by the Board as part of site plan approval.
No fence shall exceed eight feet in height, except that a fence enclosing
tennis, basketball or paddle courts may be constructed to a height of 10
feet, and further provided that any fence greater than seven feet in
height shall comply with applicable setback requirements. [Amended
9-5-2001 by Ord. No. 17-01]
A. The design of the buildings in connection with such facility shall
conform to the general character of the area or be effectively buffered
and shall not adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of
adjoining property owners or the neighborhood.
B. The facility shall to the extent practicable implement the goals and
objectives of the Township Master Plan.
C. Landscaping shall be provided including shrubs and/or trees, as is
appropriate to the building(s) and/or use.
D. Off-street parking shall be provided sufficient for the proposed use.
§ 225-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-175
1:425
one antenna array on existing or proposed buildings or structures in these
zones.
A. General.
(1) Applications to construct wireless telecommunications towers and/
or install antennas or antenna arrays shall not be subject to the
provisions of § 225-169A(5) with respect to a report from the Board
of Health.
(2) The Township reserves the right to engage an independent radio
frequency engineer or other expert to review any documentation or
testimony provided by the applicant. The costs for any consultants
or experts engaged by the Township shall be paid by the applicant
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law.
B. Application requirements. In addition to the site plan application
requirements stipulated in § 225-168, the following information shall be
provided to the Board:
(1) Evidence of the need for the wireless telecommunications
improvements within the Township and/or surrounding area.
(2) Evidence that a license to provide service has been obtained from
the Federal Communications Commission.
(3) An applicant for multiple antennas or antenna arrays on an existing
building or a tower shall provide an inventory of all existing
approved wireless telecommunications sites within the Township
and within one mile of the Township border including specific
information about the ownership, location, height, number of
antennas/arrays, and tower design. The inventory, and any updates
thereof, shall be maintained on file with the Planning Board
Secretary and Township Clerk as a public document.
(4) If a tower is proposed, the applicant shall provide documentary
evidence that a reasonable attempt has been made to locate the
antennas on or in existing buildings or structures or on another
existing tower, if any. Such evidence shall include a radio frequency
engineering analysis of the potential suitability of existing
buildings or structures in the search area for such antennas. Efforts
to secure such locations shall be documented through
correspondence between the wireless telecommunications
provider and the property owner(s) of the existing buildings or
structures.
(5) The applicant shall provide testimony by a radio frequency
engineer regarding the suitability of potential locations for wireless
telecommunications facilities in light of the design of the wireless
telecommunications network. Where a suitable location on an
existing tower is found to exist, but an applicant is unable to secure
an agreement to collocate its equipment on such tower, the
§ 225-175 HARDING CODE § 225-175
1:426
applicant shall provide written evidence of correspondence with
the owner of such tower verifying that suitable space is not
available on the existing tower(s).
(6) The applicant shall provide a description of the tower and/or arrays
and the technical and other reasons for the facility's design, height,
and location.
(7) The applicant shall provide documentation to establish that the
tower has sufficient structural integrity for the proposed use at the
proposed location and meets the minimum construction
requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
(8) The applicant shall provide documentation indicating the extent to
which additional equipment could be mounted on the tower
(including the number and types of antennas or other equipment)
and included within the equipment compound.
(9) The applicant shall provide a letter of commitment which shall be
binding upon the tower owner and all successors in interest, to
lease excess space on the tower to other potential users at
reasonable rates which shall be economically viable and not unduly
burdensome. The letter of commitment shall be recorded prior to
the issuance of a building permit.
(10) The applicant shall provide elevations of the proposed tower and
associated structures generally depicting all proposed antennas,
platforms, finish materials, and all other accessory equipment,
structures, fences, and landscaping.
C. Conditional use standards. In addition to all other standards contained
in § 225-169, except as noted in Subsection A(1) above, the following
conditions shall be met for wireless telecommunications towers and
associated equipment:
(1) When the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board
that suitable locations on existing buildings or structures either do
not exist or are not available or viable, the applicant may seek
approval to erect a wireless telecommunications tower in
accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Minimum lot size: same as for permitted uses.
(b) Minimum setback of tower and equipment compound from any
property line: same as for permitted uses.
(c) Maximum tower height: no more than necessary to provide
service and in no case higher than 120 feet.
(d) Maximum number of towers per lot: one.
(2) An equipment compound may be erected in connection with a
tower, provided:
§ 225-175 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-175
1:427
(a) It consists of no more than 2,500 square feet in area.
(b) It shall be situated behind any existing structures, buildings or
terrain features that will help shield the compound from public
view.
(c) The maximum height of all equipment lockers, cabinets, or
other structures, other than the tower, within the equipment
compound shall not exceed 12 feet. The maximum height of
any building within the equipment compound shall not exceed
the height limitations of the zone in which the property is
situated.
(d) When a location out of public view is not possible, a landscaped
buffer of 20 feet in width shall be provided around the
compound to shield the facility from public view. Landscaping
shall include evergreen trees at least eight feet in height at the
time of planting and shall be planted in staggered double rows
at 15 feet on center, or screening that will provide equivalent
buffering.
(3) Equipment buildings, cabinets, or lockers shall be located within
the equipment compound which shall be enclosed within a solid
wooden fence at least seven feet in height but not more than eight
feet in height. The fence shall include a locking security gate.
(4) Facilities installed according to these provisions shall be suitably
finished and/or painted so as to minimize their visual impact on the
landscape. Buildings and equipment that will be visible to the
public should be designed in a manner and constructed of materials
that are consistent with their surroundings. The tower and
equipment associated with the antennas shall be of such color or
finish so as to blend with their surroundings. When such color or
finish compatibility is not possible, the color and/or finish shall be
designed to minimize the visual impact of the tower, antenna
arrays, and equipment. Whenever possible, and at the discretion of
the Board, the tower shall be camouflaged to blend in with its
surroundings or natural features.
(5) Wireless telecommunications towers shall not be erected within
1,000 feet of any historic district or site listed on or eligible for
listing on the National and/or State Register of Historic Places.
(6) Antenna modifications, tower certification, and abandonment.
(a) Operators of wireless telecommunications towers shall, on an
annual basis, provide to the Township a letter certifying that
the tower is still in use.
(b) Wireless telecommunications towers that are not in use for
wireless telecommunications purposes for six consecutive
months shall be removed by the facility owner or the
§ 225-175 HARDING CODE § 225-175
1:428
§ 225-176. Assisted living residence. [Added 6-21-1999 by Ord. No.
6-99]
An assisted living residence as defined in this chapter shall be permitted
as a conditional use only in the following specified zones and subject to the
conditions and standards stipulated below:
contractually responsible party at its expense. Removal shall
occur within 90 days of the end of such six-month period. Upon
removal, the site shall be cleaned, restored, and revegetated to
blend with the existing surrounding vegetation at the time of
abandonment.
(7) Co-location is strongly encouraged in order to avoid the
construction of multiple towers. All wireless telecommunications
towers and equipment compounds shall be built so as to facilitate
collocation with additional service providers, provided that the
height limits and other bulk restrictions of this chapter are not
exceeded.
A. An assisted living residence licensed by the New Jersey Department of
Health and Senior Services shall be permitted as a conditional use in
the PRN-RC Zone and the B-2 and OB Zones on the easterly side of
Route 202 only. The development regulations and standards of this
§ 225-176 shall apply to the development of assisted living residences
and are intended to supersede those otherwise applicable to other
permitted or conditional uses in the PRN-RC, B-2, and OB Zone
districts. An applicant for an assisted living residence shall submit, with
the application for conditional use approval, a certificate of need
approved by the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services.
B. Supportive assisted living services and accessory uses directly related
to and included in an assisted living residence development may
include the following: a nursing home component approved by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services; congregate dining
facilities and food preparation areas; administrative offices related only
directly to the administration of the facility; facilities for health care
and services such as nursing stations, physician's offices, and
examination rooms; facilities for physical therapy; rooms for exercise
and entertainment; storage rooms; chapel(s); housekeeping and
laundering services; beauty/barber shop for the benefit of residents
only; and indoor and outdoor recreation areas. All supportive services
and accessory uses shall be for the sole use and benefit of the resident
users and their guests, and staff working at or assigned to the facility.
An applicant for an assisted living residence development shall provide
documentation as part of the application for conditional use and site
plan approval indicating the total number of employees per shift.
C. Bulk requirements and development standards.
§ 225-175 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-176
1:429
(1) Minimum lot size: six acres. In addition, the applicant for an
assisted living residence shall demonstrate that there is sufficient
lot area to accommodate all proposed buildings, all required
setbacks, required and proposed parking, driveways and loading
areas, buffers if required by § 225-169A(4), sewage disposal
systems and any other necessary utilities.
(2) Maximum number of units: 50.
(3) Maximum number of beds: 60.
(4) Maximum building area: 10% of lot area.
(5) Maximum floor area ratio: not applicable.
(6) Maximum total lot coverage: 30% of lot area.
(7) Minimum lot frontage: 250 feet.
(8) Minimum setbacks. All buildings and structures shall be set back at
least 50 feet from any lot line or road line. Accessory buildings shall
be situated behind the principal building. Parking areas shall be
limited to the side and rear yards with a setback from property
lines of not less than 20 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 35 feet and not more than 2 1/2 stories.
(10) Parking requirements. Sufficient parking shall be provided on the
site to accommodate the maximum number of employees during
the peak shift period plus a minimum of one parking space for
every four beds. If the number of required parking spaces results in
more parking than needed for the use, as demonstrated by the
applicant based on expert testimony, the Planning Board may
permit a portion of the required parking to be shown on the site
plan as being reserved for future parking.
(11) Parking areas, driveways, and loading areas shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the New Jersey Statewide
Residential Site Improvement Standards.
(12) Stormwater drainage systems shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the New Jersey Statewide Residential Site
Improvement Standards except as modified by special area
standards contained in this chapter.
(13) Lighting. Exterior lighting shall not create glare or shine on
adjoining properties. After 11:00 p.m., only that lighting deemed
necessary for security and emergency purposes shall be permitted
to remain switched on.
(14) All refuse disposal and recycling areas, generators, airconditioning
units, and any other special utilities or equipment
necessary for the development shall be placed behind the principal
§ 225-176 HARDING CODE § 225-176
1:430
§ 225-177. Farm stands and farm markets. [Added 12-27-2000 by
Ord. No. 7-00; amended 11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04]
A farm stand or farm market, as defined in this chapter, or a building
containing an area for the sale of agricultural products produced by a
commercial farm shall be permitted as a conditional use in the R-1, RR, R-2,
R-3 and R-4 Zones subject to the conditions and standards stipulated below:
building. Refuse areas shall be enclosed with a solid wood fence at
least six feet but not higher than eight feet in height.
(15) Landscaping. All assisted living developments shall incorporate
landscaping appropriate to the surrounding area and Harding's
rural character. Landscaping shall be employed wherever possible
to shield refuse areas and other outside equipment such as
generators from view.
A. Conditions applicable to farm stands and farm markets.
(1) Any farm stand, farm market or building from which agricultural or
horticultural products will be offered for sale must be part of and
located on a commercial farm parcel consisting of at least five acres
of land located within the Township of Harding.
(2) Any agricultural or horticultural product grown or processed in
connection with the farm operation, and items required for
packaging or the use of such products, may be offered for sale. In
addition, items such as fresh fruits, fresh vegetables, cider, honey,
jams and jelly, pies and bread and cut evergreen trees grown and/
or processed off site may be sold. All other retail activities such as
the preparation of and sale of fast food, mechanized equipment and
the sale of products associated with convenience stores are
expressly prohibited. It is the intent of this regulation to provide
farmers with an outlet to sell their agricultural or horticultural
products and to make those farm products accessible to the public.
(3) No more than one building containing a retail display area or
detached farm stand or farm market shall be permitted on a lot.
(4) The farm stand, farm market or building from which agricultural or
horticultural products will be offered for sale shall comply with the
setback limitation stipulated in § 225-169A(3). The farm stand,
farm market or other building from which agricultural or
horticultural products will be offered for sale shall comply with the
front setback requirement and other applicable bulk regulations of
the zone in which it is located except as stipulated below with
respect to height restrictions.
(5) The farm stand, farm market or building from which agricultural or
horticultural products will be offered for sale shall comply with the
regulations contained in § 225-116K of this chapter.
§ 225-176 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-177
1:431
(6) The operation of the sales activities must not result in traffic
congestion on abutting streets or endanger the public by
interfering with the safe and convenient flow of traffic on public
streets.
(7) There shall be no loudspeakers or playing of amplified music that is
audible beyond the limits of the property line.
(8) No sales shall occur before 7:00 a.m. or later than 8:00 p.m.
(9) Outdoor lighting shall be designed to provide for safety and
security without illuminating adjacent properties. There shall be no
glare when observed from adjacent properties or public roads.
Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to require outdoor
lighting.
(10) The outdoor display of goods or products for sale shall be limited in
accordance with a specified area approved by the Board as part of
site plan review and approval procedures. All outdoor display areas
shall comply with the setback limitation specified in § 225-169A(3).
Outdoor display area(s) may be situated in the front yard, subject to
approval by the Board, provided that no outdoor display area shall
be located within 25 feet of the road line. The Board may require
that an outdoor display area be screened from view of neighboring
properties.
(11) Signs shall be permitted in accordance with § 225-120A and shall
otherwise comply with all limitations and restrictions contained in
Article XXIII.
B. Special conditions applicable to farm stands.
(1) Size limitation. No farm stand shall exceed 500 square feet in area.
(2) Height limitation. No farm stand shall contain more than 1 1/2
stories or exceed 20 feet in height.
C. Special conditions applicable to farm markets.
(1) Size limitation. No farm market shall exceed 1,000 square feet in
area. The sales area of a farm market located within a larger
building or structure shall be limited in area to 1,000 square feet.
(2) Height limitation. A building used for a farm market shall comply
with the height restrictions of the zone for accessory buildings,
except that a farm market may be established within a preexisting
barn or other farm outbuilding which is nonconforming with
respect to height.
D. Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in
connection with any farm stand, farm market or outdoor display area
for the sale of agricultural or horticultural products in accordance with
the following standards:
§ 225-177 HARDING CODE § 225-177
1:432
§ 225-178. Accessory residences in R-1 and RR Zones. [Added
6-5-2002 by Ord. No. 6-02; amended 6-4-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03;
7-7-2004 by Ord. No. 18-04; 11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04]
In the R-1 and RR Zones only, and not in any other zone, in addition
to the principal dwelling on the premises, one accessory residence may
be established in or constructed as an accessory building or structure,
in accordance with the following standards and, notwithstanding the
provisions of § 225-168, shall be subject to minor site plan approval.
(1) A minimum of three off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
connection with a farm stand. In addition, sufficient off-street
parking shall be provided for employees.
(2) One parking space for every 200 square feet of sales area shall be
provided in connection with a farm market, with a minimum
requirement of three spaces. In addition, sufficient off-street
parking shall be provided for employees.
(3) If an area is set aside for the outdoor display of products for sale,
the Board may require the provision of additional parking spaces at
the rate of one space for every 500 square feet of outdoor display
area. The Board may require the additional parking spaces to be
improved or it may permit an area to be reserved on the site for
such additional parking in the event that it is needed in the future.
(4) The location of any parking area shall comply with § 225-169A(3)
and, in any event, no parking shall be permitted within any
required yard area, including the required front yard of the zone in
which the lot is situated.
(5) The construction standards for any parking area shall be approved
by the Planning Board and may include, at the discretion of the
Planning Board, suitable grassed areas, gravel surfaced areas or
paved areas.
E. Driveways. No driveway shall open onto a road within 100 feet of any
four-way intersection or property line, and all entrances shall have
adequate sight distance so as to conform to generally accepted safety
standards.
F. Abandonment. If the commercial farm or agricultural activities are
discontinued, the retail display area, farm market or farm stand and the
associated parking area and all other related improvements shall be
removed within 180 days.
A. Minimum lot size. No accessory residence shall be established on any
lot unless said lot has an area comprising at least six acres.
B. The accessory residence shall be clearly accessory and incidental to the
principal use of the property for residential purposes.
§ 225-177 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-178
1:433
C. Accessory residences shall be limited to a total of 1,200 square feet of
living space, which shall include all finished living spaces, kitchen,
bedrooms and baths. Space dedicated to garage parking for vehicles or
equipment or storage space not affiliated or used in connection with the
accessory residence unit shall not be included in this square footage
limitation.
D. No accessory residence shall contain more than two bedrooms.
E. The accessory building or structure containing an accessory residence
shall comply with all of the setback and height limitations applicable to
accessory buildings in the R-1 and RR Zones.
F. The accessory building or structure shall be located behind the front
facade of the principal building or structure situated on the same lot in
accordance with § 225-116D(1).
G. An accessory building or structure may only be used as a residence by
immediate family members, domestic employees working on the
premises and/or temporary guests, except that an accessory residence
in a contributing historic structure shall be exempt from this limitation,
provided that conditional use approval is obtained in accordance with
this article. For the purposes of this section, the Board shall determine
that a building is a "contributing historic structure" based on the review
and recommendation of the Historic Preservation Commission. In the
event of subsequent damage or partial destruction of the historic
structure, the Historic Preservation Commission shall confirm its status
as a contributing historic structure prior to any reoccupancy pursuant
to the exemption contained in this section.
§ 225-178 HARDING CODE § 225-178
1:434
Part 4
[AddeSdto7r-m12w-1at9e9r9 MBaynOagrde.m Neon.t 9-99]
ARTICLE XXXVIII
Purpose and Applicability
§ 225-179. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Part 4 to establish standards and regulations for the
management and discharge of stormwater runoff from land development
projects and other construction activities:
§ 225-180. Applicability. [Amended 4-20-2005 by Ord. No. 5-05]
Stormwater management for all development in Harding Township shall be
designed in compliance with applicable regulations as follows:
A. To reduce artificially induced flood damage to public health, life, and
property;
B. To minimize increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes;
C. To minimize the deterioration of existing watercourses, culverts,
bridges, dams and other structures that would result from increased
rates of stormwater runoff.
D. To induce water recharge into the ground wherever suitable infiltration,
soil permeability, and favorable geological conditions exist;
E. To prevent an increase in nonpoint source pollution;
F. To maintain the integrity and stability of stream channels for their
biological functions, as well as for drainage, the conveyance of
floodwater, and other purposes;
G. To control and minimize soil erosion and the transport of sediment;
H. To reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and
nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, from lands that were
developed without stormwater management controls meeting the
purposes and standards of this Part 4;
I. To minimize public safety hazards at any stormwater detention facility
constructed pursuant to subdivision or site plan approval;
J. To maintain high water quality in all streams and other surface water
bodies;
K. To protect all surface water resources from degradation; and
L. To protect groundwater resources from degradation.
A. Subdivisions and site plans for residential uses. Stormwater
management proposed or required for any subdivision or site plan for
§ 225-179 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-180
1:435
§ 225-181. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance
requirements.
Development approvals issued pursuant to this Part 4 are to be considered
an integral part of development approvals under the subdivision and site
plan review process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility
to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by other
applicable code, rule, act or ordinance. In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this Part 4 shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general
welfare. This Part 4 is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul
any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law.
Where any provision of this Part 4 imposes restrictions different from those
imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of
law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards
shall control.
residential development shall conform with Subchapter 7, Stormwater
Management, of the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards as modified by Resolution No. 02-1, Special Area Standards
for Stormwater Management in the Township of Harding, Morris
County, adopted by the New Jersey Site Improvement Advisory Board,
a copy of which may be obtained from the Harding Township Clerk or
the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
B. Subdivisions or site plans for nonresidential uses. Stormwater
management proposed or required for any subdivision or site plan,
including a minor site plan, for nonresidential development shall
conform to the requirements of this Part 4, Stormwater Management.
C. The provisions of this Part 4, Stormwater Management, shall apply to
all of the following: [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 07-17;
5-14-2018 by Ord. No. 07-18]
(1) Any project that results in a net increase to lot coverage that is
more than 0.5% of the lot size.
(2) Any project that increases net lot coverage by more than 1,000
square feet.
D. Stricter requirements apply. When a development is subject to the State
of New Jersey stormwater regulations (N.J.A.C. 7:8) and either this Part
4 or the special area standards, the stricter of the two regulations shall
apply.
§ 225-180 HARDING CODE § 225-181
1:436
ARTICLE XXXIX
Technical Standards
§ 225-182. No-net-increase objectives.
§ 225-183. Procedures for measuring compliance with no-netincrease
objectives.
A. No net increase in nonpoint source pollution. Stormwater control
systems shall be designed to prevent the degradation of water quality in
receiving watercourses from nonpoint source pollution associated with
stormwater runoff. NJDEP's Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C.
7:9B, shall be used for this determination.
B. No net increase in sediment loadings. Stormwater control systems shall
be designed to reduce to the maximum extent possible the total
suspended solids (TSS) from stormwater runoff for storm events with
magnitudes as high as the water quality storm and to retain, as closely
as possible, the predevelopment hydrologic response of the site and the
watershed.
C. No net increase in stormwater runoff rates and stream channel erosion.
Stormwater control systems shall be designed so that, to the maximum
extent possible, the postdevelopment stormwater runoff rates from the
site and at any point in the watershed between the site and the Great
Swamp are no greater than predevelopment rates, in order to retain as
closely as possible the predevelopment hydrologic response of the site
and the watershed.
D. No net increase in stormwater runoff volumes. Stormwater control
systems shall be designed so that all stormwater runoff from impervious
surfaces is infiltrated into the soil for the 1.25 inch, twenty-four-hour
storm, using the Type III rainfall distribution recommended for New
Jersey by the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service or the
Somerset County 24-Hour Design Storm Distribution as shown in the
Somerset County Stormwater Detention Basin Handbook. The first 1.25
inches of stormwater runoff from all larger storms shall also be
infiltrated into the ground.
A. Hydrologic/hydraulic analysis shall be prepared and submitted with an
application for a major subdivision or a major site plan approval
demonstrating that the postdevelopment stormwater runoff rates do
not exceed the standards set forth in this Part 4 for the water quality
storm and the two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year storms.
(1) The hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall generally conform with
methods developed by the Natural Resources Conservation Service
and published in National Engineering Handbook, Section 4 -
Hydrology, Technical Release No. 55 and Technical Release No. 20.
§ 225-182 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-183
1:437
§ 225-184. Waivers from strict compliance.
(2) Standards and procedures for developing hydrographs and
calculating peak rates of runoff shall be as shown in the Somerset
County Storm Water Detention Basin Handbook.
(3) Rainfall-frequency relationships shall be as shown in Technical
Paper No. 40, Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the United States
published by the U.S. Weather Bureau.
B. For infiltration facilities proposed to meet the no-net-increase
objectives of this Part 4, the results of a subsurface investigation and
soil tests demonstrating the suitability of the area's soils and
groundwater table for infiltration and treatment of runoff shall be
provided.
C. A nonpoint source pollutant loading analysis shall be prepared and
submitted with an application for major subdivision or major site plan
approval demonstrating that the nonpoint source pollutant and
sediment loadings resulting from the proposed land development or
construction project do not exceed the standards set forth in this Part 4.
In preparing the required analysis, it shall be acceptable to utilize the
average removal efficiency statistics provided in the Stormwater and
Nonpoint Source Pollution Control Best Management Practices Manual,
dated December 1994, and any subsequent revisions thereto, prepared
by the NJDEP and the New Jersey Department of Agriculture.
A. If the natural or existing physical characteristics of the project site
preclude achievement of any of the above-no-net increase provisions,
the Township Engineer may grant a waiver from strict compliance with
the specific no-net-increase provisions, provided that the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer that adjacent
waterways and/or property will not be impacted by: [Amended
3-23-2011 by Ord. No. 02-11]
(1) Deterioration or damage of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and
other structures;
(2) Deterioration of the waterways' biological functions, drainage,
floodwater conveyance, and other purposes;
(3) Stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation;
(4) Increased flooding endangering public health, life and/or property.
B. Where partial compliance with a specific no-net-increase provision is
possible, the Township Engineer will direct the applicant to satisfy a
reduced performance criterion. However, those no-net-increase
provisions that are not precluded by the site's physical characteristics
shall be met.
§ 225-183 HARDING CODE § 225-184
1:438
§ 225-185. Design standards for detention and retention basins.
Design standards for detention and retention basins shall be as follows:
C. If one or more of the no-net-increase provisions of this Part 4 cannot be
met on-site, and a regional stormwater management plan for the Great
Swamp watershed has been adopted by a regional entity, the applicant
may elect to meet the no-net-increase provisions of this Part 4, the
achievement of which are precluded by the site's physical
characteristics, by financially or otherwise participating in the
implementation of the regional stormwater management plan in
accordance with a specific formula for participation specified by the
regional entity.
D. Any final decision by the Township Engineer on a waiver request may be
appealed to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(a). [Added 3-23-2011 by Ord. No. 02-11]
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, the design of stormwater
detention/retention basins shall conform with the standards and
procedures set forth in the Somerset County Stormwater Detention
Basin Handbook.
B. Detention and/or retention basins shall be designed to capture and
retain all stormwater runoff from the site's impervious surfaces during
the water quality storm, and from all smaller storms. The runoff shall
then be slowly released in accordance with the requirements presented
in § 225-188A(3).
C. The peak rate of runoff from a developed site at its point of discharge
into a stream or onto adjacent private or public property shall not
exceed the rate that would be computed based on the following
hydrologic complex curve numbers:
(1) For on-site drainage areas where the surface of the ground will be
altered in any way or where the ground cover will be altered in any
way which may reduce the rate of infiltration of precipitation:
Hydrologic Soil Group Runoff Curve Number
B 40
C 55
D 63
(2) For off-site drainage areas, the runoff curve number shall be as
shown in Table III, Updated Standards and Policies for On-site
Stormwater Management, Somerset County Stormwater
Handbook.
(3) When computing the peak rate of runoff, the predeveloped site
conditions shall be used to determine the time of concentration and
§ 225-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-185
1:439
travel times. Depressions, hedgerows, and ponds shall be taken
into consideration.
(4) As a minimum, it shall be shown that flow rates resulting from a
two-year, ten-year, and one-hundred-year twenty-four-hour storm
comply with this standard.
(5) Notwithstanding the above, the peak rate of runoff from a
developed site at its point of discharge into a stream or onto
adjacent private or public property shall not exceed 50% of the
predevelopment peak runoff rate for a two-year storm, 70% for a
ten-year storm and 75% for a one-hundred-year storm. The
predevelopment peak rate of runoff shall be computed using runoff
curve numbers as set forth in Subsection C(2) above.
D. Where the increase in runoff from a small area of a site is shown to be
negligible and has no significant impact on the receiving stream or on
adjacent or nearby private or public property, the Board may approve
the plan, provided the runoff discharged from another area of the site is
reduced by the amount of the increase.
E. Where roof runoff is discharged into drywells in compliance with
standards of this Part 4, it shall be assumed that runoff from 15% of the
horizontal projection of the roof area does not reach the drywells, due
to clogging of gutters or leaders, and contributes to the runoff from the
site.
F. Most water quality control and infiltration measures will provide some
benefit in runoff peak control. Where water quality control or
infiltration measures are instituted, appropriate adjustments to the
postdevelopment peak runoff may be incorporated by the introduction
of modified runoff parameters (e.g., time of concentration, initial
abstraction, SCS runoff curve number).
G. Except as set forth in Subsection C(1) above, the development of
hydrographs, peak rates of flow, and runoff volumes shall be
determined by use of the runoff curve numbers shown in Table III,
Updated Standards and Policies for On-site Stormwater Management,
Somerset County Stormwater Detention Basin Handbook.
H. Any detention facility that impounds water through the use of an
artificial dike, levee, dam, or other barrier and raises the water level
five feet or more above the usual mean low water height when
measured from the downstream toe-of-dam to the emergency spillway
crest is classified as a dam and subject to the New Jersey Dam Safety
Standards, N.J.A.C. 7:20. All such dams must be designed, constructed,
operated and maintained in compliance with the rules of N.J.A.C. 7:20.
I. Stormwater conveyance facilities shall have the capacity to transport
not less than the peak rate of runoff resulting from a fifteen-year,
twenty-four-hour design storm. Facilities at critical locations shall have
greater capacity as may be required to prevent flood damage.
§ 225-185 HARDING CODE § 225-185
1:440
§ 225-186. Water quality control and infiltration measures.
J. Adequate provisions shall be made to safely transport the runoff from a
one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour design storm to all detention and
retention basins. Flow over the ground surface is permitted to the
extent that it will not cause significant flood damage.
A. In most instances, the water quality control and infiltration
performance requirements of this Part 4 will be satisfied by multiple
structures or devices (see §§ 225-187 and 225-188 of this Part 4).
Furthermore, most structures or devices will achieve both a water
quality control and infiltration benefit. Compliance with the no-netincrease
provisions of this Part 4 will be based on a project-wide
summation of runoff characteristics. The applicant shall show how the
collection of structures or devices incorporated in the stormwater
management plan will jointly satisfy the performance requirements of
this Part 4.
B. In order to meet the no-net-increase provisions of this Part 4 with
regard to stormwater runoff volumes, sediment loadings, and other
nonpoint source pollutant loadings, stormwater management facilities
shall provide for the control of stormwater runoff in accordance with
the following basic principles:
(1) Infiltration facilities shall be designed to achieve the recharge of at
least 70% (tabulated on an annual basis) of direct rainfall. This will
be achieved by the implementation of measures which will retain
and infiltrate all runoff generated for storms up to the 1.25 inch,
twenty-four-hour storm, using the Type III rainfall distribution
recommended for New Jersey by the U.S. Natural Resources
Conservation Service or the Somerset County 24-Hour Design
Storm Distribution. In general, multiple infiltration facilities will be
required to collectively satisfy the infiltration requirement.
(2) Concentrations of stormwater volume shall be minimized by
designing small impervious surface drainage units.
(3) Runoff shall be attenuated at the source whenever possible.
(4) Land uses shall be classified into "Harmfulness Classes" as shown
in the Land Use Assignment to Harmfulness Class table.
Stormwater runoff from Harmfulness Class 1 surfaces shall be
directed through one or more water quality devices prior to
infiltration or discharge to a stream or other watercourse.
[Amended 11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 22-04]
§ 225-185 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-186
1:441
Land Use Assignment to Harmfulness Class
Harmfulness
Class Zone Surface in Zone
1 All Lawns (not deed restricted
for no chemical fertilizer or
pesticide)
Any Roads, 300 or more vehicles
per day
Residential (R-1,
RR, R-2, R-3, R-4)
Driveways and parking pads,
if runoff not infiltrated on lot
B-1 Parking lots and entrances/
exits
B-2 Parking lots and entrances/
exits
OB Parking lots and entrances/
exits
PRN-RC Parking lots and entrances/
exits
2 All Roofs (runoff directed to dry
wells)
All Lawns (deed restricted for
no chemical fertilizer or
pesticide)
All Sidewalks
Any Roads, less than 300
vehicles per day
Residential (R-1,
R-2, R-3, R-4)
Driveways and parking pads,
if runoff infiltrated on lot
(5) Water quality and infiltration device treatment trains shall be
designed that utilize the natural qualities of the landscape.
(6) Detention/retention basins are generally not suitable as infiltration
facilities. Therefore, retention volumes associated with basins
should not be used to comply with the no-net-increase provisions of
this Part 4 as it regards runoff volume. However, retention basins
(or "wet basins") may be used to satisfy the water quality
requirements of this Part 4.
C. Utilizing the above design principles, a stormwater management plan
shall be designed for the project area, utilizing the stormwater control
best management practices (BMPs) presented in Stormwater and
Nonpoint Source Pollution Control Best Management Practices Manual,
dated December 1994, prepared by the New Jersey Department of
§ 225-186 HARDING CODE § 225-186
1:442
§ 225-187. Dry well requirements for roof runoff and runoff from
paved recreation courts.
Environmental Protection and the New Jersey Department of
Agriculture, as from time to time revised or amended.
D. In preparing the project's stormwater management plan, the design
procedure presented in Stormwater Management for Water Quality
Improvement and Infiltration in the Great Swamp Watershed, dated
January 1996, prepared by Tourbier & Walmsley, Inc., shall be followed.
E. The no-net-increase provision of this Part 4 shall be deemed to have
been met regarding nonpoint source pollutants and sediments if the
estimated postdevelopment nonpoint source annual pollutant loadings
after water quality treatment have been reduced prior to discharge by
the following percentages for the nonpoint source pollutant indicator
parameters:
Percent Removal of
Postdevelopment NPS Pollutant Loadings
Nonpoint Source
Indicator Parameters
For New
Developments on
Previously
Undeveloped Land
For Modification
of Existing
Developed Sites
Total suspended solids
(TSS)
90% or greater 45% or greater
Total nitrogen (TN) 65% or greater 30% or greater
Total phosphorous (TP) 75% or greater 25% or greater
Zinc (Zn) 90% or greater 20% or greater
Lead (Pb) 90% or greater 50% or greater
(Reference: Stormwater Control Ordinance for Lands Within the Great
Swamp Watershed Overlay Zone, Revised Final Draft 1/3/96, prepared
by the Great Swamp Watershed Association with the assistance of
Thonet Associates.)
F. In estimating the removal efficiencies of the water quality control
measures proposed, it shall be acceptable to utilize the average
removal efficiency statistics provided in the Stormwater and Nonpoint
Source Pollution Control Best Management Practices Manual, dated
December 1994, prepared by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and the New Jersey Department of
Agriculture, as from time to time revised or amended.
A. Runoff from roof areas and paved recreation courts, such as tennis and
basketball courts, and impervious patios shall be transported to dry
wells for recharge of groundwater resources. Plans for such dry wells
shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for review and approval,
§ 225-186 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-187
1:443
which shall require issuance of a grading permit. [Amended
3-23-2011 by Ord. No. 02-11]
B. Dry wells shall have the capacity to temporarily store a volume equal to
four inches of runoff from roof, court and patio areas. Alternatively, the
capacity of the dry wells may be determined by routing a one-hundredyear,
twenty-four-hour storm through the dry well system taking into
consideration soil infiltration and permeability, water table depth, and
dry well capacity.
C. Roof gutters, vertical conductors and leaders, and horizontal storm
drains shall conform with Chapter 13 of the National Standard
Plumbing Code, most recent edition. Design shall be based on a rainfall
intensity of six inches per hour.
D. All roof gutters shall be protected from the accumulation of leaves and
litter by the installation of an aluminum gutter cap leaf-separation
device. Gutter screens or louvers are not acceptable.
E. Where gutters are not used on a building, a gravel filled trench with a
perforated pipe shall be constructed under the roof overhang to collect
roof runoff.
F. Dry wells shall have an overflow pipe extending to grade. Aluminum
pins, or gutter nails, shall be extended horizontally through the pipe at
its outlet to prevent small animals from entering.
G. Dry wells shall generally be constructed of precast concrete rings
surrounded by clean crushed stone or gravel. The nominal stone size
shall be 1 1/2 inches. A bed of coarse sand not less than four inches
thick shall be placed in contact with the surface of the soil at the bottom
of the excavation. A layer of crushed stone or gravel not less than six
inches thick shall be placed on top of the coarse sand.
H. Runoff from court areas and impervious patios shall be collected in
stone- or gravel-filled shallow trenches. The nominal stone size shall be
3/4 inch. The collected runoff shall be transported to dry wells through
pipes having the capacity for the peak flow resulting from a six-inchper-
hour rainfall intensity. Alternatively, the stone filled trenches may
be constructed to temporarily store a volume equal to four inches of
runoff from the court or patio.
I. There shall be a vertical separation of not less than two feet between
the bottom of the stone in dry wells and the seasonal high water table.
J. Where soil and groundwater conditions are not suitable for the
installation of dry wells, the applicant may request a waiver of strict
compliance from the Township Engineer pursuant to the criteria in
§ 225-184. [Amended 3-23-2011 by Ord. No. 02-11]
K. All applications shall include calculations and details to show
compliance with of this Part 4.
§ 225-187 HARDING CODE § 225-187
1:444
§ 225-188. Requirements for selected stormwater management
measures.
L. Projects involving new roof areas, impervious patios, and recreation
court areas that result in a net increase to lot coverage of less than
0.5% of the lot size are exempt from the dry well requirements of this
Part 4 unless the net increase is greater than 1,000 square feet. Any
project that results in a net increase to lot coverage of less than 400
square feet shall also be exempt from the dry well requirements of this
Part 4. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 07-17; 5-14-2018 by
Ord. No. 07-18]
A. For detention basins:
(1) Detention basins shall not be located within the floodway of any
watercourse.
(2) The construction of detention basins in floodplains shall be
avoided, but where this is unavoidable, a special examination to
determine adequacy of a proposed detention facility during
extreme storm events shall be required to determine what effects,
if any, the tailwaters created by the floodplain have on the outflow
from and effective storage within the detention facility. All designs
of basins in floodplains, therefore, shall be based upon an accurate
and thorough determination of tailwater effects resulting from
runoff from the site and the watershed contributing to the
floodplain.
(3) Beginning at the time of peak storage in the basin for the water
quality storm, no more than 90% of the total peak storage volume
shall be released over an eighteen-hour period for residential
developments or over a thirty-six-hour period for commercial
developments. Longer drawdowns are permissible, but in no case
shall the drawdown period exceed 72 hours. The rate of release
shall be as uniform as possible.
(4) The minimum outlet diameter, width, or height shall be three
inches. If this minimum outlet size does not allow for the detention
times required in this Part 4, then alternative techniques for the
removal of TSS prior to discharge into the basin shall be provided.
(5) The species of native or nonintrusive exotic vegetation used in the
basin shall be approved by the Morris County Soil Conservation
District.
B. For wet pond/retention basins:
(1) Such basins shall not be located within the floodway of any
watercourse in the Great Swamp watershed.
(2) The volume of the permanent pool shall be at least three times the
volume of the expected runoff from the water quality storm.
§ 225-187 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-188
1:445
(3) The pool shall be shallow enough to avoid thermal stratification and
deep enough to minimize algal blooms and resuspension of
decomposing organics and other previously deposited materials.
(4) The flow from the contributory drainage area shall be sufficient in
dry weather to maintain the permanent pool during the summer
months and prevent stagnation.
(5) The configuration of the permanent pool shall promote maximum
sedimentation and minimize plug flow.
(6) Where feasible, native fish stock shall be used to control
mosquitoes.
C. For artificial wetlands:
(1) Where feasible, the wetlands shall be created around a standing
pool of water at least six feet in depth.
(2) At least 1/2 of the perimeter of the water area shall be graded to
form a ten- to twenty-foot-wide shallow bench for aquatic
emergents.
(3) The surface area of the artificial wetlands shall be at least 3% of the
total area contributing flow into the artificial wetland.
(4) Vegetation shall be commercial wetland plant stock, either live
plants or dormant rhizomes, instead of transplants from existing
wetlands areas or seeding.
(5) At least two hardy and rapid colonizing indigenous primary
wetlands species shall be planted over 30% of the total shallow
water area. Each species shall be planted in three or four
monospecific stands with individual plants spaced two to three feet
apart. Up to three less-aggressively colonizing secondary wetlands
species shall be randomly distributed in clumps around the
perimeter of the marsh.
(6) At least 25% of the total surface area of a basin designed
exclusively to act as a shallow marsh shall be open water with a
depth of at least two feet in order to provide habitat for waterfowl
and other marsh birds.
D. For vegetated or biofilter swales:
(1) The water velocity shall not exceed two feet per second (fps) to
allow for settlement of TSS during the water quality design storm.
The slope shall not be less than 0.5% so that positive drainage is
maintained. The swale shall be of sufficient length to allow for
settlement of TSS taking into consideration the velocity, depth of
flow, and expected loading of TSS.
§ 225-188 HARDING CODE § 225-188
1:446
(2) Where feasible, vegetation shall be used in the swale to filter out
the TSS and to provide a secondary treatment by absorption of
pollutants leached into the soil. Vegetation used in the swale shall
be native or nonintrusive exotic species approved by the Morris
County Soil Conservation District.
(3) If the swale is designed to provide infiltration, the soil texture shall
be sand, loamy sand, or sandy loam as defined by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture and there shall be a minimum of three
feet separation between the bottom of the swale and the seasonal
high water table.
(4) The swale shall be used internally within the stormwater collection
system and in conjunction with other methods such as vegetated
filter strips to increase their effectiveness.
E. For above-grade infiltration facilities:
(1) There shall be at least three feet vertical separation between the
bottom of the facility and the seasonal high water table.
(2) The maximum depth of impoundment shall be two feet.
(3) The soil texture of the upper six inches of the facility (i.e.,
immediately below the surface layer of turf, gravel, paving blocks,
etc.) shall be sand, loamy sand, or sandy loam, as described by the
U.S. Department of Agriculture. As necessary, the applicant will
import appropriate cover material to comply with this requirement.
(4) The surface of the facility shall be stabilized by turf, gravel, porous
asphalt pavement, modular paving blocks, or other measures
approved by the Municipal Engineer.
(5) The entire volume of the runoff impounded during the water quality
storm shall be recharged to groundwater within 72 hours.
(6) The design of the infiltration facility shall be based on infiltration
rates measured using procedures outlined in the Best Management
Practices Manual.
F. For below-grade infiltration facilities:
(1) Dry wells shall generally be constructed of precast concrete rings
surrounded by clean crushed stone or gravel. The nominal stone
size shall be one to 1 1/2 inches. A bed of coarse sand not less than
six inches thick shall be placed in contact with the surface of the
soil at the bottom of the excavation. A layer of crushed stone or
gravel, not less than 10 inches thick, shall be placed on top of the
coarse sand.
(2) A media separation (e.g., geotextile or graded aggregate) filter
shall be used to maintain the integrity of the interface between the
crushed stone or gravel and the coarse sand. The geotextile shall
§ 225-188 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-188
1:447
conform with AASHTO M288 Class A for use in contact with coarse
stone backfill. The geotextile shall have a flow rate of 110 gallons
per minute as specified in ASTM D-4491.
(3) The hydraulic design of dry wells shall comply with generally
accepted principals for the design of groundwater recharge wells.
The rate of discharge shall be calculated using the Thiem equation
modified for nonequilibrium conditions using the Theis equation.
Reasonable estimates of the coefficient of transmissivity shall be
made based on published data for similar soils for both unconfined
and confined aquifers. Alternatively, the Thiem equation may be
used by calculating a dynamic radius of influence based on soil
permeability, the head above the water table, and the duration the
water level is at a particular head for which the radius of influence
is to be calculated. A design storm may be routed through dry wells
using the calculated head-discharge relationship.
(4) Where gravel drives or parking areas are used, the applicant shall
provide documentation of the in-place porosity of the media for
purposes of estimating the retained runoff volume. The hydraulic
design of such facility shall be based on infiltration rates measured
using procedures outlined in the Best Management Practices
Manual.
(5) The entire volume of the runoff impounded during the 1.25 inch,
twenty-four-hour design storm shall be recharged to the
groundwater within 72 hours. Standpipes are required in all belowgrade
infiltration facilities for the purpose of inspecting water
levels.
(6) Runoff shall be treated to remove total suspended solids and other
nonpoint pollutants prior to discharge to a below-grade infiltration
facility. Treatment may consist of a vegetated buffer strip or a grass
swale designed for stormwater treatment.
G. For sediment traps and oil/grease separators: the drainage areas
served shall be less than 1/10 of an acre in size.
H. For modular paving block systems:
(1) The upper six inches of soil beneath the paving system shall be
sand, loamy sand, or sandy loam as defined by the U.S. Department
of Agriculture. As necessary, the applicant will import appropriate
cover material to comply with this requirement.
(2) In-place infiltration rates shall be measured using procedures
outlined in EPA guidance or other method acceptable to the
Municipal Engineer.
(3) Permissible paving blocks include, but are not limited to,
interlocking concrete blocks with open work cutouts.
§ 225-188 HARDING CODE § 225-188
1:448
§ 225-189. Maintainability and maintenance.
(4) Paving block systems shall be used in pedestrian and in light traffic
areas subject to automobiles only and marked by a sign restricting
traffic to only passenger vehicles.
(5) Modification of paved areas to provide benefits associated with
below-grade infiltration facilities may be obtained by constructing
pavement over a layer of coarse aggregate or similar porous media.
A. A goal for the planning and design of a stormwater management facility
is for its efficient operation with the least practical amount of
maintenance. To accomplish this, the facility shall be developed to
eliminate avoidable maintenance tasks, minimize the long-term amount
of regular maintenance, facilitate the performance of required
maintenance tasks, and reduce the potential for extensive, difficult, and
costly remedial or emergency maintenance efforts.
B. Strong, durable, and noncorrodible materials, components, and
fasteners shall be used to reduce required maintenance efforts. These
include but are not limited to noncorrodible metals such as stainless
steel or aluminum for trash racks, orifice plates, and access hatches;
hardy, disease-resistant grasses for bottoms and side slopes as
prescribed by Soil Erosion and Sediment Control standards; reinforced
concrete for structures and headwalls; and rock riprap for channel and
outlet linings.
C. Detention facilities shall be designed to minimize propagation of
insects, particularly mosquitoes.
D. Detention facility outlets shall be designed to function without manual,
electric, or mechanical controls.
E. Responsibility for operation, maintenance, repair, and safety of
stormwater management facilities, including periodic removal and
disposal of accumulated particulate material and debris, shall remain
with a designated party or parties and successors unless assumed by a
governmental agency.
F. Prior to granting approval or as a condition of final subdivision or site
plan approval to any project subject to review under these regulations,
an applicant shall enter into an agreement with the approving authority
to ensure the long-term perpetual operation, maintenance, repair, and
safety of the stormwater facility. It shall be demonstrated to the
municipality that any proposed responsible entity has the capability to
perform the required maintenance.
G. Where a stormwater management facility is used for sediment control
during construction, a debris and sediment disposal site shall be
confirmed before the facility is constructed. The disposal site may or
may not be at the site of the proposed development. Disposal site(s)
§ 225-188 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-189
1:449
shall be included in the approved Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Plan.
H. A required maintenance plan shall include specific maintenance
techniques and schedules for each type of stormwater management
facility on the site. If maintenance of the system will be the
responsibility of a person or party other than a state, county, or local
agency, the approved maintenance plan shall be recorded upon the
deed of record of the property.
I. The maintenance plan shall include the name and address of the party
or parties responsible for long-term maintenance. Documentation of
their assumption of this responsibility shall be submitted as part of any
final site plan or subdivision application.
J. Written maintenance and repair records for all stormwater
management systems shall be maintained for at least five years by the
responsible party identified in Subsection I above and shall be provided
to the municipality upon request.
K. The party or parties responsible for operation, maintenance, repair and
safety shall file a report with the Municipal Engineer annually during
the month of April stating or showing the condition of stormwater
management facilities, maintenance work that has been performed,
maintenance work that is necessary, and any safety hazards. The report
shall include a schedule for performing needed maintenance, repairs,
or safety improvements. The Municipal Engineer shall be notified when
all such work has been completed.
L. Maintenance of artificial wetlands shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Documented visual inspection of all components of the system at
least once every six months.
(2) Documented removal of silt, litter, and other debris from catch
basins, inlets, and drainage pipes at least once every six months,
and upon noticeable buildup.
(3) Documented vegetation replacement as necessary.
M. Maintenance of detention basins shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Documented visual inspection of all components of the detention
basin at least once every six months.
(2) Documented removal of silt, litter, and other debris from all catch
basins, inlets, and drainage pipes at least once every six months,
and upon noticeable buildup.
(3) Documented maintenance and necessary replacement of
vegetation at least once each year.
§ 225-189 HARDING CODE § 225-189
1:450
§ 225-190. Safety measures.
Safety measures are to be incorporated in the design of all stormwater
and infiltration control projects. These may include but not be limited to
fencing, warning signs, staff gauges indicating depth at lowest point, and
outlet structures designed to limit access.
§ 225-191. (Reserved)
N. Maintenance of ponds and retention basins shall include, but not be
limited to, annual documented monitoring of water quality, dissolved
oxygen, vegetative growth, temperature, and fish population, for a
period of three years to ensure that the pond or retention basin is
performing as intended.
O. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance, the municipality shall so notify the responsible person in
writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have
30 days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner that
is approved by the Municipal Engineer. If, for reasons of safety, there is
need for immediate action, the responsible person shall act forthwith to
remove the danger. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the Township may immediately proceed
to do so and shall be reimbursed for the cost thereof by the responsible
person or entity.
§ 225-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-191
1:451

ARTICLE XL
Requirements for Stormwater Management Plan
§ 225-192. Submission of stormwater management plan.
§ 225-193. Stormwater management plan approval.
The applicant's stormwater management plan shall be reviewed as a part
of the subdivision or site plan review process. That Board shall consult the
engineer retained by the Board to determine if all of the requirements have
been satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth
in this Part 4.
§ 225-194. Submission requirements. [Amended 11-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 13-99]
The following information shall be required:
A. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a major subdivision
or a major site plan subject to this Part 4, the applicant shall submit a
stormwater management plan as part of the application.
B. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the standards
set forth in this Part 4.
C. The applicant shall submit five copies of the materials listed in
§ 225-194 of this Part 4.
A. Topographic base map. A topographic base map of the site shall be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits of the
proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or greater,
showing two-foot contour intervals. The map shall indicate existing
surface water drainage, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, property
lines, and all other significant natural and man-made features. The
reviewing engineer may require upstream tributary drainage system
information as necessary.
B. Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of the
natural and man-made features of the site and its environs shall be
provided. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular opportunities or
constraints for development. Alternatively, similar information provided
in an environmental impact statement conforming with Article XII of
Chapter 225 of the Township Code will comply with this requirement.
C. Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of the
topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural facilities
for stormwater management and sediment control, and other
§ 225-192 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-194
1:453
permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas where
alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover, including lawns and
other landscaping, and seasonal high groundwater elevations. A written
description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in
natural conditions may also be provided.
D. Stormwater management facilities plan. The following information shall
be provided and illustrated on a plan of the same scale as the
topographic base map, and shall include:
(1) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface contours,
estimated land area to be occupied by the stormwater management
facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and details of the plan
to control and dispose of surface water.
(2) Details of all stormwater management facilities during and after
construction, including discharge provisions, discharge capacity
for each outlet at different levels of detention, and emergency
spillway provisions with maximum discharge capacity of each
spillway.
E. A drainage area map. A map showing the total drainage area and
subdrainage areas. The map shall also show soil types and their
boundaries as shown in the County Soil Survey, or as may otherwise be
determined by an on-site soil investigation.
F. Calculations.
(1) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for
the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for the design
storms as specified in the technical standards of this Part 4.87
(2) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties of
soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall
be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and
location of required soil borings or soil pits shall depend upon what
is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types
present at the location of the control measure.
87.Editor's Note: See Article XXXIX, Technical Standards.
§ 225-194 HARDING CODE § 225-194
1:454
Part 5
[Added 6-10-200A9ffBoyrdOarbdl.e N Hoo. u6s-i0n9g; RAmegeunldateidon1s-28-2019 By Ord.
No. 04-19]
ARTICLE XLI
Affordable Housing Requirements
§ 225-195. Monitoring and reporting requirements.
The Township of Harding shall comply with the following monitoring and
reporting requirements regarding the status of the implementation of its
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan:
A. Beginning on July 1, 2019, and on every anniversary of that date
through July 1, 2025, the Township shall provide annual reporting of its
Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity to the New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing, or Local
Government Services, or other entity designated by the State of New
Jersey, with a copy provided to the Fair Share Housing Center (FSHC)
and posted on the municipal website, using forms developed for this
purpose by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs (NJDCA),
Council on Affordable Housing (COAH), or Local Government Services
(NJLGS). The reporting shall include an accounting of all Affordable
Housing Trust Fund activity, including the source and amount of funds
collected and the amount and purpose for which any funds have been
expended.
B. Beginning on July 1, 2019, and on every anniversary of that date
through July 1, 2025, the Township shall provide annual reporting of the
status of all affordable housing activity within the municipality through
posting on the municipal website with a copy of such posting provided
to the Fair Share Housing Center, using forms previously developed for
this purpose by COAH or any other forms endorsed by the Special
Master and FSHC.
C. By July 1, 2020, as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the
Township will post on its municipal website, with a copy provided to
FSHC, a status report as to its implementation of its plan and an
analysis of whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled mechanisms
continue to present a realistic opportunity and whether any
mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or supplemented.
Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit comments to
the municipality, with a copy to FSHC, regarding whether any sites no
longer present a realistic opportunity and should be replaced and
whether any mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or
supplemented. Any interested party may by motion request a hearing
before the Court regarding these issues.
D. By July 1, 2020, and every third year thereafter, as required by N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.1, the Township will post on its municipal website, with a
copy provided to FSHC, a status report as to its satisfaction of its very-
§ 225-195 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-195
1:455
§ 225-196. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this Part 5 shall have the meanings given
in this section:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the Township to
administer affordable units in accordance with this Part 5, N.J.A.C. 5:93, and
UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income
at which new restricted units in an affordable housing development are
affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a
low- or moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4, and,
in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms
to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the Township's fair share obligation, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a 100-percent affordable housing development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act and approved for crediting by the Court and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that: 1) all the residents of the development wherein the
unit is situated are 62 years of age or older; or 2) at least 80% of the
low-income requirements, including its family very-low-income
requirements. Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit
comments to the municipality and FSHC on the issue of whether the
municipality has complied with its very-low-income and family very-lowincome
housing obligations.
§ 225-195 HARDING CODE § 225-196
1:456
units are occupied by one person who is 55 years of age or older; or
3) the development has been designated by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for
older persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42
U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1, et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which households
live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing facilities, central
heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements include, but are
not limited to: transitional facilities for the homeless; Class A, B, C, D and
E boardinghomes as regulated by the State of New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs; residential health care facilities as regulated by the
New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for the developmentally
disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Human Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
Administrative Agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301, et seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load-bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land included in a proposed development including the holder of an option
to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
§ 225-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-196
1:457
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1, et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not limited
to: new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to
residential use and the creation of new affordable units through the gut
rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement and load-bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable housing region, as adopted annually by COAH or a successor
entity approved by the Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the regional
median household income by household size.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NON-EXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a Class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of
the regional median as defined by duly adopted regional income limits
published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
§ 225-196 HARDING CODE § 225-196
1:458
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq., as amended and supplemented, but does not include a
market-rate unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26-1, et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to or less than 30% of the regional median
household income by household size.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a very
low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for purposes of a rehabilitation program.
§ 225-197. Applicability.
§ 225-198. Alternative living arrangements.
A. The provisions of this Part 5 shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and that
are proposed to be created within the Township of Harding pursuant to
the Township's most recently adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan.
B. This Part 5 shall apply to all developments that contain low- and
moderate-income housing units, including any currently unanticipated
future developments that will provide low- and moderate-income
housing units, and also including projects funded with low income
housing tax credits.
A. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
(1) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15); provided, however,
that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the
provider in accordance with an alternative plan approved by the
Court.
§ 225-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-198
1:459
§ 225-199. Phasing schedule for inclusionary zoning.
In inclusionary developments, the following schedule for the issuance of
certificates of occupancy for the required affordable housing units relative
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy for the permitted market units
shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
(certificates of occupancy
issued)
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
(certificates of occupancy
issued)
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
§ 225-200. New construction.
(2) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
B. With the exception of units established with capital funding through a
twenty-year operating contract with the Department of Human
Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative living
arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on affordability in
accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative commitment is approved
by the Court.
C. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall act as
the Administrative Agent for the purposes of administering the
affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the alternative
living arrangement.
A. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units.
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income
unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be very-lowincome
units (affordable to a household earning 30% or less of
regional median income by household size). The very-low-income
units shall be counted as part of the required number of low-income
units within the development.
§ 225-198 HARDING CODE § 225-200
1:460
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be very-low- or low-income
units.
(3) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and threebedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
(4) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. This standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
B. Accessibility requirements.
(1) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and the following.
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor; and
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
(d) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
(e) If not all of the foregoing requirements in Subsection B(2)(a)
through (d) can be satisfied, then an interior accessible route
of travel must be provided between stories within an individual
unit, but if all of the terms of Subsection B(2)(a) through (d)
above have been satisfied, then an interior accessible route of
§ 225-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-200
1:461
travel shall not be required between stories within an
individual unit; and
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a, et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that Harding has collected funds
from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in the development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Township of Harding's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible
entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have been
constructed with adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection B(2)(f)[2] above
shall be used by the Township of Harding for the sole
purpose of making the adaptable entrance of an affordable
unit accessible when requested to do so by a person with a
disability who occupies or intends to occupy the unit and
requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate to the Construction Official of the
Township of Harding for the conversion of adaptable to
accessible entrances.
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the Township's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of
the Township Treasurer who shall ensure that the funds
are deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and
appropriately earmarked.
(g) Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is site
impracticable to meet the requirements. Determinations of site
impracticability shall be in compliance with the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
C. Design.
(1) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market units.
§ 225-200 HARDING CODE § 225-200
1:462
(2) In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall have access to all of the same common elements and facilities
as the market units.
D. Maximum rents and sales prices.
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the Administrative Agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC, utilizing the most recently published regional weighted
average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by HUD
and using the calculation set forth below. Income limits for all
affordable units that are created in the Township for which income
limits are not already established through a federal program
exempted from the UHAC pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 shall be
updated by the Township annually within 30 days of the publication
of determinations of median income by the Department of Housing
and Urban Development (HUD) as follows:
(a) Regional income limits shall be established for the region
within which the Township is located based on the median
income by household size, which shall be established by a
regional weighted average of uncapped Section 8 income
limits published by HUD. To compute this regional income
limit, the HUD determination of median county income for a
family of four is multiplied by the estimated households within
the county according to the most recent decennial Census. The
resulting product for each county within a housing region is
summed. The sum is divided by the estimated total households
from the most recent decennial Census in the Township's
housing region. This quotient represents the original weighted
average of median income for a household of four. The income
limit for a moderate-income unit for a household of four shall
be 80% of the regional weighted average median income for a
family of four. The income limit for a low-income unit for a
household of four shall be 50% of the HUD determination of
the regional weighted average median income for a family of
four. The income limit for a very-low-income unit for a
household of four shall be 30% of the regional weighted
average median income for a family of four. These income
limits shall be adjusted by household size based on multipliers
used by HUD to adjust median income by household size. In no
event shall the income limits be less than those for the previous
year.
(b) The income limits are the result of applying the percentages
set forth in Subsection D(1) above to HUD's determination of
median income for the fiscal year 2017 and shall be utilized
until the Township updates the income limits after HUD has
published revised determinations of median income for the
next fiscal year.
§ 225-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-200
1:463
(c) The regional asset limit used in determining an applicant's
eligibility for affordable housing pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.16(b)(3) shall be calculated by the Borough annually
by taking the percentage increase of the income limits
calculated pursuant to Subsection D(1) above over the
previous year's income limits and applying the same
percentage increase to the regional asset limit from the prior
year. In no event shall the regional asset limit be less than that
for the previous year.
(d) The resale prices of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income
units may increase annually based on the percentage increase
in the regional median income limit for each housing region
determined pursuant to the above methodology. In no event
shall the maximum resale price established by the
administrative agent be lower than the last recorded purchase
price.
(e) The rent levels of very-low-, low- and moderate-income units
may be increased annually based on the percentage increase in
the Housing Consumer Price Index for the Northeast Urban
Area, upon its publication for the prior calendar year. This
increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units
constructed pursuant to low-income housing tax credit
regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations
governing low-income housing tax credits.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted rental units shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units, provided that at least 13% of
all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be affordable to
very-low-income households, which very-low-income units shall be
part of the low-income requirement.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales
prices for each bedroom type.
§ 225-200 HARDING CODE § 225-200
1:464
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one- and one-halfperson
household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four and one-half
person household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments, the
following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one- and one-halfperson
household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(d) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units
shall be calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the
unit, including principal and interest (based on a mortgage
loan equal to 95% of the purchase price and the Federal
Reserve H.15 rate of interest), taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner
association fees do not exceed 28% of the eligible monthly
income of the appropriate size household as determined under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented;
provided, however, that the price shall be subject to the
affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(7) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
size household, including an allowance for tenant-paid utilities, as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
§ 225-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-200
1:465
§ 225-201. Utilities.
§ 225-202. Occupancy standards.
In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the
Administrative Agent shall, to the extent feasible and without causing an
undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive to:
§ 225-203. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement mechanisms.
(8) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the Administrative Agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
(9) The rents of very-low-, low- and moderate-income units may be
increased annually based on the permitted percentage increase in
the Housing Consumer Price Index for the Northeast Urban Area.
This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rent increases
for units constructed pursuant to low-income housing tax credit
regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations governing
low-income housing tax credits.
A. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market
units within an inclusionary development.
B. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth
in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved
by HUD for the Section 8 program.
A. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
B. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
C. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
D. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
A. Control periods for newly constructed restricted ownership units shall
be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, except as modified by the
terms of the settlement agreement between the Township of Harding
and the Fair Share Housing Center (FSHC), as said settlement
agreement may be further amended and supplemented, and each newly
constructed restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the
requirements of this Part 5 for a period of at least 30 years, until
Harding takes action to release the unit from such requirements; prior
to such action, a restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, except as modified by the terms of
the settlement agreement between the Township of Harding and the
§ 225-200 HARDING CODE § 225-203
1:466
§ 225-204. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units,
homeowner association fees and resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
Fair Share Housing Center (FSHC), as said settlement agreement may
be further amended and supplemented.
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the Administrative Agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an appraisal
or the unit's equalized assessed value without the restrictions in place.
D. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the Administrative Agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors
and assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt sale after the unit's
release from the restrictions set forth in this Part 5, an amount equal to
the difference between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value and its
restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a recapture
lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this Part 5 shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all Code standards upon the first
transfer of title following the removal of the restrictions provided under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the Administrative Agent.
B. The Administrative Agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association fees
and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers
and those paid by market purchasers.
§ 225-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-204
1:467
§ 225-205. Buyer income eligibility.
§ 225-206. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit;
subordination.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
Administrative Agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of approved capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger
household or the addition of a bathroom. See § 225-207.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Administrative Agent may, upon
approval by the Township Committee, and subject to the Court's
approval, permit a moderate-income purchaser to buy a low-income
unit if and only if the Administrative Agent can demonstrate that there
is an insufficient number of eligible low-income purchasers in the
housing region to permit prompt occupancy of the unit and all other
reasonable efforts to attract a low-income purchaser, including pricing
and financing incentives, have failed. Any such low-income unit that is
sold to a moderate-income household shall retain the required pricing
and pricing restrictions for a low-income unit.
C. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and shall not
lease the unit; provided, however, that the Administrative Agent may
permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified
household for a period not to exceed one year.
D. The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the Administrative Agent for a
determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness complies with
the provisions of this section, and the Administrative Agent shall issue
such determination prior to the owner incurring such indebtedness.
§ 225-204 HARDING CODE § 225-206
1:468
§ 225-207. Capital improvements to ownership units.
§ 225-208. Control periods for restricted rental units.
B. With the exception of first purchase money mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95% of
the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the Administrative Agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6(b).
A. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
Administrative Agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of the
unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or that add an additional bathroom. In
no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
B. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that
are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was
initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer,
dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum
allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the Administrative Agent at
the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The purchase of
central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
unit and not included in the base price may be made a condition of the
unit resale, provided that the price, which shall be subject to ten-year,
straight-line depreciation, has been approved by the Administrative
Agent. Unless otherwise approved by the Administrative Agent, the
purchase of any property other than central air conditioning shall not
be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has
taken place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
A. Control periods for newly constructed restricted rental units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, except as modified by the terms of
the settlement agreement between the Township of Harding and the
Fair Share Housing Center (FSHC), as such settlement agreement may
be further amended and supplemented, and each newly constructed
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
Part 5 for a period of at least 30 years, until Harding takes action to
release the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action, a
restricted rental unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, except as modified by the terms of the settlement
agreement between the Township of Harding and the Fair Share
Housing Center (FSHC), as such settlement agreement may be further
amended and supplemented.
§ 225-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-208
1:469
§ 225-209. Rent restrictions for rental units; leases.
§ 225-210. 100-percent affordable projects.
All 100-percent affordable projects, including projects funded through lowincome
housing tax credits, shall comply with the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, et seq., except as modified by
the terms of the settlement agreement executed between the Township of
Harding and the Fair Share Housing Center (FSHC), as such settlement
agreement may be further amended and supplemented. All such projects
shall be required to have an initial thirty-year affordability control period
plus a fifteen-year extended use period.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Middlesex. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to
the Administrative Agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this Part 5 despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on the
property containing the unit.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units, and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full amount of
the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each
restricted rental unit shall be provided to the Administrative Agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the Administrative Agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the Administrative Agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this Part
5.
D. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling units
are restricted rental units in compliance with this Part 5.
§ 225-208 HARDING CODE § 225-211
1:470
§ 225-211. Tenant income eligibility.
§ 225-212. Municipal housing liaison.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of the regional
median household income by household size.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of the regional
median household income by household size.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of the regional median
household income by household size.
B. The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible
monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may
be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(5) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the Administrative Agent and the owner of the
unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsections A(1) through B(5) above
with the Administrative Agent, who shall counsel the household on
budgeting.
§ 225-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-212
1:471
§ 225-213. Administrative agent.
An Administrative Agent may either be an independent entity serving under
contract to and reporting to the municipality, or the municipality itself,
through a designated municipal employee, department, board, agency or
committee, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14(c). The fees of the
Administrative Agent shall be paid by the owners of the affordable units
for which the services of the Administrative Agent are required. The
Administrative Agent shall be qualified through a training program
sponsored by the Affordable Housing Professionals of New Jersey before
assuming the duties. The Administrative Agent shall perform the duties and
A. There is hereby created the position of Municipal Housing Liaison. The
Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for Harding,
including the following responsibilities which may not be contracted
out to the Administrative Agent:
(1) Serving as Harding's primary point of contact for all inquiries from
the state, affordable housing providers, Administrative Agents and
interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Harding's Fair Share
Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, submitting and posting all monitoring reports
as required by the Court and by this Part 5;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
Administrative Agents, as needed; and
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at least
annually and more often as needed.
B. The Township of Harding shall appoint a specific municipal employee to
serve as a Municipal Housing Liaison responsible for overseeing the
Township's affordable housing program, including overseeing the
administration of affordability controls on the affordable units and the
affirmative marketing of available affordable units in accordance with
the Township's Affirmative Marketing Plan; fulfilling monitoring and
reporting requirements; and supervising Administrative Agent(s).
Harding shall adopt a resolution appointing the person to fulfill the
position of Municipal Housing Liaison. The Municipal Housing Liaison
shall be appointed by the governing body and may be a full- or part-time
municipal employee.
C. Subject to the approval of the Court, the Township of Harding shall
designate one or more Administrative Agent(s) to administer and to
affirmatively market the affordable units constructed in the Township in
accordance with this Part 5. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall
supervise the work of the Administrative Agent(s).
§ 225-212 HARDING CODE § 225-213
1:472
responsibilities of an Administrative Agent as set forth in UHAC, including
those set forth in Sections 5:80-26.14, 16 and 18 thereof, which includes:
A. Affirmative marketing.
(1) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable
housing units in accordance with the Affirmative Marketing Plan of
the Township of Harding and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15;
and
(2) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services
to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
B. Household certification.
(1) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews
with interested households;
(2) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of
gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of
income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(3) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(4) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a
certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the
ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(5) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region where the
units are located;
(6) Employing a random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the Township of Harding when
referring households for certification to affordable units; and
(7) Notifying the following entities of the availability of affordable
housing units in the Township of Harding: Fair Share Housing
Center, the New Brunswick, Plainfield Area, Perth Amboy and
Metuchen/Edison branches of the NAACP, and the Latino Action
Network.
C. Affordability controls.
(1) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions
and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of
each restricted unit;
§ 225-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-213
1:473
(2) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(3) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation
of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the
Middlesex County Register of Deeds or Middlesex County Clerk's
office after the termination of the affordability controls for each
restricted unit;
(4) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(5) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or
certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
D. Resales and re-rentals.
(1) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information between owners and the Administrative Agent
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or re-rental;
and
(2) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information to low- (or very-low-) and moderate-income households
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or re-rental.
E. Processing requests from unit owners.
(1) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from owners
of restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership that the amount of
indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the terms of this Part
5.
(2) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from
owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements
to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations
to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional
bedrooms or bathrooms and the depreciated cost of central air
conditioning systems;
(3) Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a restricted
unit; and
(4) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units
for hardship waivers.
F. Enforcement.
(1) Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners,
and notifying all such owners that they must either move back to
their unit or sell it;
§ 225-213 HARDING CODE § 225-213
1:474
§ 225-214. Affirmative marketing requirements.
(2) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at
the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or
development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no
restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to
any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the
Administrative Agent;
(3) Posting annually, in all rental properties (including two-family
homes), a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with
the telephone number of the Administrative Agent where
complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
(4) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units,
reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(5) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the
municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(6) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the Administrative
Agent, to be approved by the Township Committee and the Court,
setting forth procedures for administering the affordability
controls. The Operating Manual(s) shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the Township Clerk, in the office of the
Municipal Housing Liaison, and in the office(s) of the
Administrative Agent(s).
G. Additional responsibilities.
(1) The Administrative Agent shall have the authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
(2) The Administrative Agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet the
Court-approved monitoring and reporting requirements in
accordance with the deadlines set forth in this Part 5.
(3) The Administrative Agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as needed.
A. The Township of Harding shall adopt by resolution an affirmative
marketing plan, subject to approval of the Court, that is compliant with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
§ 225-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-214
1:475
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing.
The affirmative marketing plan is intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in
that region. It is a continuing program that directs marketing activities
toward Housing Region 2 and is required to be followed throughout the
period of restriction.
C. The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 2, comprised of
Essex, Morris, Union and Warren Counties.
D. The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
affirmative marketing plan and for the proper administration of the
affirmative marketing program, including initial sales and rentals and
resales and re-rentals. The Administrative Agent designated by the
Township of Harding shall implement the affirmative marketing plan to
assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
E. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the Administrative
Agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The affirmative marketing plan shall describe the media to be used in
advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing
the affirmative marketing plan, the Administrative Agent shall consider
the use of language translations where appropriate.
G. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
H. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the County Administration Building
and/or the County Library for each county within the housing region;
the municipal administration building and the municipal library in the
municipality in which the units are located; and the developer's rental
office. Applications shall be mailed to prospective applicants upon
request.
I. In addition to other affirmative marketing strategies, the Administrative
Agent shall provide specific notice of the availability of affordable
housing units in Harding, and copies of the application forms, to the
following entities: Fair Share Housing Center, the New Brunswick,
Plainfield Area, Perth Amboy and Metuchen/Edison branches of the
NAACP, and the Latino Action Network.
J. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
§ 225-214 HARDING CODE § 225-215
1:476
§ 225-215. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing an
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for household
recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage,
recuperation of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on
the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the municipality
may take the following action(s) against the owner, developer or tenant
for any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after
service of the written notice:
(1) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or
tenant is adjudged by the Court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and
every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of these provisions
and not a continuation of the initial offense;
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment into the Township of Harding
Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent
illegally collected;
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the Court.
(2) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable as if
the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase money
mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or moderateincome
unit.
§ 225-215 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-215
1:477
(a) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at
which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating
owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the
amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase
money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality,
including attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have his
right to possession terminated as well as his title conveyed
pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior
liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if
any, shall be applied to reimburse the municipality for any and
all costs and expenses incurred in connection with either the
court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's
sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible
for the full extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all
costs incurred by the municipality in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed
in escrow by the municipality for the owner and shall be held in
such escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such
earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such
balance within the two-year period shall automatically result in
a forfeiture of such balance to the municipality. Any interest
accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the municipality, whether
such balance shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the
municipality.
(c) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser
at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The
owner determined to be in violation of the provisions of this
plan and from whom title and possession were taken by means
of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of
redemption.
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage
and any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the
§ 225-215 HARDING CODE § 225-215
1:478
§ 225-216. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an Administrative Agent appointed pursuant
to this Part 5 shall be filed in writing with the Court.
low- and moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating
owner with an amount equal to the difference between the
first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs
of the enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be
treated in the same manner as the excess which would have
been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
(e) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall
obligate the owner to accept an offer to purchase from any
qualified purchaser which may be referred to the owner by the
municipality, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income unit as
permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing
units.
(f) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of governing
affordable housing units until such time as title is conveyed
from the owner.
§ 225-215 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-216
1:479
Chapter 233
LIGHTING, EXTERIOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use and development — See Ch. 225. Peace and good order — See Ch. 285.
§ 233-1. Lighting restrictions.
No lighting installed upon or designed to illuminate any building or
structure, yard area or landscape feature, recreation court or recreation
area in the Township shall produce so strong or dazzling a light or a
reflection of so strong or dazzling a light beyond property lines as to
constitute a nuisance to adjoining properties. Exterior lighting shall not be
directed at adjoining properties and shall be hooded or shielded so that
glare will not become a nuisance to adjoining properties or motorists. For
purposes of this section, lighting shall constitute a nuisance if it exceeds 0.2
footcandle at any point on a property line.
§ 233-2. Hours of operation.
Except as necessary for safety, security purposes or social functions, all
exterior lighting shall be switched off at night after 11:00 p.m.
Chapter 235
LIMOUSINES OR LIVERY SERVICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motor vehicle regulations, traffic and
parking — See Ch. 250.
§ 235-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meaning as in N.J.S.A. 48:16-13.
§ 235-2. Insurance.
A. No limousine shall be operated wholly or partly along any street in any
municipality until the owner of the limousine shall have filed with the
Clerk of the municipality in which the owner has his principal place of
business an insurance policy of a company duly licensed to transact
business under the insurance laws of this state in the sum of $1,500,000
against loss by reason of the liability imposed by law upon every
§ 225-216 HARDING CODE § 235-2
1:480
§ 235-3. Power of attorney.
The owner of the limousine shall execute and deliver to the Division of
Motor Vehicles, concurrently with filing of a policy referred to in N.J.S.A.
48:16-14, a power of attorney, wherein and whereby the owner shall appoint
the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles his true and lawful attorney
for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of a court of
competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the
indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed. A copy of the power of
attorney shall be placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 235-4. License application.
§ 235-5. Issuance of license to operate limousine; fees.
limousine owner for damages on account of bodily injury or death
suffered by any person as the result of an accident occurring by reason
of the ownership, maintenance or use of the limousine upon any public
street. Such operation shall be permitted only so long as the insurance
policy shall remain in force to the full and collectible amount of
$1,500,000.
B. The insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final
judgment recovered by any person on account of the ownership,
maintenance and use of such limousine, or any fault in respect thereto,
and shall be for the benefit of every person suffering loss, damage or
injury as aforesaid.
A. In addition to the submission of an insurance policy and the power of
attorney, the applicant must submit a valid New Jersey driver's license
and a valid registration for the vehicle to be licensed. The applicant
shall submit to a background check and being photographed and
fingerprinted by the Police Department. The minimum fee for such
initial background check, fingerprinting and photographing shall be
$30. For renewal of fingerprinting and photographing, the minimum fee
shall be $18. Fees are to be paid by money order made payable to the
Division of State Police.
B. An applicant shall be limited to one license per address. An applicant
who wishes to obtain an additional license must submit a notarized
letter from the garage or owner of commercial property where the
applicant's additional limousine shall be garaged, stating the applicant
is permitted to garage his or her limousine at such address.
A. The Clerk of the municipality in which the owner has his principal place
of business, upon the filing of the required insurance policy, required
documentation, and the payment of a fee of $50, shall issue in duplicate
a license to operate showing that the owner of the limousine has
complied with the terms and provisions of this chapter.
§ 235-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-5
1:481
Chapter 237
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Canvassing and soliciting — See Ch. 123. Solid waste; recycling — See Ch. 338.
§ 237-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall include
the meanings given herein:
ASHES — The solid residue after the combustion of any and all types of solid
fuel, such as wood, coal, coke, charcoal or leaves.
GARBAGE — All putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, storing and preparation and disposal of food in any and all forms.
LITTER — Ashes, garbage, refuse, rubbish, trash and trimmings and
clippings, as defined in this chapter, and all other waste materials which, if
thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tend to create a danger to public
health, safety and welfare.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — All nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
B. The license shall recite the name of the insurance company, the number
and date of expiration of the policy, a description of limousine insured
thereunder and the registration number of the same.
C. The duplicate license shall be filed with the Division of Motor Vehicles
before any such car is registered as a limousine.
D. The original license shall be retained within the limousine and be
available for inspection by any police officer in the state. In lieu of
insurance information required on the license pursuant to this section,
the owner of a limousine may affix to the original license retained
within the limousine a notarized letter from an insurance company
containing the same insurance information required in the recital,
which shall constitute proof of insurance coverage, and which shall also
be available for inspection by any police officer in the state. A copy of
the notarized letter shall constitute proof to the Director of the Division
of Motor Vehicles that the applicant has complied with the insurance
provision of this section.
§ 235-5 HARDING CODE § 237-1
1:482
TRASH — All old furniture, appliances, rubber tires, junk, cartons,
household articles of an unwieldy nature, containers and other odds and
ends usually disposed of by householders.
TRIMMINGS AND CLIPPINGS — All collections of leaves, grass, rakings of
lawn and yards, tree limbs and branches.
§ 237-2. Placement of snow, ice and litter restricted. [Amended
4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
No persons shall sweep, throw or deposit snow or ice into any public
roadway or against or around any fire hydrant. No person shall sweep,
throw or deposit litter in or upon any occupied or vacant property, whether
owned by such person or not, or in or upon any road, land abutting any road,
public place, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water or into or at any
car, vehicle, structure, fence or person within the Township, provided that
nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to prohibit the depositing
of litter in public or private receptacles for collection. Persons placing litter
in public or private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent
it from being carried or deposited by natural causes upon any road, public
place or private property within the Township.
§ 237-3. Owners and tenants to maintain premises free of litter.
No owner, tenant or occupant of any occupied or unoccupied land, or part
or parts thereof in the Township, shall permit or maintain thereon:
§ 237-4. Storage of unlicensed motor vehicles restricted.
No person shall keep, store, abandon or leave upon any road or parcel of
land any motor vehicle which includes any vehicle propelled otherwise than
by muscular power, not currently used for transportation and not licensed
for the current license year, or any unused machinery, equipment or parts
thereof, provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit
the placing, keeping or storing of any such motor vehicle, machinery or
equipment or parts thereof in a garage or other building.
§ 237-5. Casting litter from motor vehicles prohibited.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any road, public place or private property within the Township.
§ 237-6. Advertising matter to be securely placed.
No person shall cast or place, or cause to be cast or placed, any
advertisement, handbill, circular or paper on any road, or into any
A. Any litter; or
B. Any refuse or debris resulting from construction activities or the
demolishing of a building for a period of more than one month after
completion of said construction or demolition.
§ 237-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-6
1:483
vestibules or yards, or upon porches of any dwelling house or other
buildings, or into or on any vehicle while on a public road or private
property; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to newspapers
and addressed envelopes delivered to subscribers and addressees.
Advertisements, handbills, circulars and papers may be distributed in the
Township, provided that the same are securely placed at each dwelling so
as not to be blown away by the wind.
§ 237-7. Trucks and truckloads causing litter prohibited.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
Township unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any
load, contents, dust or litter from being blown or deposited upon any road or
public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within
the Township, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any road
mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. Any soil,
sand, fill, stone, dry chemicals or fertilizers not in containers shall be either
covered completely or wetted down prior to traveling on a road within the
Township, in such manner that sand, dirt or dust does not blow from said
vehicle; and in no event shall the load protrude more than 12 inches above
the sides of the vehicle at the peak or highest point of the load.
§ 237-8. Dust caused by excavation or grading to be controlled.
Any excavating or grading operation shall be conducted in such a manner as
not to create dust, and, if necessary, the site of the work shall be sprinkled
or treated with a dust preventative.
§ 237-9. Costs of abatement to become lien.88
If the owner, tenant, occupant or person in charge of the land neglects or
refuses to abate or remedy a violation of this chapter within 10 days after
notice thereof, the Health Officer or the Construction Official, as the case
may be, or his designated agent, shall cause the violation to be abated
and remedied. The reasonable cost thereof as determined by the Township
Committee shall be charged against the lot on which the violation exists.
The amount so charged shall become a lien upon such lot and shall be added
to the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lot, the same to bear
interest at the same rate as taxes and to be collected and enforced by the
Tax Collector and in the same manner as taxes.
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 237-6 HARDING CODE § 237-10
1:484
§ 237-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No.
1-90]
Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of
this chapter shall be liable to a penalty as provided in § 1-3, General penalty,
of the Code of the Township of Harding.
Chapter 250
MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATIONS, TRAFFIC AND PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and driveways — See Ch. 346.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 237-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-10
1:485

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 12-12-1967 by Ord. No. 3-67 (Ch. 121, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 250-1. Speed limits.
The following speed limits are established for both directions of traffic along
the specified roads within the Township:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Bailey's Mill Road
[Added 6-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 09-10
30 Entire length
Blue Mill Road 40 Between the center of Featherbed
Lane and the Harding Township -
Chatham Township line
Featherbed Lane [Added
12-12-1988 by Ord.
No. 13-88]
35 Entire length
Meyersville Road
[Amended 2-21-2007
by Ord. No. 3-07]
30 Between the boundary of the
Great Swamp National Wildlife
Refuge and the Harding
Township - Chatham Township
line
Millbrook Road 30 Between Pleasantville Road and
Blue Mill Road
Pleasantville Road
[Added 11-13-1989 by
Ord. No. 9-89]
30 Entire length
Sand Spring Road
[Added 11-13-1973 by
Ord. No. 13-73;
amended 12-12-1988
by Ord. No. 14-88]
35 Entire length
Woodland Avenue
[Added 8-8-1972 by
Ord. No. 7-72]
40 Between the Harding Township -
Morris Township line and the
Harding Township - Chatham
Township line
§ 250-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-2
1:487
§ 250-2. Speed limit signs to be posted.
Speed limit signs shall be posted in accordance with the statutes of New
Jersey and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways, adopted by the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles, as
revised and amended.
§ 250-3. Parking prohibited. [Amended 4-10-1973 by Ord. No. 5-73]
The parking, stopping or standing of any vehicle in or upon those portions
of the following public thoroughfares within the Township as hereinafter
provided shall be unlawful:
Name of Street Side Location
Blue Mill Road Both Between the center line of
Dickson's Mill Road and a point
350 feet west thereof and
between the center line of
Dickson's Mill Road and a point
850 feet east thereof
Dickson's Mill Road
[Amended 10-18-2006
by Ord. No. 19-06]
Both Between the center line of Blue
Mill Road and a point 700 feet
southerly thereof
Dickson's Mill Road
[Added 10-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 19-06]
Both Within 100 feet of the bridge over
Pine Brook in both directions
Lindsley Road [Added
10-18-2006 by Ord.
No. 19-06]
Both Between a point 245 feet from the
center line of Lee's Hill Road and
a point 420 feet from the center
line of Lee's Hill Road
Pleasant Plains Road
[Added 10-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 19-06]
Both Between a point 500 feet from the
center line of Lee's Hill Road and
a point 700 feet from the center
line of Lee's Hill Road
Sand Spring Road
[Added 3-13-1995 by
Ord. No. 1-95;
amended 8-14-1995 by
Ord. No. 7-95]
Northeast Between the center line of
Blackwell Place and a point 325
feet north thereof, such point
being the border of Morris
Township and Harding Township
Van Beuren Road
[Added 10-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 19-06]
Both Between the north side of the
bridge over Great Brook and a
point 100 feet north thereof
§ 250-4. No-parking signs to be posted.
No-parking signs shall be posted in accordance with the statutes of New
Jersey and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
§ 250-2 HARDING CODE § 250-4
1:488
Highways, adopted by the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles, as
revised and amended.
§ 250-5. Truck weight limit. [Added 9-8-1970 by Ord. No. 3-70]
No truck having a combined gross weight of vehicle and load in excess
of four tons shall be permitted to use any Township-owned or -maintained
road.
§ 250-6. Certain roads exempted. [Added 9-8-1970 by Ord. No. 3-70;
amended 2-21-2007 by Ord. No. 4-07]
Except as set forth in this section, all roads and highways owned or
maintained by the County of Morris or the State of New Jersey are
specifically exempted from the provisions of this article:
Name of Street Side Location
Lee's Hill Road (CR
663)
North Between a point 60 feet west of the
center line of Primrose Brook and a
point 145 feet west of the center line
of Primrose Brook
Lee's Hill Road (CR
663)
Northwest
Between a point 510 feet northeast of
the center line of Pleasant Plains Road
and a point 560 feet northeast of the
center line of Pleasant Plains Road
Village Road (CR
646)
North Between a point 350 feet east of the
center line of Pleasantville Road and a
point 300 feet east of the center line of
Pleasantville Road
§ 250-7. Certain vehicles exempted. [Added 9-8-1970 by Ord. No.
3-70]
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the minimum use of
Township roads by a truck whose gross weight is in excess of four tons
where such is necessary for commercial purposes relating to premises
abutting Township roads or to exclude from any Township road vehicles
used by:
A. Public utility companies in connection with the construction,
installation, operation or maintenance of public utility facilities in the
Township.
B. The Township, the County of Morris or the State of New Jersey in
connection with the maintenance or snowplowing of roads or highways
in the Township, including trucks furnishing materials for said
maintenance or snowplowing.
C. Any Police or Fire Department or Board of Education in the
performance of its duties.
§ 250-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7
1:489
§ 250-8. No-passing zones. [Added 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 11-89]
No-passing zones shall be established and maintained as follows:
Name of Street Side Location
Sand Spring Road Both Entire length of Sand Spring Road,
between Blue Mill Road and the
border of Morris Township, in the
Township of Harding, County of
Morris, as authorized by the New
Jersey Department of Transportation
on October 27, 1989
§ 250-9. Fire zones. [Added 4-9-1990 by Ord. No. 4-90]
Fire zones shall be established, and the parking of motor vehicles shall be
prohibited in areas designated as fire zones within the Township of Harding,
as follows:
D. Any persons engaged in the collection of litter. The word "litter" shall
have the meaning given to it in Chapter 237 of this Code.
A. The following fire zones shall be established within the driveway area of
the Harding School:
(1) Along the entire southwesterly side of the driveway in front of the
Junior School Building.
(2) Along a forty-foot section centered on the easterly entrance of the
Junior School (gymnasium entrance).
(3) Along a forty-foot section on the northeasterly side of the driveway
located on the southwesterly side of the Junior School Building.
(4) Along a forty-foot section centered on the sidewalk leading to the
entrance on the southwesterly side of the Elementary School
Building.
(5) Within 25 feet of any fire cistern drafting connection. [Added
10-18-2006 by Ord. No. 19-06]
B. Within 25 feet of any fire cistern drafting connection at the Department
of Public Works. [Added 10-18-2006 by Ord. No. 19-06]
C. The following fire zones shall be established within Bayne Park: [Added
10-18-2006 by Ord. No. 19-06]
(1) Within 50 feet of the edge of Bayne Pond in Bayne Park.
(2) On both sides of the entrance drive from Blue Mill Road for a
distance of 100 feet as measured from the center line of Blue Mill
Road.
§ 250-7 HARDING CODE § 250-10
1:490
§ 250-10. Violations and penalties. [Added 9-8-1970 by Ord. No.
3-70; amended 3-31-2010 by Ord. No. 06-10]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this article or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $110 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 250-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-10
1:491

ARTICLE II
Unlicensed Motor-Driven Vehicles
[Adopted 1-11-1972 by Ord. No. 8-71 (Ch. 121, Art. II, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 250-11. Operation restricted.
No person shall operate any type of unlicensed motor-driven vehicle or
conveyance, including, but not necessarily limited to, snowmobiles, twowheel
motor vehicles known as "mini bicycles," "trail bicycles" or "motor
scooters" and three- or four-wheel motor vehicles known as "all-terrain
vehicles" or "go-carts" under the following circumstances:
§ 250-12. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to:
§ 250-13. Enforcement.
The police shall immediately confiscate any unlicensed motor-driven vehicle
operated in an area or in a manner prohibited by § 250-11 of this article.
The unlicensed motor-driven vehicle shall be returned upon the direction
of the Municipal Court Judge. Any person who is adjudged to have violated
the provisions of § 250-11, the owner of the vehicle and any parent who is
A. On private property in the Township without the express permission to
do so of the owner or occupant of said property.
B. On any public road in the Township.
C. On public property in the Township without the written permission to
do so of the proper public authority.
D. In a manner so as to make, continue or cause to be made or continued
any noise in violation of the standard set forth in § 258-3 of this Code.
E. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger the safety of any person or the property of any other
person.
A. Police and emergency vehicles.
B. Any organization of good moral repute which has applied to the
Township Committee and been given permission to use specified
vehicles on Township-owned lands in connection with organized and
supervised activities, which permission may be subject to such
conditions as the Township Committee deems proper; provided,
however, that an insurance policy or a certificate of insurance is filed
with the Township Clerk and approved as to amount and coverage of
the proposed activities by the Township Committee; and provided,
further, that the Township Committee is satisfied that the Township will
be held harmless for any such use of its lands.
§ 250-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-13
1:493
found not to have exercised reasonable care to control the acts of his child
in violation of § 250-11 shall be subject to such fine or imprisonment as the
Municipal Court Judge, in his discretion, shall determine and as provided
in the general penalty provisions of § 1-3 of this Code, including all towing,
storage and other costs incurred by the Township.
§ 250-13 HARDING CODE § 250-13
1:494
ARTICLE III
Emergency Parking Prohibitions
[Adopted 2-8-1988 by Ord. No. 1-88 (Ch. 121, Art. III, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 250-14. Parking prohibited when snow accumulates.
Parking of any vehicle on any portion of a public road, street or highway is
prohibited whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it
covers the public road, street or highway in the Township of Harding.
§ 250-15. Prohibition to remain in effect.
Said parking prohibition shall remain in effect after the snow has ceased
and until the streets, roads or highways have been plowed sufficiently and
to the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
§ 250-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SNOW — Any precipitation depositing any accumulation on the streets,
roads or highways, including snow, sleet, hail, ice or freezing rain.
§ 250-17. Signs to be erected and maintained.
As to § 250-14 of this article, regulatory and warning signs in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 shall be erected and maintained at street, road or
highway entrances for motor vehicles into this Township.
§ 250-18. Operator of parked vehicle to notify Township.
During extreme weather conditions, when a vehicle is not able to proceed
and must be parked on any street, road or highway in the Township, the
operator of such vehicle must, by the quickest means of communication,
notify a police officer of the Township on duty and/or the Superintendent of
Public Works of such vehicle.
§ 250-19. Unoccupied vehicles to be deemed a nuisance.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal of such a vehicle.
The owner of such vehicle shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and
storage which may result from such removal before regaining possession of
such vehicle.
§ 250-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-20
1:495
§ 250-20. Declaration of emergency.
Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon any
public road or street, or portion thereof, in the Township of Harding where
either a permanent or temporary emergency no-parking sign is displayed.
The ranking Harding Township police officer on duty is authorized to
declare such emergency and to direct the posting of temporary emergency
no-parking signs when, in his judgment, weather conditions, accident, fire,
public celebration or other similar emergency situation requires the
avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow
of traffic. Notification that emergency no-parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of said signs. Placing written advice of such
posting on or in such a parked vehicle shall be deemed sufficient notification
hereunder.
§ 250-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-31-2010 by Ord. No.
06-10]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this article shall be liable to
a penalty of not more than $110 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding
15 days, or both.
§ 250-20 HARDING CODE § 250-21
1:496
ARTICLE IV
Parking for Handicapped
[Adopted 12-9-1991 by Ord. No. 10-91 (Ch. 121, Art. IV, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 250-22. Definitions.
Terms used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Title
39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
§ 250-23. Designation of reserved parking spaces.
§ 250-24. Signing requirements.
§ 250-25. Restrictions on use of reserved parking spaces.
No person shall park a motor vehicle in any parking space which is duly
designated and marked in accordance with the provisions of this article
as being set aside and reserved for the vehicles of handicapped persons
unless:
A. In accordance with provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46 relating to parking
facilities open to the public or to which the public is invited, those
parking spaces enumerated in Schedule A to this article90 are hereby
set aside and reserved for the vehicles of handicapped persons.
B. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, an owner of
private property may request that certain parking spaces be set aside
and reserved for the vehicles of handicapped persons, and in the event
that such a request is approved by an amendment or supplement to this
article, then the provisions of this article, including the penalties for
violations, shall apply to such parking spaces.91
A. Each parking space set aside and reserved for the vehicles of
handicapped persons pursuant to this article shall be marked with the
required New Jersey designation sign (MUTCD R7-8) and the required
penalty sign.
B. The owners of properties to which the public is invited shall be
responsible for erecting and maintaining the required signs.
A. The vehicle shall have affixed thereto special license plates bearing the
national wheelchair symbol, or the vehicle shall display a handicapped
placard issued by the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles or a
currently valid temporary handicapped placard issued by a Municipal
Chief of Police; and
B. A handicapped person is either the driver or a passenger in the vehicle.
90.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 250-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-26
1:497
§ 250-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-31-2010 by Ord. No.
06-10]
Any person parking a motor vehicle in a parking space set aside and
reserved for the vehicles of handicapped persons in violation of the
provisions of § 250-25 of this article shall be liable to a fine of $276 for the
first offense and, for subsequent offenses, a fine of at least $276 and up to
90 days' community service on such terms and in such form as the court
shall deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
§ 250-26 HARDING CODE § 250-26
1:498
ARTICLE V
Regulation of Towing Services
[Adopted 11-16-2011 by Ord. No. 15-11]
§ 250-27. Purpose.
§ 250-28. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — An individual or a legally formed business entity that seeks
to obtain a license from the Township to furnish tow truck or wrecker
services within the Township pursuant to this article.
BASIC TOWING SERVICES — Towing, as defined in this section, and other
ancillary services as may be specified by the Director by regulation.
CONSUMER — A natural person.
DEBRIS CLEANUP —
DECOUPLING FEE — A charge by a towing company for releasing a motor
vehicle to its owner or operator when the vehicle has been, or is about to
be, hooked or lifted by a tower but prior to the vehicle actually having been
moved or removed from the property.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Division of Consumer Affairs.
A. It is the purpose of this article to provide nonexclusionary and
nondiscriminatory regulations governing the removal of motor vehicles
from private or public property on a rotating basis and for the
subsequent storage of such vehicles following removal, all as provided
by N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(u).
B. It is also the goal to provide the best possible service for motorists
traveling the roadways of Harding Township. In keeping with this goal,
it is necessary to establish a permitting process to assure that only
responsible, professional towing operators are permitted to operate
within the Township and provide safe and efficient service for motorists
whose vehicles are in need of towing and roadside services.
STANDARD SITE CLEAN UP — Refers to the amount of debris removal
that should reasonably be anticipated at the scene of a motor vehicle
accident or incident. The standard site cleanup is usually defined to the
point of impact, the final resting point of the vehicle and the associated
debris field.
A.
EXTENDED SITE CLEANUP — Refers to the removal of debris at the
point of impact, as well as along the path of pre-impact and or postimpact,
where vehicle disintegration and/or other property damage
occurs as a result of the motor vehicle accident or incident.
B.
§ 250-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-28
1:499
DIVISION — The Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and
Public Safety.
FUEL SURCHARGE — A surcharge applied to a towing bill when the cost of
fuel is over a predetermined amount.
HEAVY DUTY — A gross weight of at least 26,000 pounds.
LABOR — The additional work done at the scene by the tow truck operator,
which is beyond that required to perform a basic tow, or any additional
manpower needed to complete a recovery, winching or towing a vehicle.
Labor charged for additional manpower shall be based on a per-man, perhour
basis.
LEASE — The applicant's lease of a vehicle through a leasing company,
and showing the applicant on the registration as the owner or lessee. If
the registration is such that the lessee is not listed, the applicant will be
required to provide lease agreement documents.
LIGHT-MEDIUM DUTY — A gross weight of less than 26,000 pounds.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes all vehicles propelled other than by muscular
power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks and
motorized bicycles, motorized scooters, motorized wheelchairs and
motorized skateboards.
NONCONSENSUAL TOWING — The towing of a motor vehicle without the
consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle.
PERSON — An individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
limited liability company or any other business entity.
POLICE — The Police Department of Harding Township or of any
jurisdiction in the subject matter.
PRINCIPAL LOCATION — The business office of an applicant, where the
applicant shall conduct business associated with the towing and storage of
vehicles under the authority of the Harding Township police.
PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNER — The owner or lessee of private property, or
an agent of such owner or lessee, but shall not include a private property
towing company acting as an agent of such owner or lessee.
PRIVATE PROPERTY TOWING — The nonconsensual towing from private
property or from a storage facility by a motor vehicle of a consumer's
motor vehicle that is parked illegally, parked during a time at which such
parking is not permitted, or otherwise parked without authorization, or the
immobilization of or preparation for moving or removing of such motor
vehicle, for which a service charge is made, either directly or indirectly.
This term shall not include the towing of a motor vehicle that has been
abandoned on private property in violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.5, provided
that the abandoned vehicle is reported to the appropriate law enforcement
agency prior to removal and the vehicle is removed in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.6.
§ 250-28 HARDING CODE § 250-28
1:500
PRIVATE PROPERTY TOWING COMPANY — A person offering or
performing private property towing services.
ROAD SERVICE — A service provided at the scene to enable a vehicle to be
driven away, including but not limited to changing of a flat tire, jump-start
of a vehicle or the delivery of fuel. There will be a separate charge for the
fuel at its face value.
SECURE STORAGE FACILITY — A storage facility that is either completely
indoors or is surrounded by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that is
at least six feet high and is lighted from dusk to dawn.
TOWING — The moving or removing from public or private property or
from a storage facility by a motor vehicle of a consumer's motor vehicle
that is damaged as a result of an accident or otherwise disabled, recovered
after being stolen or is parked illegally or otherwise without authorization,
parked during a time at which such parking is not permitted or otherwise
parked without authorization, or the immobilization of or preparation for
moving or removing of such motor vehicle, for which a service charge
is made, either directly or indirectly. Dues or other charges of clubs or
associations which provide towing services to club or association members
shall not be considered a service charge for purposes of this definition.
TOWING LIST — A rotating list of all individual towers meeting the
requirements set forth hereunder. Contractors will remain on the list for a
period of three years, provided they continue to meet the requirements set
forth in this chapter and in their contracts, or until earlier removed from
the list as provided hereunder or thereunder.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may
be transported upon a highway.
WAITING TIME — The time a towing operator has equipment and personnel
waiting at a scene to perform a towing operation.
WINCHING — The process of moving a vehicle by the use of the wire rope
of the tow truck, from a position that is not accessible for direct hookup
by a conventional means for loading onto a tow vehicle. Winching shall not
mean pulling a vehicle onto a flatbed or carrier or lifting of a vehicle with a
conventional tow truck.
YARD CHARGE — The relocation of a vehicle from the towing operator's
storage facility to a public roadway for the removal by another towing
company. It shall not apply to vehicles that are capable of being driven from
the storage facility to the roadway.
§ 250-29. Application process.
A. All applications to be placed on the towing list shall be submitted to the
Chief of the Harding Township Police Department on the application
form developed by the Police Department.
B. Minimum standards of operator performance. All applicants must be
able to meet the following minimum standards of performance:
§ 250-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-29
1:501
(1) Applicants must be appropriately licensed by the State of New
Jersey.
(2) Applicants must be able to reach the scene of a vehicle to be towed
within 20 minutes (day or night, weekends and holidays).
(3) Applicants must be equipped to provide service during their
scheduled type of duty, as defined by § 250-32, for all requests
given; there will be no assigning of calls or subcontracting of calls
by the towing vendor.
(4) Applicants and all of their drivers/operators must submit to a
criminal background check by the Township Police Department. No
applicant, or any of its drivers or agents (including office
personnel/dispatchers), performing services for the Township of
Harding Police Department shall have received any type of criminal
conviction within the last seven years. Any applicant found in
violation of this section may be cause for immediate removal off the
wrecker service list.
(5) Employees of the towing vendor shall carry with them a photo ID,
which identifies them as employees of the vendor, and shall
produce said photo ID upon the request of the operators or owners
of vehicles upon which services are to be performed.
(6) Each light-duty driver must obtain certification from a nationally
recognized organization. Proof of certification is to be submitted at
the time of initial wrecker service application, or when hired by the
towing service.
(7) Each heavy-duty driver must obtain certification from a nationally
recognized organization. Proof of certification is to be submitted at
the time of initial wrecker service application, or when hired by the
towing service.
(8) The nationally recognized organizations that are recognized by the
Harding Township Police Department are:
(a) WreckMaster (1-800-267-2266).
(b) Towing and Recovery Association of America
(1-800-728-0136).
(9) With respect to the storage of towed vehicles:
(a) The applicant shall demonstrate sufficient storage capacity for
a minimum of five vehicles. Storage area shall be at the
applicant's place of business. Storage area shall be fenced,
secured and lighted at night and shall meet the minimum
criteria as defined in the definitions section under "secure
storage facility."
§ 250-29 HARDING CODE § 250-29
1:502
(b) The applicant shall accept responsibility for the safe storage of
towed vehicles.
(c) The applicant shall have access to a storage facility 24 hours a
day, 365 days per year, and shall provide access to the public to
such facility during normal business hours.
(d) All towing services shall be capable of providing reasonable
roadside services to disabled vehicles, such as but not limited
to jump-starting, the changing of flat tires, and providing
motor fuel. Such services will only be performed if they can be
done so safely, as determined by the police officer on scene.
(e) The applicant must have its principal location (as defined in the
definitions) as well as storage facility located within eight
"driving" miles of the Harding Township Police Department,
located at 21 Blue Mill Road, New Vernon.
(f) The applicant must be able to provide inside, secure storage
when requested by the Harding Township Police Department.
Inside storage shall be of sufficient size to accommodate two
private passenger vehicles, or a box-type truck, or a tractor.
(g) The storage lot must display a certificate of occupancy for
automotive-related use from the resident community, where
applicable, issued to the vendor or applicant.
(10) Applicants must agree that, in addition to towing services, they will
provide limited site cleanup of glass, debris, etc., at the site such
that the roadway will be safe to travel and no unsightly material
will be left on the roadside.
(11) Applicants must provide proof of adequate insurance as provided in
this article.
(12) The towing service owner, or its authorized representative, shall
sign the registration application form indicating that the full
requirements set forth in this section have been met by the towing
service applicant.
(13) An application for tow truck registration shall contain the following
information:
(a) The name and address of the towing company's principal
owner or owners;
(b) The address of the principal business office of the towing
company;
(c) The location of any garage, parking lot, or other storage area
where motor vehicles or other objects moved by the towing
company may be stored or placed.
§ 250-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-29
1:503
(14) A valid certificate of insurance and a schedule of insured vehicles
that are to be utilized by the towing company, from an insurer
authorized to do business in New Jersey, as set forth in § 250-30,
shall be provided.
(15) Each piece of equipment must meet the minimum standards set
forth herein. Equipment that cannot meet these standards shall not
be used to service towing requests by the Harding Township Police
Department. The towing vendor is solely responsible for the safety,
maintenance, and operation of equipment utilized. The vendor shall
provide two light-duty vehicles, one of which must be four-wheel
drive, three rollback/flatbed vehicles, one heavy-duty wrecker, one
extra-heavy-duty wrecker, one semi-tractor with fifth wheel, one
lowboy/landall-type equipment-hauling trailer, and one specialized
recovery vehicle.
(a) Light-duty wrecker. A light-duty wrecker should have a
minimum chassis rating of 15,000 pounds and be equipped
with a hydraulic boom rated for four tons, three-thousandpound
minimum wheel-lift capacity, and with dual hydraulic
winches each with an eight-thousand-pound capacity.
(b) Rollback truck. A rollback/flatbed tow truck shall have a
minimum gross vehicle weight (rating of 25,500 pounds), be
equipped with a hydraulic wheel-lift with a minimum threethousand-
pound capacity, and be capable of safely transporting
two vehicles at once.
(c) Heavy-duty wrecker. A heavy-duty wrecker shall have a
minimum chassis rating of 53,000 pounds and be equipped
with a hydraulic boom rated at 25 tons, dual hydraulic winches,
and a hydraulic underreach with a minimum forty-fivethousand-
pound lift capacity, and have tandem rear axles (two
rear axles).
(d) Extra-heavy-duty wrecker. An extra-heavy-duty wrecker should
have a minimum rating of 66,000 pounds and have a hydraulic
boom capacity of 50 tons, dual hydraulic winches, and a
hydraulic underreach with a minimum lift capacity of 55,000
pounds, and tandem rear axles (two rear axles).
(e) Semi-tractor. This tractor shall have a minimum gross vehicle
weight rating of 80,000 pounds, a fifth wheel plate, and tandem
rear axles, (two rear axles).
(f) Lowboy/landall-type trailer .The trailer should be an
equipment-hauling trailer with a minimum hauling capacity of
70,000 pounds.
(g) Specialized recovery vehicle. A specialized recovery vehicle
shall be equipped with a hydraulic three-hundred-sixty-degree
rotating boom/crane which can vertically lift and recover a
§ 250-29 HARDING CODE § 250-29
1:504
§ 250-30. Insurance requirements.
minimum of 17,000 pounds retracted at nine feet and vertically
lift and recover a minimum of 4,000 pounds at the extension
of the hydraulic boom/crane of 34 feet. The vehicle should be
equipped with any necessary straps, chains, safety equipment
and lighting.
(16) Documentation of the manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating
for each tow truck shall be made available to the Harding Township
Police Department upon request.
(17) No equipment shall be subcontracted by the applicant/vendor.
(18) All tow trucks shall be equipped with brooms and shovels, speedy
dry/absorbent, all necessary chains and straps, snatch blocks,
safety chains or safety straps, two-way radio or cell phone, jumper
cables, fire extinguisher, first-aid kit, gas can, lockout tools, lug
wrench and jack, road flares or triangles, assortment of tools,
floodlights/work lights to the rear of the wrecker, assortment of
wood blocks and boards, and amber emergency lights – with a
proper amber light permit from the State of New Jersey (copy of to
be submitted with application).
(19) All applicants/vendors shall verify a minimum of five years of
towing-for-hire experience, as well as emergency response
municipal towing and recovery, as either an owner or principal.
Verification will be done by the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
A. A towing company shall carry insurance of the following types, with the
minimum policy limits noted for each type:
(1) In the case of each light-medium-duty tow truck, motor vehicle
liability insurance coverage for the death of, or injury to, persons
and damage to property for each accident or occurrence in the
amount of at least $1,000,000 single limit; and in the case of each
heavy-duty tow truck, motor vehicle liability insurance coverage for
the death of or injury to persons and damage to property for each
accident or occurrence in the amount of at least $1,000,000 single
limit.
(2) Workers' compensation in the minimum amounts required by law,
with coverage limits of at least $100,000 each accident, $100,000
each employee for disease, and $500,000 policy limit for disease.
(3) Garagekeepers' liability insurance of at least $75,000 per location.
(4) Garage liability insurance in an amount of $75,000 combined single
limit coverage.
§ 250-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-30
1:505
§ 250-31. Indemnification.
The contractor shall agree to indemnify and hold the Township, its officers,
appointees, employees, representatives or agents, whether paid or unpaid
(including, without limitation, members of the Township Police
Department), harmless against any and all liability or claims of liability for
damage or injury to persons or property resulting from the towing services
provided by the contractor pursuant hereto, with the exception of damage
or injury to persons or property resulting solely from the willful or negligent
acts or omissions of such officers, appointees, employees, representatives
or agents.
§ 250-32. Operations of towing list.
(5) Excess or umbrella for a limit of $5,000,000 each occurrence and
aggregate, giving protection in excess of the $1,000,000 auto and
garage liability coverage.
B. Policies shall be endorsed to provide for collision coverage for vehicles
in tow.
C. The Township of Harding shall be named as an additional insured on all
policies.
D. Proof of coverage shall be provided to the Township, and the policies
shall provide that the Township be notified in the event of the wrecker
service's failure to pay premiums or in the event of cancellation,
termination or revision of the policies or amounts of coverage.
E. In the event the Township deems, in its discretion, that appropriate
coverage is not in place, the contractor shall be so advised and shall be
removed from the towing list until such time as appropriate coverage is
restored.
A. The Police Department shall compile and maintain four lists of all
licensees as provided within this section, designated as follows:
(1) Light-duty motor vehicle accident: vehicles having a gross vehicle
weight of 8,000 pounds or less, towed as a result of a motor vehicle
accident.
(2) Light-duty miscellaneous: vehicles having a gross vehicle weight of
8,000 pounds or less, towed for impounds, disabled road service,
vehicle fires or other reasons.
(3) Heavy-duty motor vehicle accident: vehicles having a gross weight
of greater than 8,000 pounds, towed as a result of a motor vehicle
accident.
(4) Heavy-duty miscellaneous: vehicles having a gross weight of
greater than 8,000 pounds, towed for impounds, disabled road
service, vehicle fire or other reasons.
§ 250-30 HARDING CODE § 250-32
1:506
§ 250-33. Consent required for towing from privately owned
property.
B. Towing vendors will be called from each list on a rotating basis.
C. In the event a towing vendor cannot be reached by telephone or radio
and/or fails to respond to a request for towing services on two
consecutive occasions, or five times within a six-month period, the
contractor will be removed from the list and will be required to reapply.
A. No person shall tow any motor vehicle parked for an unauthorized
purpose or during a time at which such parking is not permitted from
any privately owned parking lot, from other private property or from
any common driveway without the consent of the motor vehicle owner
or operator, unless:
(1) The person shall have entered into a contract for private property
towing with the owner of the property;
(2) There is posted in a conspicuous place at all vehicular entrances to
the property which can easily be seen by the public a sign no larger
than six square feet stating:
(a) The purpose or purposes for which parking is authorized and
the times during which such parking is permitted;
(b) That unauthorized parking is prohibited and unauthorized;
(c) That motor vehicles will be towed at the owner's expense;
(d) The name, address, and telephone number of the towing
company that will perform the towing;
(e) The charges for the towing and storage of towed motor
vehicles;
(f) The street address of the storage facility where the towed
vehicles can be redeemed after payment of the posted charges
and the times during which vehicles may be redeemed; and
(g) Such contact information for the Division of Consumer Affairs
as may be required by regulation;
(3) The property owner has authorized the person to remove the
particular motor vehicle; and
(4) The person tows the motor vehicle to a secure storage facility that
is located within a reasonable distance of the property from which
the vehicle was towed.
B. No private property owner shall authorize the towing of any motor
vehicle parked for an unauthorized purpose or during a time at which
such parking is not permitted from the private property owner's
§ 250-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-33
1:507
§ 250-34. Rates and fee schedule.
property without the consent of the motor vehicle owner or operator,
unless:
(1) The private property owner has contracted with a private property
towing company for removal of vehicles parked on the property
without authorization; and
(2) A sign that conforms to the requirements of Subsection A(2) of this
section is posted on the property.
C. This section shall not apply to a motor vehicle parked on a lot or parcel
on which is situated a single-family unit or an owner-occupied, multiunit
structure of not more than six units or in front of any driveway or
garage entrance where the motor vehicle is blocking access to that
driveway or garage entrance.
D. Residential community with assigned spaces.
(1) The requirements of Subsection A(2) of this section shall not apply
to a residential community in which parking spaces are specifically
assigned to community residents, provided that:
(a) The assigned spaces are clearly marked as such;
(b) There is specific, documented approval by the property owner
authorizing the removal of the particular vehicle; and
(c) A sign, which can easily be seen by the public, is posted in a
conspicuous place at all vehicular entrances to the residential
community property, stating that unauthorized parking in an
assigned space is prohibited and unauthorized motor vehicles
will be towed at the owner's expense, and providing
information or a telephone number enabling the vehicle owner
or operator to immediately obtain information as to the
location of the towed vehicle.
(2) The exemption in this subsection shall not apply to any private
parking lot or parcel owned or assigned to a commercial or other
nonresidential entity located in such residential communities.
A. Base fees and rates for towing of motor vehicles shall not exceed the
following:
(1) Light-duty rate (8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.): $85 to $125 per towing
vehicle dispatched, plus any fees for additional services performed,
plus mileage ($4 per mile) from the scene.
(2) Light-duty night rate (5:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.): $100 to $175, plus
any fees for additional services performed, plus mileage ($4.50 per
mile) from the scene. The night rate shall apply on Sundays and
legal holidays in the State of New Jersey.
§ 250-33 HARDING CODE § 250-34
1:508
§ 250-35. Unreasonable fees.
(3) Medium towing for motor vehicles with a gross weight between
10,000 pounds and 32,000 pounds: $175 to $250 per hour, with a
minimum of one hour per towing vehicle dispatched, regardless of
the time of day, plus $5 per mile from the scene.
(4) Heavy-duty towing for motor vehicles with a gross weight over
32,000 pounds, which can be moved with a conventional wrecker:
$350 to $500 per hour plus $6 per mile from the scene, per towing
vehicle dispatched, regardless of the time of day.
(5) Heavy-duty towing for motor vehicles with a gross weight over
32,000 pounds where underreach towing is required: $450 to $600
per hour, plus $6 per mile from the scene; minimum of one hour per
towing vehicle dispatched, regardless of the time of day.
B. Road service rates shall not exceed the following:
(1) Motor vehicles with a gross weight of less than 10,000 pounds: $75
to $125 per hour day rate, $125 to $150 per hour night rate, with a
one-hour minimum charge, plus costs of any materials used,
including but not limited to motor fuel.
(2) Motor vehicles with a gross weight greater than 10,000 pounds:
$100 to $125 per hour day rate, $125 to $175 per hour night rate,
with a one-hour minimum charge, plus costs of any materials used,
including but not limited to motor fuel.
C. Storage rates shall not exceed the following:
(1) Storage rates shall not exceed $40 per day for outside storage for
motor vehicles under 22 feet in length or $100 per day or any part
thereof per unit for all other motor vehicles.
(2) Vehicles stored at the Harding Township police impound area for
investigative purposes will not incur a fee during the time said
investigation is active. Upon notification that the investigation has
been completed, the owner or secured party will be charged a fee
of $40 per day beginning 72 hours after notification has been made.
(3) For extra help, if needed, $65 to $75 per hour, and any additional
equipment necessary to clear roadway debris is an extra charge.
(4) All rates are subject to weather conditions. Winching and recovery
charges are subject to conditions pertaining to the accident scene
and weather conditions. Winching and recovery services will be
charged at industry-standard prevailing rates.
A. A fee for private property towing or other nonconsensual towing
services, and storage services, shall be presumed unreasonable if it is:
§ 250-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-35
1:509
§ 250-36. Requirements for storage facility used by towing
company.
§ 250-37. Unlawful practices for towing company.
(1) More than 25% higher than the fee charged by the towing company
or storage facility for the same services when provided with the
consent of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle; or
(2) More than 50% higher than the fee charged for such other
nonconsensual towing or related storage service by other towing
companies or storage facilities operating in the municipality from
which the vehicle was towed.
B. Notwithstanding Subsection A above, a fee will be presumed
unreasonable if it exceeds the maximum amount that may be charged
for the service according to the schedule of fees set forth in the fee
schedule.
A. No person shall tow a motor vehicle to a storage facility or store such
vehicle at a storage facility unless the storage facility:
(1) Has a business office open to the public between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. at least five days a week, excluding holidays.
(2) Is secured.
(3) Is less than eight driving miles from the Harding Township Police
Department, located at 21 Blue Mill Road, New Vernon.
B. If the storage site is closed, the company shall provide release of stored
motor vehicles on the next business day.
A. It shall be an unlawful practice for any private property towing
company or for any other towing company that provides nonconsensual
towing services:
(1) To give any benefit or advantage, including a pecuniary benefit, to
any person for providing information about motor vehicles parked
for unauthorized purposes on privately owned property or
otherwise in connection with private property towing of motor
vehicles parked without authorization or during a time at which
such parking is not permitted.
(2) To fail, when so requested by the owner or operator of a vehicle
subject to nonconsensual towing, to release a vehicle to the owner
or operator that has been, or is about to be, hooked or lifted but has
not actually been moved or removed from the property when the
vehicle owner or operator returns to the vehicle, or to charge the
owner or operator requesting release of the vehicle an
unreasonable or excessive decoupling fee. Such a fee shall be
presumptively unreasonable and excessive if it exceeds by more
§ 250-35 HARDING CODE § 250-37
1:510
§ 250-38. Availability of records.
Every towing company that performs private property or other
nonconsensual towing shall retain and make available for inspection by
the Division, for a period of three years, invoices, job orders, logs, claims
for reimbursement from insurance companies and other documentation
relating to all consensual and nonconsensual towing services performed
and rates charged for the services.
§ 250-39. Miscellaneous rules.
than 25%, or a different percentage established by the Director by
regulation, the usual and customary decoupling fee charged by the
towing company for a vehicle subject to consensual towing, or if it
exceeds by more than 50%, or a different percentage established
by the Director by regulation, the usual and customary decoupling
fee charged for vehicles subject to nonconsensual towing by other
private property towing companies operating in the municipality in
which the vehicle was subjected to nonconsensual towing.
(3) To charge a fee for a private property or other nonconsensual
towing or related storage service not listed on the schedule of
services for which a fee may be charged as established by the
Director, except as may be permitted by the Director by regulation.
(4) To charge an unreasonable or excessive fee.
(5) To refuse to accept for payment in lieu of cash or an insurance
company check for towing or storage services a debit card, charge
card or credit card if the operator ordinarily accepts such card at
his place of business, unless such refusal is authorized in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 56:13-4.
(6) To monitor, patrol, or otherwise survey a private property for the
purposes of identifying vehicles parked for unauthorized purposes
and towing a motor vehicle parked for an unauthorized purpose
from such private property without having been specifically
requested to tow such vehicle by the owner of the property.
A. The Township Chief of Police shall be responsible for enforcing the
provisions of this article and shall decide whether or not an applicant's
qualifications are sufficient to be placed on the towing list. Any
aggrieved party shall be afforded the opportunity of appealing any
adverse decision of the Chief of Police to the Township Committee.
B. The regulations set forth in this article shall be made available to the
public at the Township Municipal Building during normal business
hours.
C. Employees of the contractor are not to be deemed to represent nor be
employed by the Township, and the contractor shall accept
responsibility for the conduct of its employees.
§ 250-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-39
1:511
D. Complaints concerning the services provided or fees charged by the
contractor shall be investigated by the Chief of Police, who will prepare
a written report to be presented to the Township Committee for such
further action as it deems fit.
E. Contractors shall disclose the rate of fees charged by, at a minimum,
posting the rates in a conspicuous place at the storage area.
F. The Township of Harding shall assume no liability for any services
performed by the contractor unless those services are performed for
municipal vehicles.
G. It is the responsibility of the towing vendor to recover all charges for
vehicle towing and recovery operations from the vehicle owner or the
vehicle owner's insurance carrier. Harding Township shall not be
responsible for collecting any fees that are owed to the towing vendor.
H. No tow company shall be directly involved with another tow company
that is on the towing list. Examples of direct involvement include the
sharing of a business license, tow trucks or equipment, vehicle storage
area, storage space, and employees.
I. In the event a towing vendor cannot respond to a request for service by
the Harding Township Police Department, it will immediately notify the
Harding Township Police Department, in which event Harding
Township will notify the next qualified towing vendor on the Harding
Township wrecker schedule. A towing vendor shall not assign calls or
sublet calls whatsoever. Any vendor found subletting any calls or
assigning calls to any other vendors shall be found in breach of this
agreement, and cause for immediate removal off the wrecker schedule.
J. The applicant/vendor shall submit to an inspection of its storage facility
and towing equipment, as directed by the Police Chief.
K. The vendor shall be available 24 hours a day, seven days a week,
including holidays.
L. The towing vendor shall not use answering machines, beepers or
pagers, or answering services to receive calls from the Harding
Township Police Department.
M. The vendor shall accept at least two major credit cards and shall not
charge patrons additionally for their use.
N. When a patron does not have funds available for payment, the vendor
shall tow the patron's vehicle to the vendor's storage lot until payment
arrangements have been made.
O. A towing operator shall not remove any vehicle from Harding Township
roadways without authorization from the Harding Township Police
Department or vehicle owner.
§ 250-39 HARDING CODE § 250-39
1:512
§ 250-40. Employees of towing contractors.
The contractor shall employ a sufficient number of employees to comply
with the minimum operational requirements.
§ 250-41. Dealing with the public.
P. All drivers and towing operators shall wear ANSI Class 2 safety vests at
any scene.
Q. The Chief of Police reserves the right to disqualify any applicant from
consideration to be placed on the Harding Township call-out list if he
has determined the vendor's previous performance has been
determined to be unsatisfactory for any reason.
R. The Chief of Police reserves the right to waive any minor irregularities
or discrepancies in any towing vendor application.
A. All drivers of the contractor shall be over the age of 21 years and must
have a valid, current New Jersey State driver's license and shall be in
good health and of high moral character.
B. The service, equipment and personnel are subject to periodic
inspections and approval by the Township of Harding.
A. In all of its dealings with the public, the towing vendor is expected
always to act in a professional manner and at all times to be courteous
and respectful toward members of the public as well as representatives
of the Township of Harding. While members of the public, especially
those whose cars may have been towed or impounded, may at times
resort to strong language, threats and unbecoming behavior toward the
tower, the towing vendor is expected to exercise restraint and act
courteously. Reports of discourteous behavior by the towing vendor or
his employees may be considered by the Township as sufficient cause
for removal from the towing list.
B. Upon completion of the background check of the applicant and its
employees, the finding of a conviction for any felony will be considered
ample reason to disqualify any applicant, unless waived by the
Township upon application and for good cause.
C. In the event that the contractor has been summoned by the Township
for the purpose of towing a vehicle, and the owner of the vehicle arrives
on the scene prior to the removal of the vehicle by the contractor, the
owner may be charged by the tower the "loading and show-up charge."
D. The towing vendor will take all vehicles involved in motor vehicle
accidents. No wrecker or client relationships will be honored at crash
or recovery scenes.
E. If a vehicle is disabled and it is not an accident, crash or recovery scene,
a vehicle owner/operator shall have the right to utilize a towing service
§ 250-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-41
1:513
§ 250-42. Standby service.
§ 250-43. Violations; notice of violations; violations and appeals.
other than that of the towing vendor, provided that the tow can be made
expeditiously, without creating a hazard.
F. The towing vendor shall remove and tow to the Harding Township
storage facility all vehicles as directed by the Harding Township Police
Department.
A. In addition to the service and equipment herein outlined, the towing
vendor will be required to furnish extra towing equipment and service
during snowstorms, period of emergencies, traffic emergencies,
disasters, acts of God, and for any other reason so designated by the
Chief of Police, or his duly authorized representative.
B. Standby service will begin when the Chief of Police or his authorized
designee calls the towing vendor initially and will end when he
terminates the standby status by calling the towing vendor.
C. The Chief of Police reserves the right to call for additional towing
services, in the event of extreme emergencies, snowstorms, traffic
emergencies, disasters, or acts of God, call the next qualified wrecker
service on the wrecker schedule, or bypass the wrecker call-out
schedule, when so determined by the Chief of Police.
A. If any of the provisions of this article are alleged to have been violated
or if an application is denied, the licensee or applicant shall be notified
of any noncompliance or denial by certified and regular mail.
B. The notice shall state the specific provision(s) of this article which it is
alleged has been violated or the reasons for denial of any application.
C. In the event of a violation notice, the notice shall further state that,
upon request, if made by the licensee within 15 days of the receipt of
said notice, the official issuing the notice of violation shall meet with the
licensee to discuss the basis for the determination that a violation exists
and any proposed means of eliminating any violations. That meeting
shall take place within 30 days of said request. Following any such
meeting, the official issuing the notice of violation may rescind the
notice if it is determined that there was no violation or in the event the
alleged violation is otherwise eliminated. The official may also grant
time for the correction of any violation upon request.
D. If, within 30 days after mailing the notice of violation, or within 30 days
after the aforesaid meeting, in the event a meeting is requested and
does not resolve the dispute in a mutually acceptable manner, the
licensee has failed to correct the violation or reason for noncompliance,
the licensee shall be penalized in accordance with this § 250-44.
§ 250-41 HARDING CODE § 250-43
1:514
§ 250-44. Violations and penalties.
E. A licensee or applicant may appeal from a decision to impose a penalty
or a decision not to grant a license within 15 days of the date of receipt
of a penalty notice or a notice that a license has not been granted. The
licensee or applicant shall file a letter of appeal from the decision and
request a hearing before the Township Committee. Upon receipt of
such letter of appeal, the Township Committee shall, by resolution,
appoint a hearing officer to hear and determine the appeal and set a
date for a hearing. The hearing officer shall schedule a hearing not less
than 10 nor more than 30 days from the date of service of the
complaint.
A. Township rotating call list.
(1) For a violation of any provision of this article, licensees listed on the
Township rotating call list shall be subject to the following
penalties:
(a) The first violation in any given calendar year will result in a
warning letter.
(b) A second violation in any given calendar year may result in a
suspension not greater than 15 days from the police tow list.
(c) A third violation in any given calendar year may result in a
suspension from the police tow list not greater than for a
period for the remainder of the calendar year or for 90 days,
whichever is greater.
(d) For violation of any of the provisions under this article, the
maximum penalty shall, upon conviction of a violation, be a fine
not to exceed $2,000 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days, or both.
(2) For a violation of the tow truck response time limits, police tow list
tow truck licensees shall be subject to the following penalties.
(a) The first violation in any given calendar year may result in a
warning letter.
(b) A second violation in any given calendar year may result in a
suspension not greater than seven days from the police tow
list.
(c) A third violation in any given calendar year may result in a
suspension not greater than 28 days from the police tow list.
(d) A fourth violation in any given calendar year may result in a
suspension from the police tow list not greater than for a
period for the remainder of the year or for 56 days, whichever
is greater.
§ 250-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-44
1:515
§ 250-45. Enforcement.
The municipal officers and/or agencies designated to enforce the provisions
of this article in accordance with due process of law are the Harding
Township Police Chief and/or his designee.
§ 250-46. Cancellation of license.
As previously stated herein, the termination or expiration of any of the
insurance coverages which are required herein shall be cause for the
immediate suspension of a tow truck's or wrecker's license unless renewal
or replacement of such coverage is timely made in compliance with the
applicable requirements as are set forth hereinabove.
B. Private trespass tow and wrecker operators. For violation of any of the
provisions under this article, the maximum penalty shall, upon
conviction of a violation, be a fine not to exceed $2,000 or imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both.
§ 250-44 HARDING CODE § 250-46
1:516
Chapter 254
MUNICIPAL SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and driveways — See Ch. 346.
§ 250-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-46
1:517

ARTICLE I
Qualified Private Communities
[Adopted 8-18-2010 by Ord. No. 11-10 (Ch. 124 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 254-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
QUALIFIED PRIVATE COMMUNITY — Any residential condominium,
cooperative, fee simple community, or horizontal property regime, the
residents of which do not receive any tax abatement or tax exemption
related to its construction, comprised of a community trust or other trust
device, condominium association, homeowners' association, or council of
co-owners, wherein the cost of maintaining roads and streets and providing
essential services is paid for by a not-for-profit entity consisting exclusively
of unit owners within the community. No apartment building or garden
apartment complex owned by an individual or entity that receives monthly
rental payments from tenants who occupy the premises shall be considered
an association. No proprietary campground facility, as defined in N.J.S.A.
45:22A-49, shall be considered to be an association.
QUALIFIED STREET — A street or road located within a qualified private
community and providing access to driveways or parking areas within that
qualified private community; provided, however, that in no event shall areas
used primarily as parking areas or parking lots be considered qualified
streets.
QUALIFIED STREET-LIGHT POLE — Those poles providing street-lighting
which are located on or near qualified streets and which provide lighting for
qualified streets. Street-lighting poles providing lighting for areas primarily
used as parking lots shall be excluded from the definition of "qualified
street-light pole."
REIMBURSABLE SNOW/ICE REMOVAL COSTS — Cost incurred by the
qualified private community for the removal of snow and ice from the
roads and streets located on the qualified private community property.
Reimbursement shall not exceed the cost that would have been incurred by
the Township in providing snow/ice removal services directly.
§ 254-2. Services to be provided.
A. The Township of Harding shall provide the following services within a
qualified private community in the same fashion as it provides these
services on public roads and streets:
(1) Streetlighting of qualified street-light poles.
(a) The Township shall provide street-lighting to the extent of
payment for the electricity required for the operation of such
poles, but shall not be responsible for the installation or
maintenance of lamps, standards, wiring or other equipment.
§ 254-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-2
1:519
(b) For purposes of providing street-lighting services, any
qualified private community, through its homeowners'
association, shall transfer billing of qualified street-light poles
from the qualified private community to the Township, and the
Township shall assume liability for payment of lighting said
poles from the date when the power company providing
electric service revises its billing records.
(2) Snow and ice removal.
(a) The Township shall provide annual reimbursement to any
qualified private association for its reimbursable costs for snow
and ice in the amount of 100% of the costs as detailed in
§ 254-2A(2)(b).
(b) The Township shall not be obligated to pay reimbursement to a
qualified private community for any service for which the costs
incurred by the qualified private community for which
reimbursement is sought exceeds the cost that would have
been incurred by the Township in providing the particular
service directly. This limitation shall be calculated and applied
as follows:
[1] Following the close of each budget year, the Township will
determine the annual cost incurred by the Township for
snow and ice removal. Based upon those figures, the
Township will determine the annual cost for each such
service in accordance with § 254-2A(2)(b)[2].
[2] The annual Township cost for snow and ice removal shall
be divided by the total linear miles of all public streets
owned and maintained by the Township to produce the
annual unit cost for snow removal. The annual unit cost for
snow and ice removal shall be multiplied by the total linear
miles or roads within the qualified private community, to
produce the annual reimbursement cost ceiling for snow
and ice removal services.
(c) The Township reserves the right to provide the qualified
private community with snow and ice removal services in lieu
of paying reimbursement to the qualified private community
for such service. If the Township elects to provide such service,
or to terminate any such service after it has been provided, the
qualified private community shall be given advance written
notice. The Township shall not be obligated to pay
reimbursement to the qualified private community for any
costs incurred by the qualified private community for any
services while the same services are being provided by the
Township. If the Township elects to provide any service, the
qualified private community shall pay the cost of any insurance
riders required by the Township to enable Township vehicles to
§ 254-2 HARDING CODE § 254-2
1:520
operate on the qualified private community's private roads and
streets, consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.4.
(d) Requests by the qualified private community for payment of
reimbursement under this section shall be processed pursuant
to the following procedure:
[1] The qualified private community shall submit a voucher
signed by an authorized officer of the qualified private
community's homeowners' association with each request
for payment, using voucher forms to be provided by the
Township.
[2] The Township will review the underlying documentation to
determine whether the requested reimbursement is
consistent with and authorized by this chapter. The
Township will disallow any excess amount or unauthorized
portion of the reimbursement request.
[3] Vouchers shall be submitted on an annual basis following
the end of the snow removal season for which
reimbursement is requested, but in no event later than
September 15. Each voucher shall be accompanied by
copies of invoices, payment receipts and other appropriate
documentation, which demonstrates to the satisfaction of
the Township that all costs constitute reimbursement costs
and that the qualified private community has incurred all
costs during the applicable reimbursement period.
Vouchers shall not be processed for payment by the
Township if they do not conform with these requirements.
In that event, the qualified private community will be given
notice and the opportunity to provide additional requested
documentation and/or otherwise cure any nonconformity
with these submission requirements.
[4] After making such determination, the reimbursement
amount (less any disallowed amount) for snow and ice
removal will be reduced by the Township if it exceeds the
applicable reimbursement cost ceiling, as calculated
pursuant to § 254-2A(2)(b)[2].
[5] Following formal approval of a reimbursement request,
payment shall be issued in accordance with routine
Township procedures.
B. General Provisions; limits upon Township's obligations; accounting by
qualified private communities; required agreements.
(1) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.2 et seq., unless otherwise
provided herein, the Township shall not be obligated or required to
operate any municipally owned or leased vehicles or other
equipment, or to provide any of the services enumerated in this
§ 254-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-2
1:521
article, upon, along or in relation to any road or street in any
qualified private community which either is not accepted for
dedication to public use, or does not meet all municipal standards
and specifications for such dedication, except for width.
(2) In all cases where the Township reimburses a qualified private
community in lieu of providing services directly under this article,
the qualified private community shall provide an accounting of the
use of the money paid over to it by the Township, and for the
refunding to the Township of any payments in excess of the
amounts actually expended or contractually committed by the
qualified private community, during the accounting period in order
to provide the services for which reimbursement is provided.
(3) Insurance requirements:
(a) The qualified private community is required by statute to pay
the cost of any insurance riders or increased insurance costs
incurred by the Township, and the qualified private community
shall pay such costs in order for the Township to provide any
snow and ice removal services.
(b) Any policy of insurance obtained by the Township for these
services shall provide, as a minimum, the following coverage
amounts: $1,000,000 liability coverage; $500,000 property
damage coverage.
(c) The cost of liability and property damage premiums for the
amounts set forth above shall be apportioned among those
qualified private communities electing to have the Township
provide services in the same proportion as the length of each
electing qualified private community's qualified streets are to
the total length of all the qualified streets in the electing
qualified private communities.
(d) As the premiums for such coverage may be adjusted from time
to time by the insurance carrier, so also shall the proportionate
shares of the electing qualified private communities. Upon
receipt of the premium notice, the Township Administrator or
authorized designee shall send notice to each electing qualified
private community, by regular mail, advising of the amount due
and the date payment is required. Failure to pay its share of the
premiums in a timely manner shall subject the electing
qualified private community to removal from the group of
electing qualified private communities receiving services. In
the event of removal, the removed qualified private community
shall then be eligible for reimbursement in the manner set
forth in this article.
(4) Agreement. In order to qualify for snow and ice removal services,
reimbursement for snow and ice removal services or payment for
qualified street lighting, the homeowners' association for the
§ 254-2 HARDING CODE § 254-2
1:522
qualified homeowners' association must enter into an agreement
with the Township incorporating the terms and conditions of this
article.
§ 254-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-2
1:523
Chapter 258
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 90.
Firearms and weapons — See Ch. 177.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 285.
Nuisances — See Ch. 417.
§ 258-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to the control of all sound and vibration originating
within the Township of Harding.
§ 258-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. All terminology used in this chapter not herein defined shall be
construed in accordance with applicable standards set forth in
publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its
successor body.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection,
substantial repair, alteration or similar action, but excludes emergency
work on public rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property.
DECIBEL (dB) — A dimensionless unit for measuring the volume of
sound. It is the logarithm of the ratio of a measured quantity to a
reference quantity. Noise measurements herein described shall be
expressed in decibel units.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private rights-of-way or similar property.
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving
actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage or obstruction
of public roads or private driveways threatened or caused by an
emergency.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work performed for the purpose of
preventing or alleviating property damage or maintaining open public
roads or private driveways threatened or caused by an emergency.
EXCAVATION — The movement of land or material by other than hand
tools.
HOURS — Prevailing time, Eastern standard time or daylight saving
time.
§ 254-2 HARDING CODE § 258-2
1:524
§ 258-3. Prohibited acts.
No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others
within the Township.
§ 258-4. Enumeration of prohibited acts.
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noise in violation of this chapter, but this enumeration shall not be deemed
to be exclusive or in any way limiting or affecting the provisions of § 258-3:
IMPULSIVE SOUND — A sound of short duration, less than one second,
with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive
sound include explosions, drop forge impacts and the discharge of
firearms.
MOTORCYCLE — An unenclosed motor vehicle having a saddle for the
use of the operator and two or three wheels in contact with the ground,
including but not limited to motor scooters and minibikes.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is propelled or drawn on land
by a motor, such as but not limited to passenger cars, trucks, trucktrailers,
semitrailers, campers, carts, snowmobiles, amphibious craft on
land, dune buggies or racing vehicles, but not including motorcycles.
MUFFLER or SOUND-DISSIPATIVE DEVICE — A device for abating the
sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine.92
A. Noise associated with motor vehicles.
(1) Horns: the sounding of any horn or warning device on any motor
vehicle, except when required by law or when necessary to give
timely warning of the approach of the motor vehicle or of
impending danger created by the motor vehicle; the sounding of
any horn or warning device on any motor vehicle which emits an
unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any horn or
warning device on any motor vehicle for any unnecessary or
unreasonable period of time.
(2) Mufflers: the operating of a motor vehicle unless it is equipped with
a muffler or other sound-dissipative device in good working order
and in constant operation, which muffler or device effectively
prevents loud or explosive noises from the motor vehicle and,
regardless of where operated, meets any and all requirements of
law applicable to the motor vehicle.
92.Editor's Note: The definitions of "Noise Control Officer," "noise disturbance," "sound-level
meter," "sound level (noise level)," and "sound pressure level," which immediately
followed this definition, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 258-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-4
1:525
(3) Commercial transport: the making of excessive, unnecessary and
avoidable noises in the operation of any motor vehicle.
(4) Loading and unloading: creating loud, excessive and unnecessary
noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any motor
vehicle or in the opening or destruction of bales, crates or
containers delivered by any motor vehicle.
(5) Refuse collection: collecting, loading or transporting garbage,
trash, cans, bottles or other refuse by persons engaged in the
business of garbage or refuse collection, whether private or
municipal, at any time on Sundays or any time other than between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on any other days.
(6) Miscellaneous night noises: the warming up or idling of any motor
vehicle, and the unnecessary and repeated idling, acceleration and
deceleration or starting and stopping of any motor vehicle,
between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 7:00 am.
B. Construction or demolition work: the carrying on of any construction or
demolition work at any time on Sundays, or at any time other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. The provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to interior or exterior repairs or interior
alterations when the work is actually performed entirely by a
homeowner or occupant between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.,
provided that the work is done without creating any noise disturbance
across a residential real property boundary. The provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to specific construction work in case of an
emergency, provided that any such emergency is based upon a finding
that the public health and safety will be impaired unless specific work is
performed during the time prohibited by this subsection.
C. Domestic power tools: except for emergency work, operating any
mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool,
snowblower or similar device outdoors in residential areas at any time
other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
D. Motors, engines, fans and pumps: except for emergency work,
operating any motors, engines, fans, blowers or pumps, including, by
way of example but not limitation, air-conditioning systems,
compression devices and pool-filtering systems, which create a noise
disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a
noise-sensitive zone.
E. Amplifiers, loudspeakers, radios, television sets, musical instruments
and similar devices: using or operating, either indoors or in any vehicle,
any amplifier, loudspeaker, radio receiving set, television set, musical
instrument, phonograph, tape recorder or other equipment or device
for the producing, reproduction or amplification of sound at any time
with a volume louder than is necessary for the convenient hearing of
persons who are in the room or vehicle where such equipment or device
is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The use or
§ 258-4 HARDING CODE § 258-4
1:526
§ 258-5. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following:
§ 258-6. Enforcement.94
The provisions of this chapter are enforceable by members of the Police
Department of the Township of Harding.
Chapter 266
operation of any such equipment or device between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance
of 100 feet from the building or vehicle in which it is located or
through a dwelling unit partition wall of a multifamily structure shall
be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. None of
the equipment, instruments or devices hereinabove mentioned shall
be used outdoors at any time in a manner that will create any noise
disturbance across a residential real property boundary unless such
operation is in connection with a public or other special event
authorized by the Township Committee and such operation and use is
in accordance with the specific terms and conditions set forth in the
authorization.
F. Sounds by humans: yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing or the
use of fireworks or firearms or the creation of other impulsive sounds
on the public streets or within residential areas or noise-sensitive zones
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
G. Animal and bird sounds: owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any
dog or other animal or bird which frequently or for continued periods
barks, howls, cries or squawks when such sounds are plainly audible
beyond the limits of the property upon which the animal or bird is
kept.93
A. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of any emergency.
B. Church bells or chimes.
C. Celebrations and parades scheduled by a governmental entity.
D. Any activity exempt from the provisions of local control by state or
federal law.
E. The emergency use of chain saws or other mechanized equipment in
the interest of public health and safety.
93.Editor's Note: Original § 127-5, Maximum sound pressure levels, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 258-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-6
1:527
OBSCENE MATERIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 285.
§ 266-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the retail display of obscene
material, as provided by N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3.2.
§ 266-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OBSCENE MATERIAL — Any description, narrative account, display or
depiction of sexual activity or anatomical area contained in, or consisting
of, a picture or other representation, publication, sound recording, live
performance or a film which, by means of posing, composition, format or
animated sensual details:
§ 266-3. Display of obscene materials.
A. Depicts or describes in a patently offensive way, ultimate sexual acts,
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, masturbation, excretory
functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals;
B. Lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value, when taken
as a whole; and
C. Is a part of a work which, to the average person applying contemporary
community standards, has a dominant theme, taken as a whole, which
appeals to the prurient interest.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership or any other
type of form of business which may be conducted in this state.
RETAILER — Any person who operates a store, newsstand, booth,
concession or similar business with unimpeded access for persons
under 18 years of age, who is in the business of making sales of
periodicals or other publications at retail containing pictures, drawings
or photographs. "Retailer" shall also include any person who operates a
store, newsstand, booth, concession or similar business for the sale or
rental of sound recordings, films and/or videotapes to the public.
A. It shall be unlawful and a petty disorderly persons offense for any
retailer to display or permit to be displayed at the retailer's business
premises any obscene material, as defined herein or in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3,
at a height of less than five feet or without a binder or other covering
placed or printed on the front of the material displayed.
§ 258-6 HARDING CODE § 266-3
1:528
§ 266-4. Presumptive evidence.
The public display in and of itself of obscene material shall constitute
presumptive evidence that the retailer knowingly made or permitted the
display.
§ 266-5. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 280
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 84.
Littering — See Ch. 237.
Motor vehicle regulations, traffic and
parking — See Ch. 250.
§ 280-1. Parks and playing fields established. [Amended 4-11-1988
by Ord. No. 5-88]
The Township parks and playing fields are Bayne Park, which is situated on
said Sand Spring Road, Blue Mill Road and Glen Alpin Road, and Barrett
Field, which is situated on Brook Drive South.
B. It shall not be a violation of this section for a retailer engaged in the
business of sale or rental of films and/or videotapes to the public to
display films and/or videotapes containing adult material within said
retailer's place of business, provided that the following conditions are
met:
(1) The films and/or videotapes are located in a separate room within
the business establishment.
(2) Access to the room in which the films and/or videotapes are
displayed shall be limited to persons 18 years of age or older and
shall be controlled by an employee of the business at all times;
(3) The identification of all persons desiring entrance to the separate
room shall be checked by an employee of the business; and
(4) All employees of the business establishment shall be 18 years of
age or older.
A. Any violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to the penalty set
forth in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
B. Every day, or portion of a day, that the provisions of this chapter are
violated by any person, as defined herein, shall be a separate and
distinct violation.
§ 266-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-2
1:529
§ 280-2. Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed or upon the premises of Bayne
Park or Barrett Field.
§ 280-3. Parking. [Amended 4-11-1988 by Ord. No. 5-88]
§ 280-4. Parking prohibited between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
During the hours when persons are prohibited from using Bayne Park or
Barrett Field, no person shall park any motor vehicle upon the same.
§ 280-5. Park hours.95
Except for emergencies or other special reason, the various parks in the
Township shall be open to the public every day of the year during
designated hours. The opening and closing hours for each individual park
shall be posted therein and shall be determined, from time to time, by
resolution of the Township Committee. If no opening or closing hours are
established and posted as herein provided, parks shall open at 8:00 a.m. and
close at sunset.
§ 280-6. Ice-skating restricted.
No person shall go onto the ice on any of the waters in Bayne Park,
Township of Harding, except such areas as are designated as skating areas,
and provided that a safety signal is displayed.
§ 280-7. Removal of water for commercial operations restricted.
[Added 5-8-1988 by Ord. No. 8-88]
A. During the hours when persons are prohibited from using Bayne Park
or Barrett Field, no person shall park any motor vehicle upon the same.
B. Parking of motor vehicles in the Bayne Park parking area is prohibited
at the entry to the emergency vehicle access road, which must remain
unobstructed in the areas so marked at all times.
A. No person shall be permitted to remove water from the pond at Bayne
Park as part of the operation of a business of any nature, provided that
the Township Committee may, on written application, issue a waiver of
said requirements if the Committee determines that:
(1) The water supply will not be significantly depleted.
(2) The environment will not be adversely affected.
(3) The use shall not unreasonably detract from the appearance of the
park.
95.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 280-2 HARDING CODE § 280-7
1:530
§ 280-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended
3-31-2010 by Ord. No. 06-10]
Chapter 285
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 84.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 116.
Firearms and weapons — See Ch. 177.
Littering — See Ch. 237.
Nuisances — See Ch. 417.
Sewers and water — See Ch. 422.
§ 285-1. Purpose.
This chapter is designed to supplement general law, in particular, but not
limited to, the Disorderly Persons Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:170-1 to 2A:170-10097),
as amended and supplemented.
§ 285-2. Trespassing.
No person shall enter or trespass upon the land or property of the Township
or of any public or quasi-public body without lawful permission to do so.
(4) Such applicant shall have procured all permits required by any
governmental agencies having jurisdiction.
B. These prohibitions do not apply to Township employees engaged in
maintenance or repair activities, nor to members of a recognized fire
department engaged in fire-fighting activities.
A. The Police Department of the Township of Harding, in connection with
its duties imposed by law, shall diligently enforce the provisions of this
chapter and shall have the authority to eject from Bayne Park or Barrett
Field any person acting in violation of this chapter.
B. In addition to the ejectment penalty, as provided above, any person who
violates any provisions of this chapter or who otherwise fails to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter shall, for each such
violation or offense, be subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I. Each day that a violation or offense
continues shall constitute a separate violation hereof.96
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
97.Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:170-1 et seq. were amended by L. 1978, c. 98.
For current disposition of these provisions, see the Disposition Table in the front of Title
2A of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
§ 280-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-3
1:531
§ 285-3. Interference with official in performance of duty
prohibited.
No person shall hinder, disturb or obstruct any Township official or agency
in the performance of his or its duties or willfully refuse or neglect to
assist any Township official when lawfully called upon by him to do so in
the execution of process, in the suppression of a breach of the peace or
disorderly conduct, in case of an escape or when such official is resisted in
the discharge of his duty; nor shall any person knowingly resist or oppose
any official or person authorized by law in serving or attempting to serve
any process or when making an arrest, either with or without a warrant.
§ 285-4. Disturbance of school activities, students and teachers
prohibited.
No person shall disturb the exercises of any public school or molest or
annoy any teacher therein or any school child while either is on the school
property or is going to or coming from said school.98
§ 285-5. Obstruction of roads prohibited.
No person shall unnecessarily obstruct any road or public place of the
Township.
§ 285-6. Interference with road warning devices prohibited.
No person shall mutilate, displace, remove or destroy any warning sign,
signal, road sign, barrier, traffic cone, vehicle or equipment or extinguish
any light placed upon any road or public place by any public utility,
Township official or contractor under any contract with a public utility or
the Township for the purpose of performing such contract, or to direct
traffic or to give public warning of construction work, unless acting under
the authority or with the consent of the person supervising the work or
materials protected thereby.
§ 285-7. Maintaining dangerous condition or structure prohibited.
No person shall keep or maintain on any public or private property any open
cistern, open hole or unsafe structure which is or may become dangerous to
life or health or which might extend a conflagration.
§ 285-8. Emission of offensive odors prohibited.
No person shall cause or permit to be emitted any vile, offensive, obnoxious
or nauseating odor or any odor that may be vile, offensive, obnoxious or
nauseating to any of the residents of the Township.
98.Editor's Note: Original § 141-5, Permit required for obstruction or alteration of flow of
watercourse, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 11-17-2010 by Ord.
No. 15-10.
§ 285-3 HARDING CODE § 285-9
1:532
§ 285-9. Disorderly houses prohibited.
No person shall keep, maintain or be present in any house or other building
owned or occupied by him or her, which is frequented or resorted to by
noisy, riotous or disorderly persons or by gamblers or vagrants.99
§ 285-10. Indecent exposure and lewd behavior prohibited.
No person shall appear on any road or public place or in or on private
property in such manner as to be visible from other public or private
property, in a state of nudity, or make any indecent exposure of his or her
person or commit or do any lewd or indecent act or behave in any lewd or
indecent manner.
§ 285-11. Performance in obscene exhibition prohibited.
No person shall perform or take part in any obscene, indecent, immoral or
lewd play or other exhibition or representation. The word "obscene" shall
have the meaning given to it in N.J.S.A. 2A:115-1.1.100
§ 285-12. Firearms and fireworks.
No person shall fire or discharge any cannon, gun, pistol or revolver,
firearm, firecrackers or fireworks of any description in a careless, negligent
or reckless manner so as to endanger the life, welfare or property of anyone;
provided, however, that this section shall not apply to:
§ 285-13. Disorderly conduct. [Added 10-14-1969 by Ord. No. 3-69]
No person, whether owner, tenant, occupant or guest, shall knowingly or
willingly suffer or take part in any drunken, riotous or other disorderly
conduct within the Township that shall disturb the peace and quiet of any
resident of the Township.
§ 285-14. Carrying of dangerous weapons restricted. [Added
10-14-1969 by Ord. No. 3-69]
No person shall carry any pistol or revolver (without first having obtained
a permit to carry the same in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2A: 151-1 et seq.102)
A. Any military or other authorized exercise or public ceremony.
B. Officers of the state, county or Township charged with the enforcement
of the law.
C. The use of a firearm in the defense of life or property.101
99.Editor's Note: Original § 141-11, Loitering, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 11-17-2010 by Ord. No. 15-10.
100. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:115.1 were repealed by L. 1978, c. 95. For the
original wording of this section, see now Appendix -- Title 2A.
101. Editor's Note: Former § 141-15, Public intoxication, added 10-14-1969 by Ord. No. 3-69,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 10-1-2008 by Ord. No. 15-08.
§ 285-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-14
1:533
or a rifle or shotgun (without having first obtained a firearms' purchaser
identification card in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2A:151-1 et seq.) or any
dangerous instrument of the kinds known as a "blackjack," "slingshot,"
"billy," "sandclub," "sandbag," "bludgeon," "metal knuckles," "loose wool
impregnated with metal filings," "razor blades embedded in wood slivers,"
"dagger," "dirk," "dangerous knife," or knife as defined in N.J.S.A.
2A:151-62,103 "stiletto," "switch blade," "grenade," "bomb," or other
explosives, other than fixed ammunition (except as such person may be
licensed to carry, hold or possess explosives under N.J.S.A. 21:1-1 et seq.104)
concealed in or about his clothes or person or in any automobile, motorcycle
or other vehicle.
§ 285-15. Picketing a residence prohibited. [Added 10-12-1993 by
Ord. No. 11-93]
It is unlawful for any person to engage in picketing before or about the
residence or dwelling of any individual in the Township.
§ 285-16. Participating in other breaches of peace prohibited.
No person shall engage in any other riotous conduct, indecent conduct,
breaches of the peace or vagrancy not hereinbefore mentioned.105
§ 285-17. Displaying incorrect building number. [Added 4-7-2004 by
Ord. No. 5-04]
No person shall display or cause to be displayed on any building or lot
a number different than the number assigned to the building or lot in
the numbering system approved by resolution of the Harding Township
Committee.
§ 285-18. Prohibited use or sale of marijuana and marijuana related
paraphernalia. [Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 19-18]
A. No person(s) shall be permitted to use or sell marijuana or any
marijuana-related paraphernalia on or within any public housing
facility, public park, public building or within 1,000 feet of any location
and areas within the municipality which are owned or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or school board and is used for school
purposes.
102. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A: 151-1 et seq. were amended by L. 1966, c. 60.
For current disposition of these provisions, see the Disposition Table in the front of Title
2A of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
103. Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1 and 39-9.
104. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.S.A. 21:1-1 et seq. were repealed by L. 1941, c. 27, and
by L. 1960, c. 55. For current provisions, see N.J.S.A. 21:1A-128 et seq.
105. Editor's Note: Former § 141-21, Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by
persons under legal age on private property prohibited; penalties; suspension of driving
privileges, which immediately followed this section, may now be found at Chapter 84,
Alcoholic Beverages, Article II, Possession or Consumption by Underage Persons on
Private Property.
§ 285-14 HARDING CODE § 285-18
1:534
Chapter 302
REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use and development — See Ch. 225.
B. The Police Department of the Township of Harding, in connection with
its duties imposed by law, shall diligently enforce the provisions of this
chapter and shall have the authority to eject from such public housing
facility, public park, public building and/or any location and areas
within the municipality which is owned by or leased to any elementary
or secondary school or school board and is used school purposes any
person acting in violation of this chapter.
C. In addition to the ejectment penalty, as provided above, any person who
violates any provisions of this chapter or who otherwise fails to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter shall, for each such
violation or offense, be subject to the general penalty in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I. Each day that a violation or offense
continues shall constitute a separate violation hereof.
§ 285-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-18
1:535

ARTICLE I
New Vernon Village Redevelopment Plan
[Adopted 5-7-2003 by Ord. No. 6-03 (Ch. 146, Art. I of the 1990
Code)]
§ 302-1. Plan adopted.
The New Vernon Village Redevelopment Plan, prepared by Susan C.
Kimball, Professional Planner, dated March 6, 2003, is hereby adopted as
the redevelopment plan for the redevelopment area.
§ 302-2. Adoption of plan supplement. [Added 12-17-2003 by Ord.
No. 18-03]
The New Vernon Village Redevelopment Plan: Implementation Program and
Policies, prepared by Susan C. Kimball, PP, dated November 19, 2003,
is hereby adopted as a supplement to the redevelopment plan for the
redevelopment area.
§ 302-3. Amendment to Zoning Map.
The Harding Township Zoning Map is hereby amended to provide that
the lots included in the redevelopment area shall be designated as the
"New Vernon Redevelopment Area," and the Zoning Map shall be revised
accordingly.
§ 302-4. Redevelopment agency.
The Harding Township Committee shall act as a redevelopment agency
and is hereby authorized to use all the powers and authority granted
pursuant to the Redevelopment Law to undertake the New Vernon Village
Redevelopment Plan.106
106. Editor's Note: Former § 302-5, Report by Planning Board, and § 302-6, When effective,
which immediately followed this section, were repealed 11-16-2011 by Ord. No. 14-11.
§ 302-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-4
1:537
Chapter 338
SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 237.
§ 302-4 HARDING CODE § 302-4
1:538
ARTICLE I
Dumping
[Adopted 12-12-1967 by Ord. No. 3-67 (Ch. 65 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 338-1. Dumps and dumping prohibited.
No person, whether as principal or agent, servant or employee, clerk or
otherwise, shall use or permit to be used any land or road as a dumping
ground for litter, garbage, ashes, trash, debris, rubbish, wastepaper, motor
vehicle junk and other refuse matter; nor shall any person in any way
establish a dump within the limits of the Township.
§ 338-2. Violations and penalties.107
Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of
this article shall be liable to a penalty as provided in § 1-3, General penalty,
of the Code of the Township of Harding.
107. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 338-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-2
1:539

ARTICLE II
Garbage and Rubbish
[Adopted 10-19-1981 by Ord. No. 8-81; amended in its entirety
8-10-1992 by Ord. No. 4-92 (Ch. 91 of the 1990 Code)]
§ 338-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, certain words and terms shall be held to have
meanings as follows:
GARBAGE — Waste or decayed animal or vegetable matter ordinarily
incidental to the conduct of a household, or the handling, storage, sale and
service of foodstuffs.
OCCUPANT — Includes the owner, agent, tenant, lessee, caretaker or other
person (or corporation) actually occupying or in charge of any premises to
which collection service is afforded, provided that, for the purpose of this
article, no commercial enterprise shall be deemed to be an occupant.
RUBBISH — Those discarded items and materials that normally result from
the use of property within the Township for residential purposes; provided,
however, that the following items are specifically excluded:
§ 338-4. Special rubbish pickup days designated.
The Township Committee may designate one day in the spring and one day
in the fall of each year as "cleanup day." Rubbish only shall be picked up by
the Township. In all areas of the Township of Harding, such items eligible
for such pickup shall not be placed at the roadside in front of the premises
by the occupant or occupants thereof prior to 6:00 p.m., 10 days before the
designated pickup day, and not later than 7:00 a.m. of the designated pickup
day.
§ 338-5. Promulgation of additional rules and regulations.
The Township Committee may, from time to time, promulgate rules and
regulations to implement this article.
A. Automobile or other vehicle tires.
B. Materials that may be harmful to the public health or welfare.
C. Any item which shall exceed 200 pounds in total weight.
D. Any item which shall exceed six feet in length.
E. Brush which shall not be securely tied.
F. Earth, boulders, stones and bricks.
G. Large amounts of building materials.
H. Garbage.
§ 338-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-6
1:541
§ 338-6. Violations and penalties.108
Any occupant or occupants violating any of the provisions of this article or
failing or refusing to conform to the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to a penalty as provided in § 1-3, General penalty, of the
Code of the Township of Harding.
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 338-6 HARDING CODE § 338-6
1:542
ARTICLE III
Recycling
[Adopted 4-16-2008 by Ord. No. 4-08]
§ 338-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CO-MINGLED — A combining of nonputrescible source-separated
recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated
within the Morris County District Solid Waste Management Plan to be
source-separated for the purpose of recycling. These materials include:
ALUMINUM CANS — Cans made from aluminum that was
manufactured to hold a serving of a beverage. Specifically omitted from
this definition are aluminum foil and aluminum pie plates.
A.
GLASS BOTTLES AND JARS — Bottles and jars made from glass
including clear, brown and green glass. A bottle is defined as a
receptacle having a narrow neck and a mouth that can be corked
or capped. A "jar" is defined as a wide-mouthed container that can
be capped. Caps and lids not included. Specifically omitted from this
definition are drinking glasses, windows, mirrors, light bulbs, and
anything made of Pyrex® or ceramic.
B.
PLASTIC BOTTLES (CODED 1 AND 2) — Plastic bottles coded to
indicate that they are comprised of the specific types of plastic
compounds (polymers) known as polyethylene terephthalate (PETE) or
high-density polyethylene (HDPE). See symbols below. A "bottle" is
defined as a receptacle having a narrow neck and a mouth that can be
corked or capped. Caps and lids not included. Any item made of plastic
that is not a bottle, and any plastic bottle without one of the symbols
shown below, is specifically omitted from this definition. Empty bottles
which contained hazardous materials, such as motor oil, antifreeze, etc.
should not be recycled.
C.
STEEL (TIN) CANS — An airtight container for the distribution or
storage of goods, composed of thin, usually ferrous, metal. Examples
are soup cans and tuna fish cans.
D.
NEWSPAPER — A publication containing news, information and
advertising, usually printed on low-cost paper called newsprint.
Newspaper may include glossy inserts which come with the paper,
dependent upon the market conditions at the time.
E.
§ 338-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-7
1:543
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Shipping containers made with kraft
paper linerboard and corrugated medium.
F.
MIXED PAPER — Various categories of recyclable paper, including but
not limited to white and colored paper used in printers, photocopiers
and fax machines, white and colored ledger paper, carbonless copy
paper, construction paper, undeliverable mail, mailed promotional
letters/advertisements/circulars, magazines, catalogues, envelopes,
softcover books.
G.
LEAVES — Vegetative material, typically generated in the autumn when
they fall from trees and then are raked from residents' and/or
commercial lawns.
H.
GRASS CLIPPINGS — Vegetative material generated when grass
(lawns) are cut.
I.
BRUSH — Branches, woody plants and other similar vegetative
material. Leaves and grass do not constitute brush.
J.
NATURAL WOOD WASTE — Logs, stumps, branches and other wood
tree parts. Dimensional lumber is omitted from inclusion in this
definition.
K.
OIL-CONTAMINATED SOIL — Nonhazardous soil that contains
petroleum hydrocarbons (gasoline, diesel, kerosene, jet fuel, No. 4
and No. 6 heating oils and certain other refinery products, including
coal tar). This type of soil shall be determined to be nonhazardous in
accordance with the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:26.
L.
USED MOTOR OIL — Motor oil from motor vehicles, lawn mowers,
boats, etc., which has served its intended useful purpose.
M.
LEAD-ACID BATTERIES — Storage batteries in which the electrodes
are grids of lead containing lead oxides that change in composition
during charging and discharging, and the electrolyte is dilute sulfuric
acid. These include starting batteries such as car batteries that deliver
a short burst of high power to start the engine. In addition, they may
include deep cell batteries found on boats or campers used to power
accessories like trolling motors, winches or lights.
N.
HAZARDOUS DRY CELL BATTERIES — Rechargeable batteries, such
as nickel-cadmium, nickel-iron, nickel metal hydride, lithium ion, small
sealed lead acid, etc. These are often used as substitutes for
nonrechargeable batteries in standard sizes such as AAA, AA, C, D
and 9V. Rechargeable batteries are commonly found in cordless tools,
cellular and cordless phones, laptop computers, cameras, remote
controls, toys, etc. Also included in this definition are nonrechargeable
batteries that are hazardous as defined by the Resource Conservation
Recovery Act (RCRA), regardless of the RCRA exclusion of household
waste from the definition of hazardous waste pursuant to 40 CFR
261.4(b). Nonrechargeable, hazardous batteries include older alkaline
O.
§ 338-7 HARDING CODE § 338-7
1:544
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure, or complex of
buildings in which three or more dwelling units are owner-occupied or
rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes
(see N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a.) and shall include hotels, motels, or other guest
houses serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined
under Subsection (j) of Section 3 of the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,
P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.).
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or persons
appointed by the municipal governing body to fulfill the requirements of
the Morris County Solid Waste Management Plan and the New Jersey
Statewide Mandatory Source Separation and Recycling Act and those rules
and regulations promulgated therefor.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — All solid waste generated at residential,
commercial, and institutional establishments within the boundaries of the
Township which is not bulky waste or construction and demolition debris.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated, or processed
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid
waste for the purposes of recycling.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Harding.
§ 338-8. Source separation; exemption from source-separation
requirements.
and carbon zinc batteries as well as silver oxide, mercury and
magnesium button-type batteries, etc. It should be noted that
domestically manufactured alkaline and carbon zinc nonrechargeable
batteries made after circa 1994 eliminated mercury content to the point
that they should not be considered RCRA hazardous and therefore are
not included in this material category.
METAL APPLIANCES — Appliances composed predominantly of metal,
and may include stoves, washing machines and dryers, for example,
if the appliance is predominantly metal. Also included are air
conditioners, refrigerators and dehumidifiers if they are predominantly
metal. If these appliances on the latter list contain refrigerants that
are prohibited by the Clean Air Act from being knowingly vented, the
refrigerant must be recovered accordingly.
P.
Q. WHOLE TIRES109 – Tires that are whole, not chipped into small pieces.
109. Note: Tires are allowed to be recycled and/or incinerated for energy recovery.
§ 338-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-8
1:545
A. Mandatory source separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons who
are owners, tenants, or occupants of residential and nonresidential
premises, which shall include but not be limited to retail and other
commercial locations, as well as government, schools and other
institutional locations within the Township, to separate designated
recyclable materials from all solid waste. The owner or occupant of the
premises shall keep all receptacles clean and in safe handling
condition. Disposal of designated recyclable materials shall be separate
and apart from other solid waste generated by the owners, tenants, or
occupants of such premises as follows:
(1) Aluminum cans, steel (tin) cans, glass containers, glass bottles and
jars, HDPE plastics, PETE plastics shall be emptied, rinsed and
disposed of as specified by the Township.
(2) Used newspapers shall be secured in bundles no larger than 12
inches high and shall not be placed in plastic bags. The used
newspapers shall be disposed of as specified by the Township.
(3) Corrugated cardboard shall be flattened and disposed of as
specified by the Township.
(4) Mixed paper, paperboard/clipboard, and magazines, shall be
disposed of as specified by the Township.
(5) All other designated materials as listed as designated recyclable
materials in § 338-7 shall be disposed of as specified by the
Township.
(6) Yard waste shall not be disposed of with the regular solid waste and
shall not be disposed of at any solid waste facility. It shall either be
composted on the site of the residential establishment or disposed
of at a yard waste compost facility.
B. Exemptions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16(d), the governing body of
a municipality may exempt persons occupying commercial or
institutional premises within its municipal boundaries from the sourceseparation
requirements of the ordinance which requires persons
generating municipal solid waste within its municipal boundaries to
source-separate from the municipal solid waste stream, the specified
recyclable materials if those persons have otherwise provided for the
recycling of all designated recyclable materials. To be eligible for an
exemption pursuant to this article, a commercial or institutional
generator of solid waste shall file an application for exemption with the
municipal recycling coordinator on forms to be provided for this
purpose, and provide the following information:
(1) The name of the commercial or institutional entity;
(2) The street address location and lot and block designation;
§ 338-8 HARDING CODE § 338-8
1:546
§ 338-9. Acceptance of the municipal solid waste recycling goal.
As set forth in N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13.3.b(4)(c), the Township accepts the goal
of 50% recycling of municipal solid waste by 2015 and shall monitor its
level of recycling and solid waste disposal and shall strive to achieve the
recycling of 50% of the municipal solid waste generated within its borders.
§ 338-10. Residential dwelling compliance requirements.
The owner of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this
article. For multifamily units, the management or owner is responsible
for setting up and maintaining the recycling system, including collection
of recyclable materials, in accordance with guidelines or regulations
established by Municipal Recycling Coordinator or the Director of Public
Works. Violations and penalty notices will be directed to the owner or
management, in those instances where the violator is not easily identifiable.
The management shall issue notification and collection rules to new tenants
when they arrive and every six months during their occupancy.
§ 338-11. Nonresidential establishment compliance requirements.
(3) The name, official title and phone number of the person making
application on behalf of the commercial or institutional entity;
(4) The name, address, official contact person and telephone number
of the facility which provides the service of recycling those
designated recyclable materials; and
(5) A certification that the designated recyclable materials will be
recycled, and that, at least on an annual basis, said recycling
service provider or commercial/institutional generator shall
provide written documentation to the municipal recycling
coordinator of the total number of tons collected and recycled for
each designated material.
A. Institutional establishment compliance. Institutional establishments
shall source-separate designated recyclable materials. Designated
recyclable materials may be deposited at the recycling center during
hours of operation. Otherwise the institution shall be responsible for
establishing recycling programs for collection, transportation and
marketing of designated recyclable materials.
B. Commercial establishment compliance. Commercial establishments
shall source-separate all designated materials for recycling. Designated
recyclable materials, excluding office paper, may be deposited at the
recycling center during hours of operation. Otherwise, each
establishment shall be responsible for establishing recycling programs
for collection, transportation and marketing of designated recyclable
materials.
§ 338-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-11
1:547
§ 338-12. Alternate methods of disposal.
Any person who is an owner, lessee or occupant may donate or sell used
recyclable materials to any person, partnership or corporation, whether
operating for profit or not for profit. No person, partnership or corporation
shall appropriate recyclable material placed for collection as designated
by the Township of Harding unless they have received the expressed
permission from the Township of Harding to remove such material.
§ 338-13. Ownership of materials following placement for
collection.
From the time of placement at the designated area, the recyclable materials
shall be the property of Harding Township or its designated agents, and
revenues collected from the sale of recyclable materials, if any, shall be the
property of Harding Township or its designated agents.
§ 338-14. Multi-generator building recycling responsibilities.
In the case of multi-generator buildings, including apartment buildings,
hotels, office buildings and commercial establishments, the building
management as well as the individual generators shall be responsible for
compliance with the requirements of this article.
§ 338-15. Enforcement agent designated.
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator or members of the Police and Public
Works Department are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all
provisions of this article. Enforcement officers shall have the right to
inspect garbage set out for disposal in order to determine whether
recyclable materials are included.
C. All commercial, institutional or multifamily dwellings which are not
serviced by municipal recycling collection systems must submit
recycling documentation on a semiannual basis to the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator on forms prescribed by the Township,
documenting the amount of recycled material, by material type,
collected and recycled and the vendor or vendors providing recycling
service. Due dates for report periods are as follows:
Reporting Period Due Date
January 1 to June 30 July 15
July 1 to December 31 January 15
D. All of the aforementioned provisions may, from time to time, be
modified by the Municipal Recycling Coordinator to the extent that
procedures are developed for establishments to have their recyclables
recycled, or new requirements are imposed by county or state agencies
having appropriate jurisdiction.
§ 338-11 HARDING CODE § 338-16
1:548
§ 338-16. Unlawful acts.
§ 338-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or fails to comply
with any provision of this article or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a
fine not less than $25, nor more than $1,000.
A. It shall be unlawful to combine designated, unsoiled recyclables with
other solid waste. Failure to source-separate designated materials for
recycling is a violation of this article.
B. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
contains visible signs of designated recyclable materials. It shall be the
responsibility of the resident whose solid waste was not removed
because it contained recyclables to properly segregate the uncollected
waste for proper recycling. Allowing such unseparated refuse to
accumulate will be considered a violation of this article.
§ 338-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-17
1:549
Chapter 346
STREETS AND DRIVEWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 140.
Land use and development — See Ch. 225.
Littering — See Ch. 237.
Walk-a-thons and bike-a-thons — See Ch. 383.
§ 338-17 HARDING CODE § 338-17
1:550
ARTICLE I
Road Excavations and Connections
[Adopted 12-12-1967 by Ord. No. 3-67 (Ch. 161, Art. I, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 346-1. Permit required for road excavation; fee. [Amended
8-13-1990 by Ord. No. 9-90]
§ 346-2. Permit required for driveway construction. [Amended
3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90; 8-13-1990 by Ord. No. 9-90; 11-17-2010
by Ord. No. 15-10; 3-23-2011 by Ord. No. 03-11]
The construction of any driveway connecting with a road is prohibited
unless a grading permit therefor has first been obtained from the Township
Engineer.
§ 346-3. Obstruction of flow of water along roads prohibited.
No person shall encumber or obstruct any road or public place in the
Township by placing therein or thereon any material, vehicle or equipment
of any nature whatsoever so as to interfere with the flow of water along the
same without first obtaining a permit from the Clerk.
§ 346-4. Application for permit.
No permit shall be issued unless a written application is submitted to the
Clerk. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the
name of the contractor or person who is to perform the work; the nature,
location and purpose of the undertaking for which the permit is desired; the
date of commencement and the date of completion; and such other data as
may reasonably be required by the Clerk. It shall also contain an agreement
that the applicant will comply with all ordinances, regulations and laws
relating to the work to be done.
§ 346-5. Guaranties required prior to permit issuance. [Amended
8-13-1990 by Ord. No. 9-90]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel,
undermine or in any manner break up any road or public place or to
make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any
road or public place for any purpose, unless such person shall first have
obtained a permit therefor from the Clerk. The fee for a road opening
permit shall be as provided in Chapter 171, Fees.
B. A permit shall not be required if the proposed road opening was shown
on a preliminary subdivision or site plan approved by the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment and the associated guaranties and
escrow fees have been provided to and approved by the Township as
part of the Board approval process. [Added 11-17-2010 by Ord. No.
15-10]
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-5
1:551
§ 346-6. Passing warning barriers prohibited.
No person being the owner, driver, manager or operator of any vehicle shall
drive past any barrier, warning sign or guard placed for the purpose of
giving notice of prohibition of travel over or upon any newly paved surface
or other new construction in any road or public place.
A. Guaranty of actual costs. Except as herein provided, no permit for road
excavation shall be issued until and unless there shall be deposited with
the Township Clerk a sum of money or surety bond in an amount
sufficient, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, to cover the
estimated cost of restoring and protecting the area of road, right-of-way
or public place involved against the settlement and defect in pavement,
including the expense of inspection thereof and to maintain any area of
the road, right-of-way or public place where excavation is made in good
condition for a period of 24 months after said work shall have been
done, usual wear and tear excepted. Such bond shall be in form and
substance satisfactory to the Township Attorney. Public utilities under
the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Board of Utilities shall not be
required to furnish said deposit or surety bond.
B. Guaranty of professional fees.
(1) Except as herein provided, no permit for road excavation shall be
issued until and unless there shall be established with the Township
Clerk an escrow account in an amount sufficient, in the opinion of
the Township Engineer, to cover the cost of anticipated professional
services, including engineering, legal and other expenses
connected with the application and anticipated work to be
performed. In the case of a public utility, an escrow fund of $2,000
shall be established.
(2) As invoices are received from time to time by the Township from
the professional consultants listed above, the Township Clerk will
pay said invoices from the escrow account and immediately
request, in writing, that the applicants pay such additional sums
into the escrow account as may be required to cause the amount in
the escrow account to equal the initial deposit. The Township Clerk
will review the account at least monthly to ensure that the escrow
fund is maintained at the prescribed level.
(3) Failure of an applicant to adequately maintain an appropriate
balance in the escrow account shall be considered grounds for
immediate revocation of all permits previously issued in connection
with said application.
(4) Any escrow funds not utilized for the above purposes shall be
returned to the applicant upon the acceptable completion of the
work performed.
§ 346-5 HARDING CODE § 346-7
1:552
§ 346-7. Notice of road paving to be given to abutting property
owners.
Whenever the Township Committee enacts any ordinance or resolution
providing for the paving or repaving of any road, the Clerk shall promptly
mail to the owner and tenants of lands abutting the portion of said road
to be paved or repaved and to any public utility using said road a written
notice to that effect.
§ 346-8. Excavation on newly improved streets. [Added 8-13-1990
by Ord. No. 9-90]
§ 346-9. Emergencies. [Added 8-13-1990 by Ord. No. 9-90]
Street openings may be made without the necessity of a written application
provided for in § 346-4 in emergencies such as broken or frozen mains
or other happenings which would endanger public life, health and safety;
provided, however, that verbal notice thereof shall be immediately given
to the Township Clerk's office or, if the Township Clerk's office should be
closed, to the Police Department and written applications for a permit are
thereafter made to the Township Clerk as soon thereafter as conveniently
can be done, not exceeding 48 hours, in accordance with § 346-4.
A. Before any public street is improved or paved, the Township Clerk shall
give notice to all persons owning property abutting on the street and to
all public utilities and authorities operating in the Township that the
street is about to be paved or improved. All utility line extensions,
repairs, service connections and other related work which require
excavation of the street shall be completed within 60 days from the
receipt of notice. The time for the completion of the work may be
extended, in writing, by the Township Clerk, in the Township Clerk's
sole discretion, upon application by the person performing the work.
Except in the case of an emergency (see § 346-9), no person shall be
issued a permit to excavate the street to which the notice related for a
period of five years from the date of notice.
B. Application for a deviation from the terms of this section may be made
to the Township Clerk. The Township Clerk may grant such a deviation
upon his finding, in his sole discretion, that the excavation is made
necessary by the occurrence of some event which could not have been
foreseen at the time that notice was given or where the public health or
safety requires the performance of the work in question. If the
Township Clerk should deny such a deviation, the applicant shall then
have the right of direct appeal to the Township Committee. The fee for
securing a deviation from the terms of this section shall be as provided
in Chapter 171, Fees.
§ 346-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-10
1:553
§ 346-10. Applicability.
This article shall not be applicable to any work being performed by or on
behalf of the Township either by its employees or any person under contract
with the Township.
§ 346-10 HARDING CODE § 346-10
1:554
ARTICLE II
Brush and Hedges Near Roads and Intersections
[Adopted 12-12-1967 by Ord. No. 3-67 (Ch. 161, Art. II, of the 1990
Code); amended in its entirety 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 07-16]
§ 346-11. Trimming responsibility of abutting property owner.
The owner or occupier of lands lying within the Township abutting any
public roadway shall keep all trees, brush, hedges and other plant life
growing within 10 feet of any roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection
of two roadways cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet where it shall be
necessary and expedient for preservation of the public safety.
§ 346-12. Notice of violation; removal by Township.
If, within 10 days after notice to cut and remove such trees, brush, hedges
and other plant life as required in § 346-11 is given by or under the direction
of the Tree Conservation Officer or Chief of Police, the owner or occupier
fails, refuses or neglects to cut or remove the same, the Township shall
forthwith cause the same to be cut and removed. The notice shall contain a
description of the property affected, sufficiently definite in terms to identify
it, and shall set forth that, unless such trees, shrubs, hedges and other plant
life are cut, the Township shall cut or cause the trees, shrubs, hedges or
other plant life to be cut pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.26.
§ 346-13. Cost of removal to be lien.
In all cases where the trees, brush, hedges and other plant life are cut
and removed from said roadway by or under the direction of an officer of
the Township as set forth in § 346-12 above, the reasonable cost of such
removal, as determined by the Township Administrator, shall be charged
against such land. The amount so charged shall become a lien upon such
land, and shall be added to the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon
such land. The same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes and to be
collected and enforced by the Tax Collector and in the same manner as
taxes.
§ 346-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-13
1:555

ARTICLE III
Driveways
[Adopted 3-13-1978 by Ord. No. 3-78; amended in its entirety
11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 3-87 (Ch. 161, Art. III, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 346-14. Construction and maintenance; permit; enforcement.
A. Notwithstanding the issuance of any building permit, no owner of land
shall allow any land disturbance on land owned by him, and no person
or legal entity shall engage in land disturbance, unless such owner,
person or legal entity shall have first constructed or caused to be
constructed and shall maintain so that surface materials, including but
not limited to soil, snow and ice, will not be transported onto the road a
driveway between the road and any structure to be erected or between
the road and the area to be affected by land disturbance. The driveway
shall be used for the purpose of ingress and egress to the area of land
disturbance.
B. Prior to construction of a driveway, an application for a grading permit
shall be made to the Township Engineer as required by Article I of this
chapter. [Amended 3-23-2011 by Ord. No. 03-11]
C. Specifications; gates, pillars and posts.
(1) A driveway shall be constructed in accordance with the
specifications for private roads serving four or fewer lots set forth
in § 225-76B(1) of this Code. Nothing herein contained shall relieve
the responsible party from otherwise complying with the
construction and design specifications of driveway improvements
during the normal course of construction and as required by Article
I of this article. [Amended 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 2-98]
(2) Any gates, pillars and/or posts constructed adjacent to driveways
shall be done so in accordance with the requirements set forth in
§ 225-116Q of this Code. In that regard, notwithstanding the
provision of Subsection D of this section, the provisions of
§ 225-116Q shall be enforced by the Township Zoning Officer, and
to the extent it may be required by the Zoning Officer, with the
assistance of the Township Engineer. [Added 10-19-2015 by Ord.
No. 05-15]
D. This chapter shall be enforced by the Township Engineer, and appeals
from his determinations hereunder may be taken to the Board of
Adjustment after the payment of a fee as set forth in Chapter 171, Fees.
[Amended 3-23-2011 by Ord. No. 03-11]
§ 346-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-14
1:557

ARTICLE IV
Road Construction Standards
[Adopted 12-12-1967 by Ord. No. 3-67 (Ch. 161, Art. IV, of the 1990
Code)]
§ 346-15. Acceptance for maintenance.
No road to be hereafter improved or constructed shall be accepted for
maintenance by the Township unless the plans and specifications prepared
in compliance with Township details and in accordance with the
requirements hereinafter set forth are approved by the Engineer.
§ 346-16. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ENGINEER — The Township Engineer.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS — Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction of the New Jersey State Highway Department dated
1996 and revisions thereof.[Amended 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 2-98]
TOWNSHIP DETAILS — Detail drawings as prepared by the Township
Engineer dated September 1965 and revisions thereof.
§ 346-17. Submission and approval of plans.
A. Submission. Prior to the construction of any road within the Township,
four sets of plans shall be submitted for review.
B. Details.
(1) Plans shall be on standard sheets of 24 inches by 36 inches. They
shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer of the State
of New Jersey. The horizontal scale shall be not less than one inch
equals 50 feet. The plans shall show a plan view at the top of the
sheet and its corresponding profile directly below it. Plans shall
show existing features, grades and all trees over 10 inches in
diameter within the right-of-way. Plans shall show fifty-foot
stations, complete curve data of the center line and all proposed
pavement and structures within the right-of-way.
(2) Profiles shall show existing elevation and proposed elevation for
each fifty-foot station.
(3) Plans shall include cross sections, drawn to a scale of one inch
equals five feet, showing the entire right-of-way and graded width.
Each section shall show the amount of cut and fill in cubic yards.
(4) All data shall be based on United States Coast and Geodetic Survey.
§ 346-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-17
1:559
§ 346-18. Center-line stakeout; scope of work; minimum widths of
pavement, shoulders and gutters.
§ 346-19. Construction materials and standards.
(5) On deep cuts, soil logs or borings may be required to be
incorporated into the plans.
(6) Detail sheets shall be made part of the plans showing each
contemplated structure and typical sections and shall be in
accordance with Township details.
(7) Elevation benchmarks shall be permanently established at
intervals of a minimum of 1,000 feet along the right-of-way, and the
location and elevation shall be indicated on the plans.
(8) Each roadway intersection shall be shown to a scale of one inch
equals 20 feet, including profiles along each gutter line for a
distance of at least 100 feet from the intersection.
(9) Plans shall include complete drainage calculations for each inlet,
section of pipe and gutter flow.
(10) Plans and profiles shall be shown for each easement.
(11) Plans shall also include plans and profiles for each driveway
entrance to the proposed road.
(12) A copy of the plans and Standard Specifications shall be kept on the
job at all times.
(13) Approval of the plans by the Township shall not be construed as
acceptance of the road by the Township.
A. Prior to the commencement of any work, a licensed professional
engineer shall provide a center-line stakeout of the road at each fiftyfoot
station. These stakes or their equivalent offsets shall be maintained
throughout the construction period. Complete elevation of the stakes
and cut sheets shall be furnished to the Township Engineer prior to the
commencement of that phase of work requiring those elevations and
cut sheets.
B. The scope of the work and the control of the work shall be in
accordance with paragraphs 1.4.1 through 1.7.8, inclusive, of the
Standard Specifications.
C. The minimum width of pavement, shoulders and gutters shall be as set
forth in the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards,
N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq., as modified by the New Jersey Site
Improvement Advisory Board in accordance with Resolution 97-1.
[Amended 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 2-98]
A. Clearing and grubbing.
§ 346-17 HARDING CODE § 346-19
1:560
§ 346-20. Shoulder and gutter construction. [Amended 4-20-1998
by Ord. No. 2-98]
Seeding and/or sodding of gutters and/or shoulders, wherever required,
shall be in accordance with paragraphs 7.5.1 through 7.9.3, inclusive, of the
Standard Specifications.
§ 346-21. Easements.111
All easements, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall have a
minimum width of 20 feet.
(1) The right-of-way shall be cleared of brush, trees, stumps, topsoil
and debris, except those trees as noted on the plans, which will
remain. Trees within the right-of-way which are to remain shall be
marked and protected with a four-foot-high red painted snow fence
around the tree, held in place with rigid posts, at a radius of 10 feet
for each foot of diameter of the tree. No excavation within this
radius will be permitted without written approval of the Engineer.
(2) Topsoil shall be stockpiled at the locations as shown on the plans.
No topsoil shall be removed from the site but shall be utilized along
the right-of-way.
(3) All clearing and grubbing shall be in accordance with paragraphs
2.1.1 through 2.1.3, inclusive, of the Standard Specifications.
B. Excavation and embankment.
(1) Excavation and embankment shall be accomplished in accordance
with paragraphs 2.2.1 through 2.7.4, inclusive, of the Standard
Specifications.
(2) All embankments over three feet thick shall be allowed to settle
over one winter season before the construction of any pavement or
structures.
C. Subbase. If, in the opinion of the Engineer, subbase material is
required, it shall be installed in accordance with paragraphs 2.9.1
through 2.9.3, inclusive, of the Standard Specifications.
D. Slope protections. Slope protection shall be in accordance with
paragraphs 2.12.1 through 2.15.3, inclusive, of the Standard
Specifications.
E. Subgrade. Preparations of the subgrade shall be in accordance with
paragraphs 2.10.1 through 2.10.3, inclusive, of the Standard
Specifications.110
110. Editor's Note: Former Subsections F, G and H, which immediately followed this subsection,
were repealed 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 2-98.
111. Editor's Note: Former § 161-19, Gutter construction, was repealed 4-20-1998 by Ord. No.
2-98. See now § 346-20, Shoulder and gutter construction.
§ 346-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-21
1:561

ARTICLE V
Right-of-Way Permits
[Adopted 11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 20-18]
§ 346-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANTICIPATED MUNICIPAL EXPENSES — The cost of processing an
application for a right-of-way permit including, but not limited to, all
professional fees such as engineer and attorney costs to the Township.
BACKUP POWER CAPABLE — Shall mean that the facility is capable of
being connected to a generator, batteries, or other power source when the
electric distribution system is down and so that the facility is capable of
operating independently from same.
CABINET — A small box-like or rectangular structure used to facilitate
utility or wireless service from within the municipal right-of-way.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM — The part of the electric system, after
the transmission system that is dedicated to delivering electric energy to an
end user.
EXISTING POLE — A pole that is in lawful existence within the municipal
right-of-way.
GROUND-LEVEL CABINETS — A cabinet that is not attached to an existing
pole and is touching or directly supported by the ground.
MUNICIPAL RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface of, and the space above or
below, any public street, road, place, public way or place, sidewalk, alley,
boulevard, parkway, drive, and the like, held by the Township as an
easement or in fee simply ownership. This term also includes rights-of-way
held by the County of Morris where the Township's approval is required for
the use of same pursuant to N.J.S.A. 27:16-6. This term shall not include
private roadways.
POLE — A long, slender, rounded piece of wood or metal.
POLE-MOUNTED ANTENNA — A device that is attached to a pole and
used to transmit radio or microwave signals and shall include, but not be
limited to, small cell equipment and transmission media such as femtocells,
picocells, microcells, and outside distributed antenna systems.
POLE-MOUNTED CABINET — A cabinet that is proposed to be placed on an
existing or proposed pole.
POWERED COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT — Telecommunications
equipment that has the ability to operate, by way of a generator, off of the
electrical grid.
PROPOSED POLE — A pole that is proposed to be placed in the municipal
right-of-way.
§ 346-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-22
1:563
RIGHT-OF-WAY AGREEMENT — An agreement that sets forth the terms
and conditions for use of the municipal right-of-way and includes, but is not
limited to, municipal franchise agreements.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT — An approval from the Township setting forth
applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
SURROUNDING STREETSCAPE — Existing poles within the same right-ofway
which are located within 500 feet of the proposed pole.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE — The Township Committee of the Township of
Harding.
UTILITIES REGULATED BY THE BOARD OF PUBLIC UTILITIES —
Companies subject to regulation by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities
under Chapter 48 of the Revised Statutes.
UTILITY SERVICE — Electric, telephone, or cable service.
§ 346-23. Pole-mounted antennas, access to right-of-way, right-ofway
agreements.
§ 346-24. Application to utilities regulated by the Board of Public
Utilities, other entities.
§ 346-25. Right-of-way permits, siting standards for poles, antennas
and cabinets in the right-of-way; backup power.
A. No person shall operate or place any type of pole-mounted antenna
within the Township right-of-way without first entering into a right-ofway
agreement pursuant to the provisions of this section.
B. The terms of said right-of-way agreement shall include:
(1) A term not to exceed 15 years;
(2) Reasonable insurance requirements;
(3) Fine for unauthorized installations;
(4) A reference to the siting standards set forth in this section; and
(5) Any other items which may reasonably be required.
A. Notwithstanding any franchise or right-of-way agreement to the
contrary, all facilities proposed to be placed within the municipal rightof-
way by a utility regulated by the Board of Public Utilities, or any
other entity lawfully within the municipal right-of-way, shall be subject
to the standards and procedures set forth in this chapter and shall
require right-of-way permits for the siting of poles, antennas and
cabinets in the municipal right-of-way.
A. No pole, antenna or cabinet shall be installed within the municipal
right-of-way without the issuance of a right-of-way permit.
§ 346-22 HARDING CODE § 346-25
1:564
B. Pole siting standards.
(1) Height. No pole shall be taller than 35 feet or 110% of the height of
poles in the surrounding streetscape, whichever is taller.
(2) Location, safety and aesthetics. No pole shall be erected in the
right-of-way unless it:
(a) Is used to bring utility service across the right-of-way to an
existing or proposed development from an existing pole; or
(b) Is replacing an existing pole; or
(c) Is approved pursuant to a land development application by
either the Township's Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning
Board pursuant a land use application; or
(d) Is located on the opposite side of the street from the electric
distribution system; and
(e) For sites in the RR/R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 Zone, is 200 linear feet
from any other existing pole or proposed pole along the same
side of the street, or for sites in the B-1, B-2 and OB Zones, is
100 linear feet from any other existing pole or proposed pole
along the same side of the street; and
(f) Is not located in an area with underground utilities; and
(g) Does not inhibit any existing sight triangles or sight distance;
and
(h) Allows adequate room for the public to pass and repass across
the municipal right-of-way; and
(i) Is finished and/or painted and otherwise camouflaged, in
conformance with best available stealth technology methods,
so as to blend in compatibly with its background and so as to
minimize its visual impact on surrounding properties.
C. Ground-level cabinet site standards.
(1) Ground-level cabinets are prohibited in the RR/R-1, R-2, R-3 and
R-4 Zone and any future residential zone.
(2) Ground-level cabinets are permitted in B-1, B-2 and OB Zone,
provided that each ground-level cabinet:
(a) Is less than 28 cubic feet in volume; and
(b) Is finished and/or painted so as to blend in compatibly with its
background and so as to minimize its visual impact on
surrounding properties; and
(c) Does not inhibit an existing sight triangles or sight distance;
and
§ 346-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-25
1:565
§ 346-26. Application process.
(d) Allows adequate room for the public to pass and repass across
the municipal right-of-way.
D. Pole-mounted antenna and pole-mounted cabinet siting standards.
(1) Pole-mounted antennas are permitted on existing poles in all zones,
provided that each pole-mounted antenna:
(a) Does not exceed three cubic feet in volume; and
(b) Is finished and/or painted and otherwise camouflaged, in
conformance with best available stealth technology methods,
so as to blend in compatibly with its background and so as to
minimize its visual impact on surrounding properties; and
(c) Does not inhibit sight triangles or sight distance; and
(d) Allows adequate room for the public to pass and repass across
the municipal right-of-way.
(2) Pole-mounted cabinets are permitted on existing poles in all zones,
provided that each pole-mounted cabinet:
(a) Does not exceed 16 cubic feet; and
(b) Is finished and/or painted and otherwise camouflaged, in
conformance with best available stealth technology methods,
so as to blend in compatibly with its background and so as to
minimize its visual impact on surrounding properties; and
(c) Does not inhibit sight triangles or sight distance; and
(d) Allows adequate room for the public to pass and repass across
the municipal right-of-way.
(3) The Township may also require that a permittee provide a
certification from a licensed engineer attesting to the structural
integrity of any pole-mounted antenna or pole-mounted cabinet.
(4) PL Zone. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, no groundlevel
cabinets or poles are permitted within the municipal right-ofway
within the PL Zone.
E. Special backup power requirement for powered communications
equipment. All powered communications equipment must be backup
power capable.
A. Pre-application meeting. Prior to making a formal application with the
Township for use of the municipal right-of-way, all applicants are
advised to meet with the Township Engineer to review the scope of
applicant's proposal.
§ 346-25 HARDING CODE § 346-26
1:566
§ 346-27. Waiver.
B. The Township Committee shall, by resolution, approve or disapprove
every right-of-way permit application based on the recommendations
provided to it pursuant to Subsections E and F below.
C. All applications made under this section which trigger Federal
Communications Commission shot clock rules pursuant to the Federal
Communications Commission Order titled "Accelerating Wireless
Broadband Deployment by Removing Barriers to Infrastructure
Investment; Accelerating Wireline Broadband Deployment by the
Removal of Barriers to Infrastructure Investment," WT Docket No.
17-79; WC Docket No. 17-84, shall be processed on an expedited basis.
D. Every application made pursuant to this chapter must include a
stamped survey prepared by a New Jersey licensed surveyor
demonstrating that any proposed pole is located within the municipal
right-of-way. An application which does not include such a survey shall
immediately be deemed incomplete.
E. New poles and ground-level cabinets.
(1) The Planning Board shall, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25b(3),
review applications for the placement of new poles and groundlevel
cabinets within the municipal right-of-way and advise the
Township Committee of its recommendation to approve or
disapprove same.
(a) If the Planning Board recommends a denial of an application, it
shall set forth the factual basis for such a denial in writing.
F. Pole-mounted antenna and pole-mounted cabinets.
(1) The Township Engineer shall review application to place polemounted
antenna and pole-mounted cabinets within the municipal
right-of-way and advise the Township Committee of his or her
recommendation to approve or disapprove same.
G. If the Township Engineer recommends a denial of an application, he or
she shall set forth the factual basis for such a denial in writing.
H. If the Township Committee denies any application made under this
section, it shall do so in writing and set forth the factual basis therefor.
A. The Township Committee may waive any siting standard set forth in
§ 346-25 where the applicant demonstrates that strict enforcement of
said standard:
(1) Will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting any interstate or
intrastate telecommunications service pursuant to 47 U.S.C.
253(a); or
§ 346-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-27
1:567
§ 346-28. Right-of-way permit fees and deposit towards anticipated
municipal expenses.
§ 346-29. Miscellaneous provisions.
(2) Will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless
service pursuant to 47 U.S.C. 332(c)(7)(B)(i)(II); or
(3) Will violate any requirement set forth by the Federal
Communications Commission Order entitled "Accelerating
Wireless Broadband Deployment by Removing Barriers to
Infrastructure Investment; Accelerating Wireline Broadband
Deployment by Removing Barriers to Infrastructure Investment,"
WT Docket No. 17-79; WC Docket 17-84; or
(4) Will prohibit, or have the effect of prohibiting, the ability of an
entity to provide utility service to any prospective customer within
the Township.
A. Every right-of-way permit application must include a right-of-way
permit fee in the following amounts:
(1) One to five sites: $500.
(2) Each additional site: $100.
B. Deposit towards anticipated municipal expenses.
(1) In addition to the right-of-way permit fee, the Township Engineer
may, in his or her own discretion, require the posting of a twothousand-
dollar deposit towards anticipated municipal expenses
related to an application made pursuant to this chapter.
(2) Applicant's deposit towards anticipated municipal expenses shall
be placed in an escrow account. If said deposit contains insufficient
funds to enable the Township to perform its review, the Chief
Financial Officer of the Township shall provide applicant a notice of
insufficient balance. In order for review to continue, the applicant
shall, within 10 days, post a deposit to the account in an amount to
be mutually agreed upon.
(3) The Chief Financial Officer shall, upon request by the applicant,
and after a final decision has been made by the Township
Committee regarding his or her pending right-of-way permit
application, refund any unused balance from applicant's deposit
towards anticipated municipal expenses.
A. Any approval received pursuant to this chapter does not relieve the
applicant from receiving consent from the owner of the land above
which an applicant's facility may be located as may be required under
New Jersey law.
§ 346-27 HARDING CODE § 346-29
1:568
B. Applicant must, in addition to receiving a right-of-way permit, also
receive all necessary road opening permits, construction permits and
any other requirement set forth in the Revised Ordinances of the
Township of Harding or state statutes.
C. The Township's consent for use of county roads, as required pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 27:16-6, shall take the form of a right-of-way permit subject to
the standards and application process set forth in this chapter. No such
applicant shall be required to enter into a right-of-way agreement with
the Township.
§ 346-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-29
1:569
Chapter 383
WALK-A-THONS AND BIKE-A-THONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 171. Streets and driveways — See Ch. 346.
§ 383-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Walk-a-thon/Bike-athon
Ordinance of the Township of Harding."
§ 383-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Township of Harding.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Harding.
WALK-A-THON/BIKE-A-THON — Any procession on foot or by bike
consisting of a minimum of 25 persons in or upon any street, park or other
public place in the Township.
WALK-A-THON/BIKE-A-THON PERMIT — A permit as required by this
chapter.
§ 383-3. Permit required; exceptions.
§ 383-4. Permit application.
A person seeking issuance of a walk-a-thon/bike-a-thon permit shall file an
application with the Chief of Police on forms provided by such officer. An
application for a permit shall be filed with the Chief of Police not less than
A. No person shall engage in, form or start any walk-a-thon/bike-a-thon,
unless a permit shall have been obtained from the Chief of Police.
B. Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school
authorities.
(2) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
§ 346-29 HARDING CODE § 383-4
1:570
10 days nor more than 60 days before the date on which it is proposed to
conduct the walk-a-thon/bike-a-thon.
§ 383-5. Standards for permit issuance.
The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when,
from a consideration of the application and from such other information as
may otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
§ 383-6. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a walk-athon/
bike-a-thon permit to the Township. The appeal shall be taken within
10 days after notice. The Township Committee shall act upon the appeal
within 20 days after its receipt.
§ 383-7. Alternative permits.
The Chief of Police, in denying a request for a walk-a-thon/bike-a-thon
permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the proposed
activities on a date, at a time or over a route different from that proposal.
A. The conduct of the proposed activities will not substantially interrupt
the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.
B. The conduct of the proposed activities will not require the diversion of
so great a number of police officers of the Township to properly police
the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent
normal police protection to the Township.
C. The conduct of the proposed activities will not require the diversion of
ambulance service to portions of the Township, other than that to be
occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto.
D. The concentration of persons and vehicles at assembly points will not
unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance
service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas.
E. The conduct of the proposed activities will not interfere with the
movement of fire-fighting equipment en route to a fire.
F. The conduct of the proposed activities are not reasonably likely to cause
injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct, create a
disturbance or create litter.
G. The proposed activities are scheduled to move from point of origin to
point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en
route.
H. The proposed activities are not to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods or event, and are not designed to be
held purely for private profit.
§ 383-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 383-8
1:571
§ 383-8. Revocation of permit.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a walk-a-thon/bikea-
thon permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for
issuance as herein set forth.
§ 383-9. Fees. [Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1-90; 4-12-1993 by
Ord. No. 4-93]
Each person requesting a permit shall pay a fee as provided in Chapter 171,
Fees, to Harding Township, except that no fee shall be charged to a person
applying on behalf of an eleemosynary or nonprofit organization.
§ 383-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
general penalty provided in Chapter 1, Article I, of this Code.
Chapter 388
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 140.
Land use and development — See Ch. 225.
Sewers and water — See Ch. 422.
§ 383-8 HARDING CODE § 383-10
1:572
ARTICLE I
Declaration of Water Emergency; Water Use Restrictions
[Adopted by the Board of Health 3-20-2002 by Ord. No. 3-02 (Ch.
149, Art. IV, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 388-1. Declaration of water emergency.
Whenever the Township Committee determines that a water emergency
exists in the Township, it may adopt a resolution declaring the existence of a
water emergency. The resolution shall identify that portion of the Township
affected by the water emergency, which may include the entire Township,
and shall specify which of the water use regulations contained in § 388-2
is being imposed as well as any exemptions which may be authorized.
The resolution shall become effective immediately upon publication in an
official newspaper of the Township and shall continue in effect for the
period specified therein, unless extended or repealed as set forth in § 388-3.
For the purposes of this section, a water emergency shall exist when the
Township Committee is satisfied on the basis of expert advice that a water
emergency exists in the Township.
§ 388-2. Water use restrictions.
Upon adoption by the Township Committee of a resolution declaring that
a water emergency exists in the Township in accordance with § 388-1, all
citizens shall be urged to observe voluntary indoor conservation measures,
and any or all of the following water use restrictions shall be imposed
and shall be applicable to all owners and occupants of residential and
commercial properties in the Township during the water emergency, except
where a bona fide health emergency exists and except as to exemptions
specified in the resolution:
§ 388-3. Duration of water use restrictions.
The resolution of the Township Committee required by § 388-1 shall, in
addition to complying with that section, provide a period of time during
A. The complete ban and prohibition of outside water usage, including the
watering and sprinkling of lawns and plants, the filling of pools and the
washing of cars or driveways; provided, however, that hand-watering of
plants, shrubs and trees without the use of a hose shall be permitted;
or
B. Any other water use restriction specified by the Township Committee in
the resolution adopted pursuant to § 388-1 which is reasonable under
the circumstances considering the nature and extent of the water
emergency. Any water restriction imposed pursuant to this section shall
be limited in application to that portion of the Township or the entire
Township identified as being affected by the water emergency in the
resolution of the Township Committee adopted in accordance with
§ 388-1.
§ 388-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-3
1:573
which the water use restrictions imposed shall be applicable, which shall
be no longer than reasonably necessary to abate the water emergency
under the circumstances, considering the nature and extent of the water
emergency. At the expiration of the time period specified in the resolution,
the water use restriction shall lapse and be inapplicable and unenforceable.
If the Township Committee shall be satisfied that the water emergency has
abated prior to the expiration of the time period specified in the resolution,
it shall adopt a resolution declaring the water emergency ended and the
water use restrictions inapplicable. If, prior to or upon the expiration of
the time period specified in the resolution, the Township Committee shall
determine that the water emergency continues to exist, it may adopt a
resolution continuing the water use restrictions for a specified period of
time.
§ 388-4. Enforcement of water use restrictions.
The water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this article shall be enforced
during a water emergency by such Township official or officials as may
be authorized by the Township Committee and named in the resolution
declaring the water emergency. Each authorized official is hereby
empowered to issue summonses for the violation of the water use
restrictions imposed pursuant to this article.
§ 388-5. Violations and penalties.
For a first offense, a fine up to but not exceeding $100. For a second offense,
a fine up to but not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for not more than 10
days, or both. For a third and any subsequent offense, a fine up to but not
exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. Each
and every violation after a first offense shall constitute a separate violation,
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which such a violation occurs or continues.
§ 388-3 HARDING CODE § 388-5
1:574
ARTICLE II
Tampering with Water Facilities and Resources
[Adopted by the Township Committee 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 05-12]
§ 388-6. Cisterns and fire hydrants.
§ 388-7. Tampering with system; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to wrongfully connect, disconnect,
tap or interfere or tamper with any of the cisterns, hydrants, plugs, mains,
pipes, conduits, connections, taps, or other firesafety facilities for the
purpose of wasting or using such water or to in any way tamper with fireprotection
facilities and divert water for non-firesafety-related use, unless
such person or persons are duly authorized by or are in the employ of the
Township. Violation of this section is declared to be a criminal mischief. The
penalty shall be assessed in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2C:17-3.
A. Water from fire cisterns, fire hydrants and other related water fireprotection
systems shall be used only in case of fires, except that water
from fire cisterns and hydrants may be used in a reasonable amount
and at such times and places as the Township may permit. The testing
of cisterns, hydrants and firefighting apparatus by any fire company is
permitted. No lines or pumps will be permitted to be connected with
cisterns, hydrants or waterlines so as to draw water directly from the
cistern, main or service pipe, except for fire purposes, without specific
permission from the Township.
B. The opening, closing or use of any fire cistern or fire hydrant or plug,
except in case of fire, without the written permission of the Township
shall be deemed as tampering with firesafety facilities and shall
constitute criminal mischief.
§ 388-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-7
1:575
Part III: Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 401
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 388-7 HARDING CODE § 388-7
1:576
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 10-14-2010 by Board of Health Ord. No. 03-10]
§ 401-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Board of Health of
the Township of Harding of a general and permanent nature, as revised,
codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code and
consisting of Chapters 401 through 422, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as Part III of the "Code of the Township of Harding,"
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code" or "Health Code."
§ 401-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances of the Board of Health enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force and effect hereinafter.
§ 401-3. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on the Adopting
Ordinance; and if the Adopting Ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall
be certified as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file
in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health, to be made available to
persons desiring to examine the same during all times while the said Code
is in effect.
§ 401-4. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board of
Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Harding" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 401-5. Publication; filing.
The Secretary of the Board of Health, pursuant to law, shall cause the
Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township of Harding. Sufficient
copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Secretary for
inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
§ 401-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 401-5
1:577
enactment and publication of the Adopting Ordinance, coupled with
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 401-6. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary, or someone authorized and directed by
the Secretary, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the Secretary's office for the use of the
public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to
the effective date of this codification, which shall be adopted specifically
as part of the Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 401-7. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Board of
Health to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section shall be
subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $500.
§ 401-8. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 401-9. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or parts thereof.
§ 401-10. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board
of Health and in force on the date of the adoption of this Code and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 401-5 HARDING CODE § 401-11
1:578
§ 401-11. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 401-10 shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and obligations,
which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 401-12. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any ordinance of the Board of Health adopted subsequent to 3-13-2010.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any agreement, franchise, license, right, easement or privilege
heretofore granted or conferred.
F. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
G. Any provisions of an ordinance or resolution of the Board of Health
creating employments, positions or offices and fixing salaries and duties
therefor which are not provided in the Code hereby adopted and which
are not in conflict or inconsistent therewith, or any ordinance
pertaining to the salaries and compensation of Board of Health officers
and employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Board of Health for
adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4,
certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in
one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof112 are made
112. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 401-12B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout Part III of
the Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 401, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art.
I. During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or
deletions will be replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted)
10-14-2010 by Board of Health Ord. No. 03-10." Schedule A, which contains a complete
description of all changes, is on file in the Township offices.
§ 401-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 401-12
1:579
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
§ 401-12 HARDING CODE § 401-12
1:580
Chapter 405
BATHING FACILITIES
§ 405-1. Adoption of state standards by reference.
§ 405-2. Permits and licenses.
There is hereby established the following schedule of fees for permits and
licenses which shall be in addition to any other such fees established by the
Township of Harding or the State of New Jersey:
§ 405-3. Violations and penalties.
A. The code promulgated by the New Jersey Department of Health and
Senior Services regulating Public Recreational Bathing (N.J.A.C.
8:26-1.1 et seq.) and controlling the location and construction,
alteration and operation of public recreational bathing sites and fixing
penalties for violations is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1
to 26:3-69.6. A copy of said code annexed hereto and made a part
hereof without inclusion of the text thereof herein.
B. One copy of said code has been placed on file in the office of the
Secretary of this Board of Health upon the introduction of this chapter
and will remain on file in said office for the use and examination by the
public.
A. Every public recreational bathing shall, on or before May 1 of each year,
pay to the Harding Township Board of Health an annual license fee per
facility in the amount set forth in Chapter 171, Fees.
B. Prior to the construction of a public recreational bathing facility, the
owner or applicant shall submit an application and plan of construction
to the Harding Township Health Department and pay to the Harding
Township Board of Health a permit fee for plan review in the amount set
forth in Chapter 171, Fees.
C. Prior to the alteration of a public recreational bathing facility, the owner
or applicant shall submit an application and plan of alteration to the
Harding Township Health Department and pay to the Harding Township
Board of Health a permit fee for plan review in the amount set forth in
Chapter 171, Fees.
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter or the Public Recreational Bathing Code
made a part hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not
less than $50 nor more than $1,000 for each violation.
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 401-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-4
1:581
§ 405-4. Exceptions.
The fees and charges hereinabove set forth shall not apply to pools, spas or
whirlpools owned and operated exclusively by organizations or institutions
which are exclusively charitable, religious, educational or municipal.
§ 405-5. Effective date.
This chapter and the code herein established shall take effect 30 days after
the first publication of the ordinance, in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 188, P.L. 1950 (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6).
Chapter 410
FEES, BOARD OF HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 171.
§ 410-1. Animals, Chapter 90, Dogs, Article I.
A. Fees. [Amended 10-14-2010 by Board of Health Ord. No. 03-10 ;
12-29-2010 by Board of Health Ord. No. 05-10]
Type of Application, License or
Permit Fee
Annual dog license $18.70 for spayed/neutered
(includes $1 state registration
fee and $0.20 state pilot clinic
fee)
$21.70 for nonspayed/
neutered (includes $1 state
registration fee, $0.20 state
pilot clinic fee and $3
population control fee)
Delinquent fee $10
Population control fee $3
Vicious dog license fee $250
Maintenance fee for detained dog Not more than $4 per day
B. Exemption from fees. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and
commonly known as "Seeing Eye dogs," dogs used to assist
handicapped persons commonly known as "service dogs" or dogs used
to assist deaf persons and commonly known as "hearing ear dogs" shall
be licensed and registered as other dogs as herein provided for, except
that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any
§ 405-4 HARDING CODE § 410-1
1:582
§ 410-2. Food Establishments, Retail, Chapter 189. [Amended
3-31-2010 by Ord. No. 04-10; 11-13-2014 by Board of Health Ord.
No. 02-2014113]
fee therefor. [Added 10-14-2010 by Board of Health Ord. No.
03-10]
C. License fees for kennels and pet shops; no fee for shelter or pound. The
annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for 10 or
fewer dogs shall be $10 and for more than 10 dogs, $25. The annual
license fee for a pet shop shall be $10. No fee shall be charged for a
shelter or pound. [Added 2-23-2017 by Board of Health Ord. No.
01-2017]
A. License to operate the following establishments:
(1) Risk Type 1 retail food establishment as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24 1.1
et seq.: $175.
(2) Risk Type 2 retail food establishment as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24 1.1
et seq.: $275.
(3) Risk Type 3 retail food establishment as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24 1.1
et seq.: $375.
(4) Risk Type 4 retail food establishment as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24 1.1
et seq.: $500.
(5) Temporary retail food establishment as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24 1.1
et seq.: $50 up to three days.
(6) Mobile retail food establishment as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24 1.1 et
seq.: $125.
(7) A vending machine that contains potentially hazardous food as
defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24 1.1 et seq.: $125 for the first machine at a
location and $35 for each additional machine at the same location.
(8) A vending machine that does not contain potentially hazardous
food as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24 1.1 et seq.: $35 for the first machine
at a location and $10 for each additional machine at the same
location.
B. For each inspection of a facility to determine whether a violation has
been corrected to comply with Code requirements: $75 per hour.
C. Sampling and microbiological analysis of hazardous foods necessitated
by reason of unsatisfactory results, the owner(s) of the retail food
establishment to be assessed and the Board compensated for the actual
costs of sampling and microbiological analysis of hazardous foods plus
$75 per hour or part thereof.
113. Editor's Note: Section 5 of this ordinance provided that it shall take effect 1-1-2015.
§ 410-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-3
1:583
§ 410-3. Sewers and Water, Chapter 422. [Amended 12-11-2008 by
Board of Health Ord. No. 3-08; 3-31-2010 by Ord. No. 04-10]
A. Article I, Individual Water Supply Systems: [Amended 11-13-2014 by
Board of Health Ord. No. 02-2014114]
(1) For filing and initial review of application and plans for certificate
of compliance, location and design, for a new individual water
supply system and issuance of such certificate: $375.
(2) For a permit for repair or alteration of an existing individual water
supply system and issuance of such certificate: $175.
(3) For a permit for sealing, closure or abandonment of an existing
individual water supply system and issuance of such certificate:
$375.
(4) For each inspection of an individual water supply system, or any
part of any such system, required by a failure to locate, construct,
repair or alter the system in accordance with applicable
requirements: $75 per hour.
(5) For an appearance or hearing before the Board when an applicant
is seeking relief from the Board: $175.
(6) When the Board deems it necessary for related consultations by the
Township Attorney or the Board of Health Attorney or the Township
Engineer, the applicant is to be assessed and the Board
compensated for the actual costs of the consultation based on the
rate of the professionals in effect at the time of filing the
application. The applicant shall establish an account with the
Finance Department with an initial balance of $1,000 and maintain
a minimum balance of $500 until the application process is
completed. The account shall be managed in accordance with the
provisions in § 171-23, Technical review fees.
B. Article II, Public Sanitary Sewer System. [Amended 12-29-2010 by
Board of Health Ord. No. 04-10]
(1) A sewer service charge of $680 per year, per single-family unit, to
be prorated at the per diem rate, rounded up to the next penny if
service is less than a full year, effective on January 1, 2011; the
sewer service charge shall be billed annually. One quarter of the
billed amount shall be due on the first day of February, the first day
of May, the first day of August and the first day of November, or as
otherwise set by the collector of sewer fees.
(2) A one-time sewer service surcharge of $56.50 shall be added to the
annual sewer service charge for all residential accounts active from
114. Editor's Note: Section 5 of this ordinance provided that it shall take effect 1-1-2015.
§ 410-3 HARDING CODE § 410-3
1:584
July 1, 2008, to December 31, 2008. The surcharge shall be added
to the annual bill for 2009 and paid in quarterly installments.
(3) The sewer service charge for commercial or nonresidential account
shall be $190 per year or part thereof, plus $7.75 per 1,000 gallons
of water except that there shall be a minimum fee of $200 per year
or part thereof for those accounts generating less than 5,000
gallons a year.
(4) A pumping station service charge per year of $160 per year, per
single-family unit, shall be added to residences connected to the
sewage pumping station. The charge shall be added to the annual
bill and paid according to the schedule of payments.
(5) A fee of $1,800 shall be paid before a new connection is made to the
sanitary sewer.
(6) The payment of annual sewer charges is required even though the
building may be vacant.
(7) Any such sewer charge not paid on the due date shall bear interest
at the same rate as uncollected taxes of Harding Township and
shall become a lien upon the premises connected to the sanitary
sewer system until paid, and Harding Township shall have the same
rights for the collection thereof, together with interest and costs
and penalties, as it has by law for the collection of taxes upon real
estate.
C. Article III, Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems. [Amended
11-13-2014 by Board of Health Ord. No. 02-2014115]
(1) Observation of soil investigation.
(a) For observation by a representative of the Board of Health of
soil investigation during the first day: $275.
(b) For each additional day: $150 per hole.
(2) Certificate of compliance, location and design.
(a) For filing and review by the Board of Health of an application
seeking approval for an individual subsurface sewage disposal
system for new construction or alteration the applicant is to be
assessed and the Board compensated for the actual costs of the
review and inspections based on the rate of the Health
Department personnel in effect at the time of filing the
application. The applicant shall establish an account with the
Finance Department with an initial balance of $1,000 and
maintain a minimum balance of $500 until the application
process is completed. The account shall be managed in
115. Editor's Note: Section 5 of this ordinance provided that it shall take effect 1-1-2015.
§ 410-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-3
1:585
accordance with the provisions in § 171-23, Technical review
fees.
(b) For filing when an appearance or hearing before the Board is
necessitated by the applicant seeking approval of an alternate
design for an individual sewage disposal system or when an
applicant is seeking other relief from the Board: $175.
(c) When the Board deems it necessary for related consultations
by the Township Attorney or the Board of Health Attorney or
the Township Engineer, the applicant is to be assessed and the
Board compensated for the actual costs of the consultation
based on the rate of the professionals in effect at the time of
filing the application. The applicant shall establish an account
with the Finance Department with an initial balance of $1,000
and maintain a minimum balance of $500 until the application
process is completed. The account shall be managed in
accordance with the provisions in § 171-23, Technical review
fees.
(d) For filing and the issuance of a certificate of compliance for a
new construction of an individual sewage disposal system:
$1,200.
(e) For filing and the issuance of a certificate of compliance for an
alteration of an individual sewage disposal system: $975.
(f) For filing and the issuance of a certificate of compliance for
repair of an existing individual sewage disposal system: $275.
(g) For each inspection of an individual sewage disposal system, or
any part of any such system, required by a failure to locate,
construct, alter or maintain the system, or any part of any such
system, required by a failure to locate, construct, alter or
maintain the system in accordance with applicable
requirements: $75 per hour.
(h) Septic abandonment not part of new construction or alteration
of an individual sewage disposal system: $350.
(i) A septic permit shall be valid for a period of one year. In the
event that the system has not been completed and a certificate
of compliance has not been issued, the applicant may apply for
an extension of time not to exceed one year. No more than two
one-year extensions may be granted. The Board of Health, in
granting such extension, may impose additional conditions on
the permit as may be appropriate taking into consideration
newly adopted standards and practices. [Added 4-18-2016 by
Board of Health Ord. No. 02-2016]
[1] A permit extension fee for the first year extension: $225.
§ 410-3 HARDING CODE § 410-3
1:586
§ 410-4. Bathing Facilities, Chapter 405. [Added 3-31-2010 by Ord.
No. 04-10]
§ 410-5. Solid Waste; Recycling, Chapter 338.
Type Fee
Vehicles used to collect refuse $10 per vehicle annually
§ 410-6. License or permit. [Added 11-13-2014 by Board of Health
Ord. No. 02-2014116]
[2] A permit extension fee for the second year extension:
$350.
(j) All construction for sewage disposal systems shall be
completed within 20 days from the commencement of the
installation of the sewage disposal system. An inspection fee
shall be charged to the owner/applicant for every day the
system is not completed past the 20th day, unless an extension
was given pursuant to Subsection D(1) in § 422-22: $150
[Added 4-18-2016 by Board of Health Ord. No. 02-2016]
(3) For applying for a letter of approval from the Board of Health to the
Planning Board for a subdivision/site plan: $250, plus $75 for each
lot.
(4) For filing a report of inspection of a nonresidential subsurface
sewage disposal system, when a representative of the Health
Department witnesses the inspection: $75.
(5) Cleaning or emptying of receptacles, for issuance of permit to clean
or empty receptacles used for reception or storage of human
excrement or other putrescible matter at any one location on a
given date: $5.
(6) For license to operate a residential subsurface sewage disposal
system: $0 for a five-year license.
(7) For license to operate a nonresidential subsurface sewage disposal
system: $75 for a two-year license.
A. For filing and review by the Board of Health of an application seeking
approval for the construction or alteration of a public recreational
bathing facility: $350.
B. For filing when an appearance or hearing before the Board is
necessitated by the applicant seeking approval of an alternate design or
when an applicant is seeking other relief from the Board: $175.
C. License to operate a public recreational bathing facility: $275.
116. Editor's Note: Section 5 of this ordinance provided that it shall take effect 1-1-2015.
§ 410-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-6
1:587
§ 410-7. Appeals and special meetings at request of applicant.
[Added 4-18-2016 by Board of Health Ord. No. 02-2016]
Chapter 417
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 90.
Littering — See Ch. 237.
Noise — See Ch. 258.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 285.
Solid waste; recycling — See Ch. 338.
Sewers and water — See Ch. 422.
§ 417-1. Nuisances enumerated.
No person shall create, commit, maintain or allow to be created, committed
or maintained any nuisance within the Township. For the purposes of this
chapter, the following specific things, conditions and acts, each and all
of them, are hereby defined and declared to be nuisances, but said
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
A. Application fee for prior approval for a building permit: $175.
B. Revision of a denied application for prior approval for a building permit:
$50.
C. Application fee for a variance review: $100.
D. Application fee for the demolition of a building: $275.
A. For filing when an appearance or a hearing before the Board is
necessitated by the applicant seeking approval of an alternate design
for an individual sewage disposal system or when an applicant is
seeking other relief from the Board: $175.
B. The fee for appeals or a special meeting of the Board of Health of the
Township of Harding held at the request of an applicant or other
interested party is hereby fixed at $500. Such fee shall be paid prior to
the holding of such special meeting by the person or firm whose request
has been granted and shall be in addition to any and all other fees or
charges applicable to such proceedings.
A. Maintaining or permitting to be maintained any pool, pond, ditch,
stream or other body of water, or any cistern, privy vault, cesspool, rain
barrel or other receptacle containing liquid, or permitting the
accumulation of any water or liquid, in which mosquito larva or pupa
breed or do exist.
§ 410-6 HARDING CODE § 417-1
1:588
§ 417-2. Discharge of water restricted.
No person shall, within the Township, direct, discharge or otherwise drain
or cause or permit the direction, discharge, flow or drainage into any gutter
or upon or across any sidewalk, public alley, road, parking area or any other
public or private place, of any:
B. The existence or presence of any accumulation of garbage, refuse,
manure or animal or vegetable matter in which fly larva or pupa exists
or which attracts flies and other insects or wherein they breed.
C. Constructing, maintaining or using any well, or permitting the use of
any well or other supply of water for drinking or household purposes,
which is polluted or which is so situated or constructed that it may
become polluted.
D. Polluting or causing or permitting the existence of any condition or
conditions which pollute or cause or threaten the pollution of any
source of potable waters or any water supply.
E. Depositing, maintaining or permitting the maintenance or
accumulation of any household refuse, wastewater, sewage, garbage,
tin cans, offal or excrement; any decaying fruit, vegetable, fish, meat,
animal carcass or bones; any oyster or clam shells; or any other matter,
material, substance or thing which serves as food for insects or rodents,
and to which they may have access, or which serves as or constitutes a
breeding place or harborage for insects, rats or other rodents.
F. Causing or permitting to be created or to exist on any property any foul
or obnoxious odors, gases or vapors.
G. Depositing or storing or permitting the deposit, storage or
accumulation on any property of any foul, putrid, corrosive or otherwise
obnoxious liquid or substance.
H. Depositing or storing or permitting the deposit, storage or
accumulation on any property of any chemical or other waste; or
inflammable, explosive, corrosive or otherwise dangerous liquid
material or substance, except in a manner and under such conditions
and restrictions as are prescribed by law.
I. Permitting any garbage, offal, scraps, waste food or other putrescible
material to be held in a container which is not watertight, or which is
uncovered in any store, factory, or outside of any building or on any
public or private property, or in any building of multiple occupancy
except in the individual apartment.
J. The keeping of horses, cows, goats, rabbits, guinea pigs, dogs, cats or
other animals under insanitary conditions.
A. Refuse or wastewater from any sink, stable, toilet, septic tank, cesspool,
sewer lateral or sewage disposal unit.
§ 417-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 417-2
1:589
§ 417-3. Discharge of dangerous fluids prohibited.
No person shall, within the Township, deposit, empty, drain or discharge any
gasoline, fuel or lubricating oil or other petroleum product or derivatives,
or any solvent, thinner, lacquer, paint, paint remover, varnish, cleaning
fluid or other cleansing preparation or anything of a corrosive, explosive
or inflammable nature or any effluent containing any of the same into any
storm sewer, catch basin, ditch, stormwater drain, gutter, road or other
public place.
§ 417-4. Open burning restricted.
No person shall, within the Township, burn any substance in any public
road, nor burn or permit to be burned any garbage, animal remains or offal,
or burn any other substance in such a manner that there is thereby created
noxious, nauseating or annoying smoke, fumes or odor.
§ 417-5. Abatement of nuisances.
The creation, existence or continuance of any condition or situation which
is a violation of, or contrary to, any of the provisions of this chapter is
hereby declared to constitute a nuisance, and the same shall be subject to
injunction and abatement in the manner provided by law.
B. Waste or wash water from any laundry, automobile filling station,
garage or car-washing establishment.
C. Stormwater from a roof leader, cellar drain or sump pump, or from any
storm drain, brook, spring, pond, marsh or lowland or from any
swimming pool.
A. Whenever a nuisance as declared by this chapter is found on any plot of
land, lot, right-of-way or any other private premises or place, notice in
writing shall be given to the owner thereof to remove or abate the same
within such time as shall be specified therein, but not less than five days
from the date of service thereof. A duplicate of the notice shall be left
with one or more of the tenants or occupants of the premises or place.
B. If the owner resides out of the state or cannot be so notified speedily,
such notice shall be left at that place or premises with the tenant or
occupant thereof or posted on the premises, and such action shall be
considered proper notification to the owner, tenant or occupant thereof.
C. Whenever a nuisance as declared by this chapter is found on any public
property or on any highway or any other public premises or place,
notice in writing shall be given to the person in charge thereof to
remove or abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein.
If such person fails to comply with such notice within the time specified
therein, the Board of Health may remove or abate such nuisance in the
manner as hereinafter provided in the case of a like condition existing
on a private premises or place.
§ 417-2 HARDING CODE § 417-5
1:590
§ 417-6. Recovery of costs by Board of Health.
The Board of Health may institute an action at law to recover costs incurred
by it in the removal or abatement of any nuisance as declared by this
chapter from any person who shall have caused or allowed such nuisance to
exist, or from any owner, tenant or occupant of premises who, after notice
and notification as herein provided, shall fail to remove and abate the same
within the time specified in such notice.
§ 417-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-21-1974 by Board of
Health Ord. No. 1-74]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or notice or order issued pursuant thereto shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $2 nor more than $500 for
each violation.
Chapter 422
SEWERS AND WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 140.
Land use and development — See Ch. 225.
Streets and driveays — See Ch. 346.
Water — See Ch. 388.
Board of Health fees — See Ch. 410.
D. If the owner, tenant or occupant being notified as provided by this
section shall not comply with such notice within the time specified
therein and fails to remove or abate such nuisance, the Board of Health
shall proceed to abate the nuisance or may cause it to be removed or
abated in a summary manner by such means as said Board shall deem
proper in accordance with law.
§ 417-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 417-7
1:591

ARTICLE I
Individual Water Supply Systems
[Adopted 11-13-1973 by Board of Health Ord. No. 12-73; last
amended 11-14-1991 by Board of Health Ord. No. 2-91 (Ch. 149,
Art. I, of the 1990 Code)]
§ 422-1. Definitions. [Amended 8-10-1995 by Board of Health Ord.
No. 3-95]
As used in this article, the following terms shall include the meanings given
herein:
ALTER or ALTERATION — Any physical change in the well, including (but
not limited to) deepening, modification or decommissioning, such that there
will be a change in size, construction or installation (including, but not
limited to, extension of the casing). The replacement of pumps shall not be
considered an alteration.
BOARD OF HEALTH or BOARD — The Board of Health of the Township of
Harding, or its duly authorized agent.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE, INSTALLATION — A certificate issued by
the Board of Health certifying that an individual water supply system has
been installed in such manner as to meet the requirements of Department
of Environmental Protection's Standards for the Construction of Public
Noncommunity and Nonpublic Water Systems and higher standards
prescribed by this article and all terms and conditions of approval imposed
by the Board with respect to such system upon the issuance of the
certificate of compliance, location and design therefor.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE, LOCATION AND DESIGN — A certificate
issued by the Board of Health certifying that a proposed individual water
supply system, or an alteration of such system, is in compliance with the
provisions of DEP's Standards for the Construction of Public Noncommunity
and Nonpublic Water Systems, and any higher standards prescribed by this
article.
DEP — New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DEP'S STANDARDS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC
NONCOMMUNITY AND NONPUBLIC WATER SYSTEMS — The New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection's Standards for the Construction
of Public Noncommunity and Nonpublic Water Systems, as found at N.J.A.C.
7:10-12.1 et seq., and as amended and/or supplemented.
INDIVIDUAL WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — Any system for the supply of
water for potable or domestic purposes, other than a public system
approved by the DEP.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — An engineer licensed to practice
professional engineering in the State of New Jersey.
§ 422-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 422-1
1:593
REPAIR — To fix, refurbish or replace one or more components of a well in
a manner that will or is meant to restore and preserve the original location,
design, construction, installation and/or operation of the system.
SAFE DRINKING WATER ACT or ACT — The Safe Drinking Water Act as
found at N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq., as amended and/or supplemented.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed, constructed,
assembled or erected on, above or below the surfaces of a parcel of land or
upon another structure or building, and including fences and garden walls
more than seven feet high.
§ 422-2. Prohibited acts. [Amended 8-10-1995 by Board of Health
Ord. No. 3-95]
No individual water supply system shall be installed on a property served
by a public water system approved by the DEP. No building shall be served
by both a public water supply and an individual water supply.
§ 422-3. Certificate of compliance, location and design required
prior to construction or alteration of system. [Amended 8-10-1995
by Board of Health Ord. No. 3-95]
§ 422-4. Certificate of compliance, installation required prior to
operation of system. [Amended 8-10-1995 by Board of Health Ord.
No. 3-95]
No individual water supply system shall be placed in service or operation
until the Board of Health or its duly authorized agent shall have issued a
certificate of compliance, installation with respect to such system. No such
certificate shall be issued until the owner or developer shall have furnished
to the Board of Health the following:
A. No person shall locate, construct (drill, build, assemble and/or install)
or alter an individual water supply system until the Board of Health
shall have issued a certificate of compliance, location and design with
respect to such system.
B. Neither the Health Department nor the Board of Health shall be
responsible for any harm or danger to persons or property resulting
from the construction or maintenance of any well.117
C. A certificate of compliance, location and design shall expire one year
from the date of issuance.
A. An as-built plan of the system prepared and signed by a professional
engineer or a New Jersey State licensed well driller, which plan shall
include the exact location of any well in relation to the foundation of the
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 401, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I).
§ 422-1 HARDING CODE § 422-4
1:594
§ 422-5. Applicability of state standards to individual water supply
systems. [Amended 8-10-1995 by Board of Health Ord. No. 3-95]
The DEP's Standards for the Construction of Public Noncommunity and
Nonpublic Water Systems shall be in full force and effect in the Township
of Harding, except that the following regulations or higher standards are
hereby prescribed:
buildings served by the system and all other buildings, structures,
driveways, etc., on the lot.
B. A DEP well record (goldenrod - Health Department DWR-138).
C. A written report by a New Jersey certified laboratory determining
potability.
A. Location of wells. Every wellhead shall be located at a higher elevation
than any individual sewage disposal system serving the same property,
unless site conditions peculiar to a property render this requirement
unreasonable. Wells shall not be buried, and well pits are prohibited.
B. Storage of water. Water shall be stored only in impervious tanks
protected against surface drainage. All tanks shall be provided with
watertight covers, and any overflow or ventilation openings shall be
covered with a metallic screen of not less than 16-mesh to prevent the
entrance of insects and vermin. No storage tank shall have a drainage
connection directly to a sewer.
C. General well construction requirements. The following general
construction requirements shall apply to the construction of all wells
and to the upgrading of any well which is required by the enlargement
or change in use of an existing building:
(1) All water used in the construction, alteration, repair or
decommissioning of any well shall be potable as defined in the Safe
Drinking Water Act118 .
(2) Once the well has been installed, the well casing shall be capped
until the pump is installed and the well placed in service or until the
well is properly decommissioned. The cap shall be either threaded
onto the casing or be a friction-type device which locks onto the
outside of the casing or a blank sanitary well seal or any other type
of cap as may be approved by the Township Health Department.119
(3) All annular space(s) between the well casing(s), and the annular
space between the borehole and outermost casing, where
applicable, shall be grouted in place as soon as possible. This can
118. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 401, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I).
§ 422-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 422-5
1:595
be done either by the tremigrout method or the displacement
method.
(4) Unsuitable or nonproductive wells that cannot be used for their
intended purpose shall be decommissioned in accordance with the
requirements stated herein.
(5) When the drilling of a pilot hole for any well is temporarily
suspended and the rig moves away from the drilling site, the hole
shall be considered abandoned and subject to the decommissioning
requirements of this Code, unless drilling operations are resumed
within 72 hours of the initial date of suspension.
(6) All flowing wells shall be equipped with a watertight cap, either
threaded, slip-on or welded, and a control valve or necessary
appurtenances so that the flow of water can be controlled so as to
protect the integrity of the well construction and/or the wellhead.
(7) If the Board of Health determines that any well water system or any
appurtenance thereto is not being properly maintained or has
deteriorated to such an extent that contamination might enter the
well or enter the groundwater or constitute a physical hazard, the
Board may order work to be performed on the well or
appurtenances thereto as is deemed necessary to prevent
contamination of the groundwater or to mitigate the physical
hazard.
(8) Every well shall be maintained in a condition whereby it will
conserve and protect the groundwater resources, and whereby it
will not be a source of, or channel for, pollution that may
contaminate the water supply of that well, any water-bearing unit
or any aquifer.
(9) Any repairs made to existing wells and/or pump systems where the
wellhead terminates below ground shall include extending the well
casing above the land surface and installing a pitless adapter.
Extending the well casing above grade shall be accomplished by
either welding additional casing on the existing casing or the use of
an approved, gasketed, watertight, casing adapter.
(10) Any new or existing well shall not be located or enclosed in a
basement or cellar of a building, nor built over by any realty
improvement that would inhibit access to the well for any repair,
replacement or decommissioning. All wells shall be at least 10 feet
from any and all structures.
(11) All well casings shall extend a minimum of 18 inches above grade
and shall be equipped with pitless adapters.
(12) Pitless adapters must be inserted within the well casing, and the
casing must be extended 18 inches above final grade on any new or
upgraded wells. A minimum of 50 feet of casing shall be installed
§ 422-5 HARDING CODE § 422-5
1:596
and grouted by an approved method in the presence of a
representative of the Board of Health in all new water systems.
D. General requirements for the decommissioning of all wells.
(1) The Board of Health may order the decommissioning of any well
due to abandonment, improper maintenance, contamination,
potential for contamination, unproductivity, unsuitability and/or
well construction in violation of any provision of the DEP's
Standards for the Construction of Public Noncommunity and
Nonpublic Water Systems or this Code for new or upgraded wells.
(2) The Board of Health may require or allow a well to be
decommissioned by a method other than as set forth in this section.
(3) No well shall be decommissioned until:
(a) The driller proposing to seal the well has secured Board of
Health approval and an appropriate permit; and
(b) The well has been inspected by a representative of the Board.
(4) All wells shall be decommissioned by, or under the direct and
constant on-site supervision of, a New Jersey licensed well sealer.
(5) The driller shall calculate and have on site the amount of sealing
material necessary to completely and appropriately decommission
the well.
(6) Any hazardous materials (including but not limited to contaminated
casings, cuttings, sediment, displaced water or free product)
generated during the sealing shall be handled in accordance with
Board of Health and DEP regulations.
(7) The well shall be cleared of pump, pipe, debris and all other
obstructions which may impede proper sealing and
decommissioning.
(8) If the well has been over-drilled so as to remove the entire casing,
screen and gravel pack, the resulting bore hole shall be
constructed to, and maintained at, the original depth of the well
until the bore hole is properly sealed in accordance with this
subsection.
(9) The Board of Health, at its discretion, may require additional
information about a well prior to the well being decommissioned.
Such information may include, but is not limited to, data gathered
via geophysical logging, down hole televising, photographing and/
or water quality testing.
(10) If it is known or suspected that an ungrouted annular space exists
between the outermost casing and the bore hole, the casing shall
§ 422-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 422-5
1:597
§ 422-6. Exceptions. [Amended 8-10-1995 by Board of Health Ord.
No. 3-95]
No employee of the Board of Health shall have any authority to make
exceptions to the requirements established by the Department of
Environmental Protection's Standards for the Construction of Public
Noncommunity and Nonpublic Water Systems, the standards of the Safe
Drinking Water Act120 or the higher standards established by this Code.
§ 422-7. Application. [Amended 8-10-1995 by Board of Health Ord.
No. 3-95]
be perforated, ripped or removed to ensure that said space is
sealed.
(11) All water used in the sealing process shall be of potable quality.
(12) The following materials shall be used to seal and decommission
wells:
(a) Portland cement mixed as per the manufacturer's
recommendations;
(b) Portland cement/high-grade bentonite mixed as per the
manufacturer's recommendations; or
(c) High-grade bentonite mixed as per the manufacturer's
recommendations.
(13) The Board of Health may approve or disapprove alternate or
additional sealing materials at its discretion.
(14) Only those materials and/or additives specifically designed and
recommended for well sealing by the manufacturer and approved
by the Board of Health shall be used to decommission wells. The
material shall have a maximum permeability of 1 x 10-7
centimeters per second when prepared in accordance with
manufacturer's specifications.
(15) Sealing materials shall be pumped into the well under pressure
through a tremie pipe which discharges at the bottom of the well. If
an annular space is being sealed, the material must discharge at
the bottom of the annular space. During sealing, the tremie pipe
may be raised from the bottom of the space being filled in a manner
which ensures that the discharge end of the tremie pipe is
constantly submerged within the column of undiluted sealing
material in the well.
A. All applications for certifications required by § 422-3 of this article shall
be made upon forms to be supplied by the Board of Health for that
120. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq.
§ 422-5 HARDING CODE § 422-7
1:598
purpose. A separate application shall be filed and a separate certificate
issued for each installation. Applications for each new installation must
be signed by a professional engineer. Application for repairs or
alterations to an existing system may be signed by a professional
engineer, a New Jersey-licensed well driller or a New Jersey-licensed
plumber, unless the Sanitary Inspector employed by the Board of
Health determines that the proposed repairs or alterations are
improper, unfeasible or too complex, in which event the installation
shall be designed and the application shall be signed by a professional
engineer. The Sanitary Inspector employed by the Board of Health is
authorized to approve all applications but may obtain the advice and
guidance of the Harding Township Engineer whenever appropriate. The
Board of Health may impose reasonable conditions on its approval of
such an application and may require that the applicant prepare and
record a deed, subject to the approval of the Board or its attorney,
setting forth the conditions as a restrictive covenant running with the
land and enforceable by the Board.
B. Every application for a certificate of compliance, location and design
shall contain, in addition to the information required by the DEP's
Standards for the Construction of Public Noncommunity and Nonpublic
Water Systems, a statement that the location design of the proposed
system will comply with the Safe Drinking Water Act's121 standards and
any higher standards prescribed by this article. Such statement shall be
signed by one of the following qualified persons:
(1) For either a new installation or an alteration or repair, the
professional engineer responsible for location.
(2) For an alteration or repair, a professional engineer, a New Jersey
licensed well driller or a New Jersey-licensed plumber, except
when, pursuant to Subsection A, the Sanitary Inspector requires a
professional engineer to locate the installation and sign the
application.
C. In order to obtain a certificate of compliance, location and design, an
applicant shall submit an appropriately completed well permit
application form, together with:
(1) A scaled plot plan at one inch equals 30 feet of the location of the
lot showing all wells, service lines, sewage disposal systems or
other potential sources of contamination within 150 feet of the
proposed or subject well.
(2) An approved DEP well permit (yellow: Health Department Copy
DWR 133).
(3) A fee as set forth in Chapter 410, Fees, Board of Health.
121. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq.
§ 422-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 422-7
1:599
§ 422-8. Inspection of individual water supply system construction.
[Amended 8-10-1995 by Board of Health Ord. No. 3-95]
A duly authorized representative of the Board of Health shall make an
inspection when the 50 feet of casing, and the grouting of the annular space
between the borehole and outermost casing, is being installed, and at any
other time deemed necessary during the construction of an individual water
supply system, to determine compliance with the terms of the certificate of
compliance, location and design issued therefor. The Board of Health shall
be notified at least 48 hours prior to the commencement of the construction
of any such system. The final inspection of an individual water supply
system shall include the collection of a sufficient number of samples for
analysis to determine whether the water meets potable water standards
adopted by the DEP. A certificate of compliance, installation shall not be
issued for a water supply system failing to satisfy the potable water
standards, unless remediating measures are taken to correct the problem.
This remediation method must be approved by the Board of Health.
§ 422-9. Testing.
§ 422-10. Stop-work orders. [Amended 8-10-1995 by Board of
Health Ord. No. 3-95]
The Board of Health may order all further work in and about any individual
water supply system which is being constructed or installed in violation
of the DEP's Standards for the Construction of Public Noncommunity and
Nonpublic Water Systems, or in violation of any provision of this article, to
be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary to remedy
such violation, and thereafter to continue such work without any violation
of any of the provisions of the regulations. After issuance of any such
D. The Board of Health shall signify its certification and approval of the
proposed location and that the proposed system complies with the
aforesaid Act and standards and this article by the signature of its
Sanitary Inspector or other duly authorized agent on the application.
A. The Board of Health may test in any appropriate manner any materials,
construction, products or units comprising any part of any individual
water supply system in order to determine compliance with applicable
requirements of state laws and standards and provisions of this article.
[Amended 8-10-1995 by Board of Health Ord. No. 3-95]
B. The Board of Health may take and test samples of water from any
individual water supply system whenever the Board has reason to
believe that the water supplied by such system fails to meet potable
water standards adopted by the State Department of Environmental
Protection. In the event that a sample does not meet such standards,
the Board of Health may order that the use of the individual water
supply system from which such sample was taken shall be immediately
terminated.
§ 422-7 HARDING CODE § 422-10
1:600
order and the service of a copy thereof upon any person connected with
or working in and about the construction or installation of any such water
supply system, or any part thereof, no further work shall be done thereon
except as aforesaid.
§ 422-11. Expiration and renewal of certificate of compliance,
location and design. [Amended 8-10-1995 by Board of Health Ord.
No. 3-95]
§ 422-12. Appeals. [Amended 8-10-1995 by Board of Health Ord.
No. 3-95]
Any person aggrieved by a denial of any certification required by this article
or by any order of the Board of Health with respect to an individual water
supply system shall be entitled to a hearing thereon before the Board of
Health within 15 days after written request therefor is made by the person
claiming to be adversely affected. Upon such hearing or within 15 days
thereafter, the Board shall affirm, alter or rescind the previous action with
written findings and conclusions.
§ 422-13. Fees. [Amended 8-10-1995 by Board of Health Ord. No.
3-95]
The following fees shall be paid to the Township of Harding:
A. Every certificate of compliance, location and design issued pursuant to
this article shall expire one year after the date of issuance, unless prior
to such time construction of the realty improvement with respect to
which the certificate was issued shall have been commenced, in which
event the certificate shall remain valid and in effect for a period of two
years from the date of issuance.
B. The Board of Health may, in its discretion, renew a certificate which has
expired under the provisions of this section. Such renewal shall be
subject to the provisions of this section. A fee as provided in Chapter
410, Fees, Board of Health, shall be charged for the renewal of a
certificate of compliance, location and design.
A. For filing an application and plans for a certificate of compliance,
location and design for a new individual water supply system and the
issuance of such certificate, a sum as provided in Chapter 410, Fees,
Board of Health.
B. For filing an application and plans for a certificate of compliance,
location and design for the repair or alteration of an existing individual
water supply system and the issuance of such certificate, a sum as
provided in Chapter 410, Fees, Board of Health.
C. For the issuance of a certificate of compliance, installation with respect
to an individual water supply system, including a water sample report, a
sum as provided in Chapter 410, Fees, Board of Health.
§ 422-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 422-13
1:601
§ 422-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-10-1995 by Board of
Health Ord. No. 3-95]
Any person who shall violate any provision of the DEP's Standards for the
Construction of Public Noncommunity and Nonpublic Water Systems, any
provision of this article, or any order of the Board of Health issued pursuant
thereto, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 for each offense
and an additional penalty of not more than $100 for each day the violation
continues to exist.
D. For each reinspection of an individual water supply system, or of any
part of any such system, required by failure to locate and construct or
alter the system in accordance with applicable requirements, a sum as
provided in Chapter 410, Fees, Board of Health.
E. For an appearance or hearing before the Board when the applicant is
seeking other relief from the Board, a sum as provided in Chapter 410,
Fees, Board of Health.
F. For filing and initial review of an application or plans for a certificate of
compliance, location and design and the issuance of such certification,
a sum as provided in Chapter 410, Fees, Board of Health. Additional
fees will be charged for related consultations at the rate as provided in
Chapter 410, Fees, Board of Health, by the Sanitary Inspector and/or
according to the fee schedule of the Township Engineer in effect at the
time of filing the application.
§ 422-13 HARDING CODE § 422-14
1:602
ARTICLE II
Public Sanitary Sewer System
[Adopted by the Township Committee 12-12-1977 by Ord. No. 10-77,
as amended (Ch. 149, Art. II, of the 1990 Code); readopted by the
Board of Health at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 401, General
Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I)]
§ 422-15. Connections to Morris Township sanitary sewer.
A. Dwellings to connect.
(1) Dwellings and/or accessory facilities on the following lots in
Harding Township may connect to and use the Morris Township
sanitary sewer upon payment of applicable fees:
Block 1, Lots 2, 3, 5, 6, 7
Block 2, Lots 14, 15, 16
Block 5, Lots 8.01, 9, 10, 11
Block 23, Lot 1
Block 23.02, Lots 17, 18, 27, 28, 29, 29.01, 29.02, 30
Block 23.03, Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
Block 24, Lots 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
(2) Dwellings and/or accessory facilities on the following lots in
Harding Township may connect to and use the sanitary collection
system in Harding Township leading to the Harding Township
Pumping Station upon payment of applicable fees: [Amended
7-13-2017 by Board of Health Ord. No. 02-2017]
Block 23, Lot 12
Block 23.02, Lots 13, 13.01, 13.02, 13.03, 14, 14.01 through 14.11,
16
Block 24, Lots 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 14.01, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
20.01, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26
Block 25, Lots 6, 7, 8, 9, 14, 15, 16, 17, 17.01, 17.02, 17.03, 18,
18.01-18.02, 19, 20, 20.01, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27
Block 25.01, Lots 1, 2, 2.01, 3, 4.01 through 4.43
Block 25.02, Lot 12
Block 25.03, Lots 1 through 112, 114
B. No person shall install a sewer line or make a connection between a
dwelling on one of the lots listed above in Subsection A and the Morris
Township sanitary sewer without:
(1) Paying the permit fee required by Subsection F(1) and obtaining a
sewer permit from the Harding Township Plumbing Inspector.
§ 422-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 422-15
1:603
(2) Complying with the provisions of this section and the rules and
regulations of Morris Township adopted by reference under
Subsection C.
(3) Having such installation and connection supervised by the Harding
Township Plumbing Inspector and the Morris Township Sewer
Inspector.
(4) If a Harding Township road is opened, complying with the
provisions of Chapter 346, Article I, entitled "Road Excavations and
Connections," of this Code.
C. The following provisions of Chapter 71 entitled "Sewers and Sewerage"
of the Morris Township Code in effect as of April 25, 1972, are hereby
adopted by reference and established in and for the Township of
Harding: §§ 71-1, 71-3 (except that Subsections B and J of § 71-3 are not
adopted), 71-4 through and including 71-6, 71-8 and 71-9. A copy of
said provisions is annexed hereto and made a part hereof, although the
text is not set forth in this subsection. Three copies of said provisions
have been placed and shall remain on file in the Township Clerk's office
for the use and examination of the public as long as this section is in
effect.
D. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
sewer line shall be paid by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
Township of Harding from any loss or damage that may indirectly or
directly result from the installation of the building sewer.
E. Any and all abandoned cesspools, septic tanks and seepage pits on
premises which connect to the Morris Township sanitary sewer shall be
fully drained and completely filled with earth immediately upon
abandonment of said connection. Any such drainage or filling which is
determined to be unsatisfactory in the opinion of the Harding Township
Sanitary Inspector shall be addressed pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:9A-12.8,
Abandoned systems, as amended and/or supplemented. A permit to
alter a subsurface sanitary disposal system shall be obtained from the
Board of Health prior to abandonment, and the proper abandonment of
the system shall be inspected by a representative of the Board of
Health.
F. Fees. The following fees shall be paid to the Township of Harding:
(1) Permit; inspection; reinspection.
(a) For issuance of a sewer permit and the first inspection of the
installation and connection by the Harding Township Plumbing
Inspector, a sum as provided in Chapter 410, Fees, Board of
Health.
(b) For each reinspection of such excavation and installation
required by the owner's failure to locate and construct said
§ 422-15 HARDING CODE § 422-15
1:604
sewer line in accordance with applicable requirements, a sum
as provided in Chapter 410, Fees, Board of Health.
(2) Sewer service charge.
(a) For the sewer service charge per year per single-family unit, to
be prorated if service is less than a full year, a sum as provided
in Chapter 410, Fees, Board of Health.
(b) The effective date to commence billing and collecting the
annual service charge for new buildings and existing buildings
shall be on the date a new and/or existing building connects
with the sewer. [Amended 7-13-2017 by Board of Health
Ord. No. 02-2017]
(c) The payment of the annual service charge is required even
though the building may be vacant.
(d) The sewer service charge hereby imposed shall be due and
payable quarterly to the Township on a calendar-year basis.
(e) Said sewer service charge shall be due on or before the first
day of the first month of the succeeding quarter year and shall
be billed and collected by the Harding Township Chief
Financial Officer.
(f) Any such sewer service charge not paid on the due date shall
bear interest at the same rate as uncollected taxes of the
Township of Harding and shall become a lien upon the
premises connected to the sanitary sewer system until paid;
and the Township of Harding shall have the same rights for the
collection thereof, together with interest and costs and
penalties, as it has by law for the collection of taxes upon real
estate.
(3) Pumping station service charge.
(a) For the pumping station service charge per year, per singlefamily
unit, imposed on those properties set forth in
§ 422-15A(2) of this article to be prorated if service is less than
a full year, a sum as provided in Chapter 410, Fees, Board of
Health, effective January 1, 1991.
(b) The effective date to commence billing and collecting the
annual service charge for new buildings and existing buildings
shall be on the date a new and/or existing building connects
with the sewer. [Amended 7-13-2017 by Board of Health
Ord. No. 02-2017]
(c) The payment of the annual service charge is required even
though the building may be vacant.
§ 422-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 422-15
1:605
§ 422-16. Public sanitary sewer system established.
There is hereby established in the Township of Harding a public sanitary
sewer system which shall be known and designated as "Harding Township
Public Sewer System," which system shall include all public sanitary sewer
facilities which the Township may from time to time construct, acquire and/
or maintain for the purposes of the collection, treatment and disposal of
sewage within the Township.
§ 422-17. Operation of public sanitary sewer system.
Said sewer system shall be operated by the Township of Harding as a
municipal public utility as defined in and subject to the provisions of Title
40A of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated and all fees, rents and other
charges received by the Township in connection therewith shall be
segregated by the Township and designated as the "Public Sewer Utility
Fund" and kept in a fund separate from other Township revenues, to be used
only for the purposes of said municipal public utility.
(d) The pumping station service charge hereby imposed shall be
due and payable quarterly to the Township on a calendar-year
basis.
(e) Said pumping station service charge shall be due on or before
the first day of the first month of the succeeding quarter year
and shall be billed and collected by the Harding Township
Chief Financial Officer.
(f) Any such pumping station service charge not paid on the due
date shall bear interest at the same rate as uncollected taxes of
the Township of Harding and shall become a lien upon the
premises connected to the sanitary sewer system until paid;
and the Township of Harding shall have the same rights for the
collection thereof, together with interest and costs and
penalties, as it has by law for the collection of taxes upon real
estate.
(4) For connection to the sanitary sewer, a sum as provided in Chapter
410, Fees, Board of Health.
(5) All completed buildings on Block 23.01, Lots 1, 2, 7, 19 and 27, and
Block 24, Lot 8, for which a certificate of occupancy has been
issued and which have a private disposal system which was in use
on March 25, 1976, shall be exempt from any charge for connection
to the Morris Township sanitary sewer.
§ 422-15 HARDING CODE § 422-17
1:606
ARTICLE III
Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems
[Adopted 12-10-2015 by Board of Health Ord. No. 02-2015122]
§ 422-18. Adoption of State standards by reference.
The regulations promulgated by the New Jersey State Department of
Environmental Protection on June 1, 1989, pursuant to the Realty
Improvement Sewerage and Facilities Act (1954)123 and known as
"Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems," N.J.A.C.
7:9A, effective January 1, 1990, and last amended April 2, 2012, and as may
be further amended, are hereby adopted by reference in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 26:3-69 to 26:3-69.6.
§ 422-19. Systems to comply with higher standards.
The Board of Health or its designee shall not approve the installation or
construction of a new subsurface sewage disposal system or alteration or
expansion of an existing subsurface sewage disposal system unless such
system complies with certain higher standards prescribed herein in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:9A-3.1(b).
§ 422-20. Waiver procedures.
The Board of Health may approve waivers from higher standards
established by the Board when conditions indicate that such waivers are
desirable or necessary. The design engineer should consult with the Board
of Health or its duly authorized agent regarding specific problems requiring
possible waivers from the standards. Any waiver from established standards
must be approved by the Board of Health.
§ 422-21. Definitions.
The following words and terms when used in this article shall have the
following meanings and where applicable shall have the same definitions as
stated in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-2.1, as adopted by this article, and as may be further
supplemented by this article:
ADVANCED WASTEWATER TREATMENT OR DISPOSAL TECHNOLOGY —
The definition of "advanced wastewater pretreatment device" shall be the
same as in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-2.1 and as further supplemented as follows: means
any component or system, which is a part of an individual subsurface
sewage disposal system that is employed to reduce levels of pollution or
convey pollutants to the subsurface environment that is not addressed or is
not designated for administrative authority approval in N.J.A.C. 7:9A.
122. Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Art. III, Individual Subsurface Sewage
Disposal Systems, adopted 11-14-1991 by Board of Health Ord. No. 2-91 (Ch. 149, Art. III,
of the 1990 Code), as amended.
123. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.
§ 422-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 422-21
1:607
ALTERATION — The definition of "alteration" shall be the same as in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-2.1 and as further supplemented as follows: the replacement
of a cesspool is an alteration.
AUTHORIZED INSTALLER — An individual who has completed all training
requirements of a manufacturer of a product that is listed by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:9A-8.3 or 7:9A-9.8 and/or a listed system integrator of a drip dispersal
system designed and installed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:9A-10.8, and
who installs those advanced wastewater pretreatment devices, products
used in lieu of laterals/filter material and/or drip dispersal systems, as
applicable.
AUTHORIZED SERVICE PROVIDER — An individual who maintains an
advanced wastewater pretreatment device and/or drip dispersal system in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:9A-12.3, who monitors the system remotely and
who responds appropriately to alarm conditions. This individual must either
hold an S2 or greater license pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:10A; or have completed
all training required by a manufacturer of an advanced wastewater
pretreatment device that is listed by the Department in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-8.3; and/or be a listed system integrator of a drip dispersal
system in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:9A-10.8.
BEDROOM — As defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-2.1, means any room within a
dwelling unit, finished or unfinished, which may reasonably be expected to
serve primarily as a bedroom or dormitory. The term "bedroom" shall be
considered to include any room or rooms within an expansion attic.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Township of Harding.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certificate issued by the
administrative authority certifying that an individual sewage disposal
system has been installed, altered or repaired in such manner as to comply
with the requirements of the Standards for Subsurface Sewage Disposal
Systems (N.J.A.C. 7:9A), the higher standards prescribed by this article and
all terms and conditions of approval imposed by the administrative authority
with respect to such system.
CONSTRUCT — To build, install, fabricate or put together on site one or
more components of an individual subsurface sewage disposal system.
EDUCATION PROGRAM — An educational program prepared and
administered by the Board of Health regarding the fundamentals of
individual subsurface sewage disposal systems and the proper procedures
for the maintenance of such systems. The educational program shall be
deemed to be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:9A-3.14.
EXPANSION ATTIC — As defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-2.1, part of a dwelling
unit left unfinished but which is capable of being finished as a bedroom or
bedrooms and which is accessible by permanent stairways or designed so
that stairways can be installed.
§ 422-21 HARDING CODE § 422-21
1:608
INDIVIDUAL SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — An individual
subsurface sewage disposal system, as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-2.1, that
discharges liquid effluent of typical domestic strength to a disposal field.
LICENSED SEPTIC SLUDGE REMOVAL OPERATOR — Any person, firm
or corporation which has been found qualified to pump out an individual
subsurface sewage disposal system, and who has been issued a license by
the state of New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
OWNER or LESSEE — The person who owns or leases the realty upon
which an individual subsurface sewage disposal system is located and/or
the person who uses said system. The owner or the lessee of the system, if
different, are jointly and severally liable for the obligations imposed by this
article.
PERMIT TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, ALTER OR REPAIR — A permit issued
by the Board of Health or its designee granting permission to construct,
install, alter or repair an individual subsurface sewage disposal system in
accordance with an application on file with the administrative authority and
in compliance with the provisions of the Standards for Subsurface Sewage
Disposal Systems (N.J.A.C. 7:9A) and the higher standards prescribed by
this article.
PLOT PLAN — A sketch drawn by the owner/lessee, or agent on his/her
behalf, showing the type (if known) and location of the individual subsurface
sewage disposal system servicing the property, as well as the location and
type of any on-site water supply. All plots shall be drawn to scale and list the
dimensions used.
RECONSTRUCTION — As defined in Uniform Construction Code N.J.A.C.
5:23, any project where the extent and nature of the construction is such
that the work area cannot be occupied while construction is in progress
and where a new certificate of occupancy is required before the work
area can be reoccupied. Reconstruction may include repair, renovation,
alteration or any combination thereof. Reconstruction shall not include
projects comprised only of floor finish replacement, painting or
wallpapering, or the replacement of equipment or furnishings. Asbestos
hazard abatement shall not be classified as reconstruction solely because
occupancy of the work area is not permitted.
REPAIR — The definition of "repair" shall be the same as in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-2.1
and as further supplemented as follows: the replacement of a cesspool is
not a repair.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — An operation that stores, prepares,
packages, serves, vends or otherwise provides food for human consumption:
Such as a restaurant, satellite or catered feeding location; catering
operation if the operation provides food directly to a consumer or
to a conveyance used to transport people; market; vending location;
conveyance used to transport people; institution; or food bank; and
A.
That relinquishes possession of food to a consumer directly, or
indirectly through a delivery service such as home delivery of grocery
B.
§ 422-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 422-21
1:609
SERVICE CONTRACT — A legal, written agreement between a property
owner and an authorized service provider to perform all system startup,
maintenance and monitoring requirements identified in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-2.1
for any system that includes an advanced wastewater pretreatment device,
which includes all drip dispersal systems. The agreement must be fully
transferable to subsequent owners of the property and renewable.
SYSTEM — An individual subsurface sewage disposal system, including all
of the component parts thereof.
§ 422-22. Permit required to construct, install, alter or repair;
issuance; expiration; transferability; suspension or revocation
scope; applicability and exemptions.
orders or restaurant takeout orders, or delivery service that is provided
by common carriers.
A. The owner and/or occupant of any realty improvement serviced by an
individual on-site subsurface sewage disposal system located in the
Township of Harding shall be subject to all of the requirements of this
article.
B. No person shall construct, install, alter or repair an individual
subsurface sewage disposal system without first obtaining a permit
from the Board of Health or its designee.
C. Permit shall be valid for a period of one year. In the event that the
system has not been completed and a certificate of compliance has not
been issued, the applicant may apply for an extension of time not to
exceed one year. The Board of Health, in granting such extension, may
impose additional conditions on the permit as may be appropriate
taking into consideration newly adopted standards and practices. No
more than two one-year extensions may be granted. A permit extension
fee of $225 for the first extension and $350 for the second extension
will apply.
D. All construction for sewage disposal systems shall be completed within
20 days from the commencement of the installation of the sewage
disposal system.
(1) A request for an extension of the above twenty-day period must be
in writing to the Board of Health or its designee. Construction shall
be deemed to have commenced when the excavation for the
disposal area, septic tank or other components begins.
Construction will be complete when the final grading of the
disturbed areas is complete. The house connection need not be
constructed for the work to be deemed complete.
(2) If the owner/applicant fails to complete installation of the sewage
disposal system within 20 days and no extension has been
requested, the Board of Health or its designee shall make daily
inspections of the system until it is complete.
§ 422-21 HARDING CODE § 422-22
1:610
§ 422-23. Application.
§ 422-24. Testing.
(3) An inspection fee of $150 per day shall be charged to the owner/
applicant for every day the system is not completed past the 20th
day, unless an extension was given pursuant to Subsection D(1)
above.
E. No person within the Township of Harding area shall use an individual
subsurface sewage disposal system unless such construction,
installation, alteration and maintenance are in accordance with all
applicable sanitary regulations and this article. After January 1, 2050, a
person within the Township of Harding shall not use an individual
subsurface sewage disposal system on a parcel that is identified in the
Harding Township Wastewater Management Plan as being in the Sewer
Service District. Such systems shall be abandoned in accordance with
§ 422-15E and the dwellings and/or accessory facilities shall be
connected to the Morris Township sanitary sewer in accordance with
the provisions of § 422-15.
F. Any system not in active use shall be exempted from this article. The
Board of Health may require an owner or lessee of a system seeking
exemption under this section to submit proof in a form acceptable to the
Board so as to qualify for this exemption.
A. All plans shall comply with the Checklist for Individual Subsurface
Sewage Disposal System Application approved by resolution by the
Board of Health and as may be amended from time to time.
B. The Board of Health or its designee may impose reasonable conditions
on its approval of an application and may require that the applicant
prepare and record a deed, subject to the approval of the Board of
Health or its attorney, setting forth the conditions as a restrictive
covenant running with the land enforceable by the Board of Health or
its designee.
A. The design engineer shall sample and test, or cause to be tested,
natural on-site soil, suitable fill and other material of the subsurface
sewage disposal system as may be necessary to obtain information for
design and for determination of compliance with standards and with the
provisions of an approved design.
B. When the Board of Health or its designee has recorded observation
information which differs from the site evaluation information provided
by the applicant's engineer or the information provided is incomplete,
the Board of Health or its designee may require further testing and/or
evaluation of the site.
C. When the Board of Health's recorded observation information which
differs from the soil suitability information provided by the applicant's
§ 422-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 422-24
1:611
§ 422-25. Filing of soil suitability reports.
All records and reports of soil suitability shall be filed with the Board of
Health in a timely manner. Such reports shall include a map of the site
accurately showing the location of all soil profile pits, soil borings, monitor
well and all permeability tests.
§ 422-26. Location of component parts of systems.
The following minimum distances (in feet) shall be maintained between
system components and between system components and other structures
or points:
Component Part
Minimum
Distance From
ASTM C-1227
NOT-approved
tanks
(feet)
Minimum
Distances From
ASTM C-1227
approved tanks
(feet)
Minimum
Distance From
Disposal Areas
(feet)
Building 251 10 252
Property line 10 5 25
In-ground
swimming pool
25 10 20
Watercourse 100 25 100
Driveway 103 103 104
Well 1005 50 1005
engineer or soil test reports are not representative of the general soil
condition in which the disposal system is proposed to be installed, the
Board of Health or its designee may require further testing and/or
evaluation of the site.
D. The design engineer shall provide replicate samples, removal of which
shall be witnessed by the Board of Health or its designee, for tube
permeameter testing and for sieve analysis and hydrometer testing,
when requested by the Board of Health or its designee. Such samples
shall be tested at the discretion of the Board or its designee, and the
cost of all testing shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
E. The Board of Health or its designee may sample and test soils and
materials used for the construction of a disposal system when the test
data is not consistent with observations and evaluations made by the
Board of Health or its designee. The cost of all testing shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
§ 422-24 HARDING CODE § 422-26
1:612
Component Part
Minimum
Distance From
ASTM C-1227
NOT-approved
tanks
(feet)
Minimum
Distances From
ASTM C-1227
approved tanks
(feet)
Minimum
Distance From
Disposal Areas
(feet)
Footings for
unoccupied
buildings
(outbuildings,
decks, etc.)
106 106 106
NOTES:
1 Except where the building is on a slab at an elevation higher than the
invert of the septic tank outlet pipe, in which case minimum distance
will be 10 feet.
2 May be reduced to 15 feet from disposal field and 30 feet from seepage
pit for portions of the building constructed either on a slab foundation
or over a continuous dust cap which is at or above natural or finished
grade, whichever is higher only.
3 Unless a permanent barrier is installed between the driveway and
the area over the tank or unless the septic tank and its cover are
designed to support a wheel load from the heaviest vehicle that could
be expected to travel over it.
4 Unless a permanent barrier is installed between the driveway and the
area over the disposal field.
5 May be reduced by one foot for each additional foot of well casing
greater than 50 feet.
6 May be reduced to five feet with permission of administrative authority.
§ 422-27. Disposal field sizing requirements.
§ 422-28. Reserve expansion/replacement disposal area.
A. Where sanitary sewage ejector pumps are installed or proposed, the
disposal field size shown in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-10.2 shall be increased by
50%.
B. Garbage grinder units are prohibited from use on properties served by
an individual sewage disposal system.
A. An area equivalent to 100% of the disposal areas shall be reserved for
future expansion or replacement of the disposal system. The site shall
comply with Subchapter 4 of N.J.A.C. 7:9A and all requirements of this
Code. The soil shall be suitable for an individual subsurface sewage
disposal system in compliance with Subchapters 5 and 6 of N.J.A.C.
7:9A.
§ 422-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 422-28
1:613
§ 422-29. Septic tanks.
§ 422-30. Dosing tanks.
B. The reserve expansion/replacement disposal area shall be shown on the
plan of the disposal system and shall be marked "area reserved for
expansion/replacement of disposal system."
C. No structures shall be located in a manner which would interfere with
the construction of a disposal system within the reserve area.
D. Reserve of expansion/replacement disposal area shall be tested in
compliance with § 422-24 of this Code.
A. The liquid capacity of all septic tanks for new residential installations
and residential alterations shall be not less than 100% greater than the
minimum capacity required by N.J.A.C. 7:9A-8.2, and the tanks shall be
dual compartment tanks. Alternatively, multiple compartments may be
provided by connecting individual septic tanks in series.
B. The septic tank(s) installation shall be such that the high seasonal
water table shall be no higher than one foot below the outlet or any
joints of the septic tank.
C. Septic tank installations shall be designed to prevent flotation of the
tank when empty.
D. All tanks, including risers and inspection ports to the highest joint, shall
be tested for water tightness after installation using hydrostatic or
vacuum test as required by N.J.A.C. 7:9A-8.2.
A. Each dosing tank shall have an alarm system that shall be on a separate
dedicated circuit and shall have a manual reset. The location of the
alarm and controls shall be approved by the administrative authority.
B. A separate electrical circuit shall be supplied for each pump.
C. Dosing tanks shall be readily accessible for maintenance and
inspection.
D. Float switches shall be mounted on a noncorrosive support independent
of the pump, the internal pumping or the steps. Switches shall be
located where there is a minimum of turbulence and shall be mounted
so that they do not become entangled with equipment, steps or
electrical wires.
E. The inlet shall be connected to a tee which shall be oriented vertically.
The tee shall be securely fastened to the inlet pipe. A pipe equal to the
diameter of the inlet pipe shall extend downward vertically to an
elevation not greater than four inches above the elevation of the normal
high water level (pump on) in the pump pit.
F. All piping shall be Schedule 40 PVC.
§ 422-28 HARDING CODE § 422-31
1:614
§ 422-31. Delivery pipes.
The delivery pipe from the dosing tank to the disposal bed shall be tested
for leakage at a pressure of 1 1/2 times the design pressure head. There
shall be no measurable pressure loss for a period of 30 minutes. Appropriate
safety measures shall be observed during the testing period.
§ 422-32. Pressure dosing networks.
Pressure dosing networks shall be tested in the following manner:
§ 422-33. Sanitary sewage ejector pumps; exemptions.
When sanitary sewage ejector pumps are installed or proposed, they shall
require:
§ 422-34. Inspection of construction.
A. The network shall be thoroughly flushed prior to the installation of the
end caps.
B. The end caps shall be installed with a one-eight-inch hole drilled
vertically in the top.
C. After all end caps have been installed with a one-eighth-inch hole in the
top, the distribution network shall be tested by pumping water through
it at the design pressure rate of flow.
D. The height of the water stream discharging from each one-eighth-inch
hole in the end cap shall be measured.
E. No water stream shall have a height that differs from the average
height by more than 20%.
F. After the test has been completed, the end caps shall be removed. New
end caps shall be installed with a one-eighth-inch hole drilled
horizontally near the crown of the pipe.
A. An additional septic tank (surge tank) not less than 1,000 gallons in
capacity connected in series with the primary septic tank.
B. A flow velocity in the pipes of greater than two feet per second and less
than 10 feet per second.
C. Gravity flow from the building to the additional septic tank.
D. When a sanitary sewage ejector pump with maximum discharge of 1 1/2
inches and a maximum velocity of two feet per second is proposed for
handling gray water only, § 422-33A, B and C shall not apply.
A. Inspection by Board of Health or its designee.
(1) All stages as set forth in the Checklist for Individual Sewage
Disposal System Application of the construction of an individual
§ 422-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 422-34
1:615
§ 422-35. Certificate of compliance.
Certificate of compliance shall be issued after the following are furnished to
the Board of Health or its designee:
§ 422-36. Stop-work orders.
The Board of Health or its designee may order all further work in and about
any individual sewage disposal system which is being installed in violation
of N.J.A.C. 7:9A, Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal
Systems, or any provision of this article to be stopped forthwith. Such stopwork
order shall remain in effect until such time as a remedy to correct
such deficiency has been approved by the Board of Health or its designee.
sewage disposal system shall be inspected by the Board of Health
or its designee to determine compliance with the terms of the
permit issued thereof. The Board of Health or its designee shall be
notified at least two working days prior to the commencement of
the construction of any such system.
(2) No component of a subsurface sewage disposal system shall be
backfilled or otherwise covered from view until it has been
inspected by the Board of Health or its designee and approved for
backfilling or covering.
B. Inspection by licensed engineer:
(1) The construction of the sewage disposal system shall be inspected
by the applicant's licensed engineer. Such inspection shall satisfy
the requirements shown on the Checklist for Individual Subsurface
Sewage Disposal System Application.
(2) The applicant's engineer or engineer's authorized agent shall make
observations or measurements as may be necessary to prepare an
accurate as-built plan of the disposal system.
A. An as-built plan of the system prepared by licensed professional
engineer or surveyor within 30 days of the date of satisfactory final
grade inspection. The as-built plan shall show the exact location of all
tanks, building sewers, siphons, pumps, cleanouts, distribution box,
manifold, primary and reserve disposal field, dry wells, curtain drains
and wells in relation to the foundation of the building served by the
system. As-built plans shall be required for all alterations made to
existing individual sewage disposal system.
B. A certification in writing signed and sealed by licensed professional
engineer that the said system has been located, constructed, installed
or altered in compliance with all applicable state and local
requirements and the approved engineering plans.
C. Copy of the suitable fill laboratory test report.
§ 422-34 HARDING CODE § 422-36
1:616
Remedial action to correct the deficiency shall be complete prior to the start
or resumption of any other construction.
§ 422-37. Subdivision.
Persons applying for a letter of approval from the Board of Health or
its designee to the Planning Board shall submit an application and plans
showing the following information:
§ 422-38. Notification of proper operation and maintenance
practices.
A. All freshwater wetlands and freshwater wetland transition areas shall
be accurately delineated by the design engineer and supported by a
letter of interpretation from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
B. All soil series and the boundaries between adjacent soil series shall be
accurately shown on a map of the subdivision based on the County Soil
Survey Map. Modifications shall be made as determined to be
appropriate based on information obtained by the mapping of wetlands
or by information obtained by test pit observations for the evaluation of
sites for sewage disposal systems.
C. A feasible location to construct a disposal system to serve a fourbedroom
dwelling shall be shown for each proposed lot on the
subdivision plan. A similar location shall be shown for a reserve
disposal system area. These locations shall comply with N.J.A.C. 7:9A,
Subchapter 4, Site Evaluation and System Location.
D. Soil suitability and soil permeability shall be determined in compliance
with Subchapters 5 and 6 of N.J.A.C. 7:9A.
E. The applicant shall submit a complete report of all site and soil
evaluation work on standard forms prescribed by the Board of Health or
its designee. The location of all tests shall be accurately shown on the
map of the proposed subdivision.
F. Following the review of all site and test information, the Board of
Health or its designee shall advise the Planning Board that based on a
review of information submitted by the applicant it appears that:
(1) All lots proposed to be created by the subdivision are suitable for
the construction of a subsurface sewage disposal system in
accordance with both state and local regulations; or
(2) One or more of the lots proposed to be created by subdivision do
not appear to be suitable for a subsurface sewage disposal system
in compliance with both state and local regulations. The lots that do
not appear to comply shall be identified.
§ 422-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 422-38
1:617
§ 422-39. Use of subsurface sewage disposal systems.
A. The administrative authority shall notify each property owner issued
approval for the design, construction, installation, alteration or repair
of an individual subsurface sewage disposal system after January 1,
1990, of the proper operation and maintenance practices.
B. Written notification of the proper operation and maintenance practices
shall initially be issued to the applicant with the approval for the
location, design, construction, installation, alteration or repair of the
individual subsurface sewage disposal system and reissued on a
triennial basis to the present property owner. For approvals issued
before June 21, 1993, the notification shall be accomplished by
December 21, 1993, and reissued on a triennial basis, thereafter.
C. The written notification shall inform the present property owner how to
properly operate and maintain an individual subsurface sewage
disposal system. A mass mailing to all property owners who have
individual subsurface sewage disposal systems is an acceptable method
of notice. The notice shall include, at a minimum:
(1) A general outline of how an individual subsurface sewage disposal
system works and the potential impact of improper operation and
maintenance on system performance, ground and surface water
quality, and public health;
(2) The recommended frequency of septic tank and grease trap
pumping to prevent overaccumulation of solids, and methodology
for inspection to determine whether pumping is necessary;
(3) A list of materials containing toxic substances which are prohibited
from being disposed of into an individual subsurface sewage
disposal system;
(4) A list of inert or nonbiodegradable substances which should not be
disposed of within an individual subsurface sewage disposal
system;
(5) Proper practices for maintaining the area reserved for sewage
disposal;
(6) Impacts upon system performance resulting from excessive water
use; and
(7) Warning signs of poor system performance or malfunction and
recommended or required corrective measures.
D. The written notification may be developed by the administrative
authority, or the administrative authority may distribute copies of
relevant guidance material and/or technical manuals for on-site
wastewater treatment systems subject to N.J.A.C. 7:9A-3.14.
A. General.
§ 422-38 HARDING CODE § 422-39
1:618
(1) The subsurface sewage disposal system shall be used only for the
disposal of wastes of the type and origin provided for in the
approved engineering design. No permanent or temporary
connection shall be made to any source of wastes, wastewater or
clean water other than those plumbing fixtures which are normally
present within the type of facility indicated in the approved
engineering design.
(2) Drainage from basement floors, footings or roofs shall not enter the
sewage disposal system and shall be diverted away from the area of
the disposal field.
(3) As set forth in N.J.S.A. 58:10A-17, no person shall use or introduce
or cause any other person to use or introduce into any sewage
water disposal system any sewage system cleaner containing any
restricted chemical material.
(4) Disposal of materials containing toxic substances into a subsurface
sewage disposal system is prohibited. Materials containing toxic
substances include, but are not limited to, waste oil (other than
cooking oil), oil-based or acrylic paints, varnishes, photographic
solutions, pesticides, insecticides, paint thinners, organic solvents
or degreasers and drain openers.
(5) Inert or nonbiodegradable substances should not be disposed of in
the subsurface sewage disposal system. Such substances include,
but are not limited to, disposable diapers containing plastic, cat box
litter, coffee grounds, cigarette filters, sanitary napkins, facial
tissues and wet-strength paper towels.
(6) Large quantities of cooking greases or fats shall not be discharged
into systems not equipped with a grease trap designed and
constructed as prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-8.1.
(7) Major plumbing leaks shall be repaired promptly to prevent
hydraulic overloading of the system.
(8) Vehicle traffic and vehicular parking shall be kept away from the
aspects of the system, unless the system has been specifically
designed to support vehicular traffic.
(9) Discharge of pool/spa water into an individual subsurface sewage
disposal system is prohibited.
(10) Installation of garbage disposals/grinders is prohibited.
B. Disposal field maintenance.
(1) The area of the disposal field shall be kept free of encroachments
from decks, pools, sprinkler systems, driveways, patios, accessory
buildings, additions to the main building and trees or shrubbery
whose roots may cause clogging of any part of the system.
§ 422-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 422-39
1:619
(2) Grading shall be maintained in a condition that will promote runoff
of rainwater and prevent ponding.
(3) All drainage from roofs, footing drains, ditches or swales shall be
diverted away from the disposal field.
(4) Vegetation shall be maintained to prevent soil erosion. Trees and
other woody vegetation shall not be allowed on or near disposal
fields.
(5) Vehicle traffic and vehicular parking shall be kept away from the
area of the disposal field, unless the disposal field has been
specifically designed to support vehicular traffic.
C. Abandoned systems.
(1) When it is necessary to abandon a system or components of a
system, all septic tanks, dosing tanks, seepage pits, dry wells and
cesspools which are to be abandoned shall be emptied of wastes
and removed or filled completely with sand, gravel, stones or soil
material in a manner which is acceptable to the Board of Health or
its designee.
(2) Except when done as part of or in conjunction with an alteration, a
permit must be obtained from the Board of Health prior to
abandoning a septic system or component of a septic system.
D. Additional inspection and maintenance requirements for systems with
grease traps.
(1) Grease traps shall be inspected and cleaned out at a frequency
adequate to prevent the volume of grease from exceeding the
grease retention capacity. Grease shall be removed whenever 75%
of the grease retention capacity has been reached.
(2) Pumping of grease traps shall be performed by a solid waste hauler
registered with the NJDEP in accordance with the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 7:26-3.1.
(3) Equipment used in the pumping of grease traps shall meet the
following requirements:
(a) Mobile tanks shall be securely mounted on trucks or trailers,
shall be watertight and provided with a leakproof cover and
shall be vented to permit the escape of gases but not the liquid
or solid contents of the tank.
(b) Pumps and hoses shall be maintained and operated in a
condition that will prevent the leakage of sewage.
(c) Equipment shall be available to permit accurate measurement
of the volume of grease in relation to the grease retention
capacity of the grease trap.
§ 422-39 HARDING CODE § 422-39
1:620
§ 422-40. Removal of septic tank sludge.
(d) Pumping of grease traps shall be conducted in such a manner
that the entire contents of the grease trap including both
liquids and solids are removed.
(e) Pumping shall be carried out in a manner that will prevent
spillage of sewage onto the ground. If any spillage occurs, the
solid portion shall be immediately removed and disposed of in a
sanitary manner and the area of the spill shall be disinfected
using a method acceptable to the Board of Health or its
designee.
(f) Grease and other waste materials removed from grease traps
shall be disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the
Statewide Sludge Management Plan adopted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq. and 58:11A-1 et seq., and any other
applicable state or local rules, regulations, ordinances or
directives.
E. Maintenance of dosing tanks.
(1) Dosing tanks and associated pumps, siphons, switches, alarms,
electrical connections and wiring shall be maintained in proper
working order.
(2) Any solids that accumulate in the dosing tank shall be removed and
disposed of in a sanitary manner.
A. Prior to emptying, relieving or pumping out all or a portion of any
individual subsurface sewage disposal system within the Township of
Harding, the licensed septic sludge removal operator shall obtain a
septic sludge removal permit from the Board of Health or its designee.
B. The septic sludge removal operator shall complete all information on
the septic sludge removal permit and deliver one copy to the property
owner and one copy to the Board of Health or its designee within 72
hours of the time that the individual sewage disposal system is pumped.
Failure to deliver said report within the required time frame shall be
considered to be a violation of this article.
C. In addition to the license required under Subsection A above, the
pumping of septic tanks shall be performed by a solid waste hauler
registered with the NJDEP in accordance with the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 7:26-3c.
D. Equipment used in the pumping of septic tanks shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) Mobile tanks shall be securely mounted on trucks or trailers, shall
be watertight and provided with a leakproof cover and shall be
§ 422-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 422-40
1:621
§ 422-41. Enforcement.
vented to permit the escape of gases but not the liquid or solid
contents of the tank.
(2) Pumps and hoses shall be maintained and operated in a condition
that will prevent the leakage of sewage.
(3) Equipment shall be available to permit the accurate measurement
of the sludge and scum levels in relation to the bottom of the outlet
baffle.
E. Pumping of septic tanks shall be conducted in such a manner that the
entire contents of the septic tank including both liquids and solids are
removed.
F. Pumping shall be carried out in a manner that will prevent spillage of
sewage onto the ground. If any spillage occurs, the solid portion shall
be immediately removed and disposed of in a sanitary manner and the
area of the spill shall be disinfected using a method acceptable to the
Board of Health or its designee.
G. Septage shall be disposed of at a sewage treatment plant designated in
accordance with district and/or state solid waste management plans
pursuant to the Statewide Sludge Management Plan adopted pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq. and 58:1A-1 et seq.
A. Nuisances to be corrected.
(1) Any on-site sewage disposal system or component thereof that is
found to be malfunctioning (as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-2.1 and
7:9A-3.4) shall constitute a nuisance and shall be repaired,
modified or replaced pursuant to an order of the Board of Health or
its designee to correct the condition caused by the malfunction.
Alterations shall be performed in accordance with Standards for
the Construction of Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal
Systems as adopted and implemented by the Board of Health by
virtue of this Code and any amendments thereto.
(2) Any individual subsurface sewage disposal system which has not
been maintained in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:9A-12.3, Septic Tank
Maintenance, is hereby declared a nuisance.
(3) Any individual subsurface sewage disposal system which is
constructed, installed, altered, repaired, operated or maintained in
violation of this section, the NJDEP regulations, any rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant to this article or any permit or
certificate issued pursuant to this article is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
(4) In addition to the powers provided for in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1 et seq.,
the Board of Health or its designee retains its authority to abate
§ 422-40 HARDING CODE § 422-41
1:622
§ 422-42. Appeals and special meetings at request of applicant.
§ 422-43. Violations and penalties.
any nuisance in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3-45
et seq.
B. Malfunctioning subsurface sewage disposal system.
(1) The Board of Health or its designee shall have the right to inspect
any system which shows evidence of any malfunction. Such
evidence may include, but not be limited to, foul odors, leakage to
ground surface, or soggy ground over system. Water and/or soil
samples may be taken to confirm the existence of a malfunctioning
system.
(2) The Board of Health or its designee may required that any
malfunctioning system be corrected by servicing or by replacement
or alteration of the system.
(3) Until any necessary replacement or alteration of a system has been
accomplished, the Board of Health or its designee may require
pumping and the removal of the entire contents of the septic tank
for the system (both liquids and solids) at intervals specified by the
Board or its designee.
C. Right of entry. In furtherance of the rights granted to the Board of
Health in N.J.S.A. 26:3-45 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 7:9A-3.19, the Board of
Health or its designee, upon presentation of identification, shall have
the right to enter upon property where an individual subsurface sewage
disposal system is located for the purpose of observation, inspection,
monitoring and/or sampling of the on-site sewage disposal system. This
authority is exercised by virtue of N.J.S.A. 26:3-31 as a necessary and
reasonable method of furthering the duties of the Board of Health as
enumerated therein.
A. Any person aggrieved by a denial of any permit or certification required
by this article or by any order of the Board of Health or its designee
with respect to an individual sewage disposal system shall be entitled to
a hearing thereon before the Board of Health within 15 days after
written request therefor is made by the person claiming to be adversely
affected. Upon such hearing or within 15 days thereafter, the Board of
Health shall affirm, alter or rescind the previous action with written
findings and conclusions.
B. The fee for appeals or special meeting of the Board of Health of the
Township held at the request of an applicant or other interested party is
hereby fixed and established at $500. Such fee shall be paid prior to the
holding of such special meeting by the person or firm whose request
has been granted and shall be in addition to any and all other fees or
charges applicable to such proceedings.
§ 422-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 422-43
1:623
A. A person who violates any provision of this article, or any term or
condition of any certificate or license issued hereunder, shall be liable
for one or more of the following penalties [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29(b)]:
(1) A fine of not less than $100 nor more than $5,000.
(2) A period of community service not to exceed 90 days.
B. Each separate day and each violation of any provision or this article,
any term or condition of any permit or certificate or any notice or order
issued by the Board of Health shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation under this article.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the remedies of
the Board of Health or its designee for violation of this article. The
Board of Health or its designee may proceed under any other remedy
available at law or in equity for any violation of this article or any term
or condition of any permit or certificate issued by the Board or Health
or its designee or for any failure to comply with any notice or order
issued by the Board of Health or its designee or its enforcement official
under this article.
§ 422-43 HARDING CODE § 422-43
1:624
Appendix
Chapter A435
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1990 Code to 2010 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1990 Code Location in 2010 Code
Ch. 1, General Provisions
Art. I, Definitions; Construal of
Provisions; General Penalty
Ch. 1, Art. I
Art. II, Adoption of Code NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. II
Ch. 5, Administration of Government Ch. 7
Ch. 9, Drug-Free Public Facilities Zone Ch. 154, Art. II
Ch. 10, Drug-Free School Zones Ch. 154, Art. I
Ch. 13, Fire Departments, Volunteer Ch. 16
Ch. 17, First Aid and Rescue Squad Ch. 21
Ch. 23, Personnel Policies Ch. 38, Art. II
Ch. 25, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 27, Recreation Advisory Committee Ch. 7
Ch. 29, Shade Tree Advisory Committee
§§ 29-1, 29-2 and 29-3, Establishment;
Membership; Appointments; Terms
Ch. 7
§ 29-4, Tree Conservation Officer Ch. 7
Ch. 35, Alarm Systems Ch. 80
Ch. 39, Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 84, Art. I
Ch. 43, Buildings, Unfit Ch. 116
Ch. 51, Canvassing and Soliciting Ch. 123
Ch. 55, Construction Codes, Uniform Ch. 140
§ 422-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:625
Chapter/Title From 1990 Code Location in 2010 Code
Ch. 61, Dogs and Other Animals
Art. I, Dogs Ch. 90, Art. I
Art. II, Livestock Ch. 90, Art. II
Art. III, Cats Ch. 90, Art. III
Ch. 65, Dumping Ch. 338, Art. I
Ch. 68, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 71, Fees
Art. I, Purpose; Administration of
Government
Ch. 171
Art. II, Affordable Housing Ch. 171
Art. III, Board of Health Ch. 410
Art. IV, Construction Code, Chapter 55 Ch. 171
Art. V, Land Use and Development Ch. 171
Art. VI, Miscellaneous Ch. 171
Art. VII, Public Records and Documents Ch. 171
Ch. 73, Fertilizer Application Ch. 174
Ch. 75, Firearms and Weapons Ch. 177
Ch. 83, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 87, Food Establishments, Retail Ch. 189
Ch. 91, Garbage and Rubbish Ch. 338, Art. II
Ch. 95, Gasoline Stations Ch. 199
Ch. 105, Land Use and Development Ch. 225
Ch. 111, Lighting, Exterior REP
Ch. 115, Littering Ch. 237
Ch. 121, Motor Vehicle Regulations, Traffic
and Parking
Art. I, General Provisions Ch. 250, Art. I
Art. II, Unlicensed Motor-Driven Vehicles Ch. 250, Art. II
Art. III, Emergency Parking Prohibitions Ch. 250, Art. III
Art. IV, Parking for Handicapped Ch. 250, Art. IV
Ch. 124, Municipal Services
Art. I, Qualified Private Communities Ch. 254, Art. I
Ch. 127, Noise Ch. 258
Ch. 131, Nuisances Ch. 417
Ch. 137, Parks Ch. 280
Ch. 141, Peace and Good Order
§ DT-1 HARDING CODE § DT-1
1:626
Chapter/Title From 1990 Code Location in 2010 Code
§§ 141-1 to 141-17, 141-19, 141-20 and
141-22
Ch. 285
§ 141-18 Ch. 266
§ 141-21 Ch. 84, Art. II
§ 141-22 Omitted
Ch. 145, Recycling Superseded by Ord. No. 4-08;
see Ch. 338, Art. III.
Ch. 146, Redevelopment Plan
Art. I, New Vernon Village
Redevelopment Plan
Ch. 302, Art. I
Ch. 149, Sewers and Water
Art. I, Individual Water Supply Systems Ch. 422, Art. I
Art. II, Public Sanitary Sewer System Ch. 422, Art. II
Art. III, Individual Subsurface Sewage
Disposal Systems
Ch. 422, Art. III
Art. IV, Declaration of Water Emergency;
Water Use Restrictions
Ch. 388, Art. I
Ch. 151, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 153, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 157, Solid Waste REP
Ch. 161, Streets and Driveways
Art. I, Road Excavations and Connections Ch. 346, Art. I
Art. II, Brush and Hedges Near Roads
and Intersections
Ch. 346, Art. II
Art. III, Driveways Ch. 346, Art. III
Art. IV, Road Construction Standards Ch. 346, Art. IV
Ch. 165, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 172, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 181, Walk-A-Thons and Bike-A-Thons Ch. 383
Ch. 184, Wildlife Regulations Ch. 90, Art. IV
Ch. 185, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. A191, Cable Television Franchise Ch. A435
Ch A192, (Reserved) Omitted
Disposition List
Chapter DL
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:627
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-00 9-18-2000 Acquisition of property NCM
6-00 11-20-2000 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
7-00 12-27-2000 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
1-01 2-21-2000 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
2-01 2-7-2001 Uniform Construction Code
fees amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-07
3-01 2-7-2001 Salaries amendment NCM
4-01 2-21-2001 Acquisition of interest as
tenant
NCM
5-01 3-7-2001 Acquisition of property NCM
6-01 3-7-2001 Appropriation NCM
7-01 3-7-2001 Lease agreement NCM
8-01 6-20-2001 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
9-01 3-21-2001 Alarm system fees amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-07
10-01 4-18-2001 Emergency appropriation NCM
11-01 5-16-2001 Trees and land use
amendments
Chs. 7, 171
12-01 6-6-2001 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 7
13-01 6-6-2001 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 7
14-01 7-18-2001 Bond NCM
15-01 7-18-2001 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
16-01 7-18-2001 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
17-01 9-5-2001 Administration of government
amendment; land use
amendment
Chs. 7 and 225
18-01 10-17-2001 Bond NCM
§ DT-1 HARDING CODE § DL-1
1:628
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-01 11-28-2001 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
1-02 2-6-2002 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
2-02 3-20-2002 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
3-02 3-20-2002 Declaration of water
emergency; water use
restrictions
Ch. 388, Art. I
4-02 4-3-2002 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
5-02 5-1-2002 Acquisition of interest as
tenant
NCM
6-02 6-5-2002 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
7-02 6-19-2002 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
8-02 7-10-2002 Bond NCM
9-02 9-4-2002 Bond NCM
10-02 9-4-2002 Accept easement NCM
11-02 9-4-2002 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
BOH
1-02
10-4-2002 Sewers and water: individual
subsurface sewage disposal
systems amendment
Repealed by BOH
02-2015
12-02 10-16-2002 Land use and development
fees amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-07
13-02 10-16-2002 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
1-03 2-5-2003 Salaries amendment NCM
2-03 4-2-2003 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
3-03 4-2-2003 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
4-03 4-2-2003 Administration of government
amendment; uniform
construction codes
amendment
Chs. 7 and 140
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:629
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-03 3-19-2003 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
6-03 5-7-2003 New Vernon Village
Redevelopment Plan
Ch. 302, Art. I
7-03 4-2-2003 Police salaries amendment NCM
8-03 4-2-2003 Salaries NCM
9-03 5-7-2003 Exceed CAP NCM
10-03 5-21-2003 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
11-03 6-4-2003 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 7
12-03 6-4-2003 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
13-03 6-4-2003 Acquisition of development
easement
NCM
14-03 6-18-2003 Capital improvement NCM
15-03 7-16-2003 Bond NCM
16-03 8-13-2003 Salaries amendment NCM
17-03 8-13-2003 Penalties amendments Chs. 1; 90, Art. III
18-03 12-07-2003 New Vernon Village
Redevelopment Plan
amendment
Ch. 302, Art. I
19-03 11-19-2003 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
20-03 10-1-2003 Capital improvement NCM
21-03 10-15-2003 Alcoholic beverages:
possession or consumption by
underage persons on private
property
Ch. 84, Art. II
22-03 12-3-2003 Conveyance of land NCM
23-03 12-17-2003 Salaries NCM
24-03 12-17-2003 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 7
1-04 2-4-2004 Salaries amendment NCM
2-04 2-18-2004 Salaries amendment NCM
3-04 3-17-2004 Emergency appropriation NCM
4-04 3-17-2004 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
§ DL-1 HARDING CODE § DL-1
1:630
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-04 4-7-2004 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 285
6-04 4-7-2004 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 7
7-04 4-7-2004 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 7
8-04 4-21-2004 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
9-04 6-16-2004 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
10-04 6-2-2004 Exterior lighting amendment REP
11-04 Bond Not adopted
12-04 6-16-2004 Street name changes NCM
13-04 6-16-2004 Bond NCM
14-04 7-7-2004 Personnel policies:
indemnification of officers and
employees
Ch. 38, Art. I
15-04 7-7-2004 Personnel policies: policies
and procedures
Ch. 38, Art. II
16-04 7-7-2004 Bond NCM
17-04 7-7-2004 Vacate easement NCM
18-04 7-7-2004 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
19-04 8-11-2004 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 7
20-04 9-7-2004 Capital improvements NCM
21-04 11-3-2004 Cable television franchise NCM; see Ch.
A191
22-04 11-3-2004 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
1-05 2-16-2005 Building subcode fees
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-07
2-05 5-4-2005 Development fees Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-07
3-05 3-16-2005 Exceed budget appropriation
limits and establish cap bank
NCM
4-05 4-6-2005 Land use and development
fees amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-07
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:631
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-05 4-20-2005 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
6-05 4-20-2005 Alcoholic beverages fees
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-07
7-05 Land use and development
amendment
Tabled
8-05 Bond NCM
9-05 5-18-2005 Development fees amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-07
10-05 6-15-2005 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
11-05 6-15-2005 Street name change NCM
12-05 6-15-2005 Lease agreement NCM
13-05 7-13-2005 Salaries NCM
14-05 7-13-2005 Capital improvements NCM
15-05 9-6-2005 Alcoholic beverages:
possession or consumption by
underage persons on private
property amendment
Ch. 84, Art. II
16-05 9-6-2005 Bond NCM
17-05 10-5-2005 Animals: feeding wildlife Ch. 90, Art. IV
18-05 10-5-2005 Street name approval NCM
19-05 Street name approval Tabled
20-05 11-22-2005 Bond NCM
1-06 3-1-2006 Bond NCM
2-06 3-1-2006 Bond NCM
3-06 3-1-2006 Salaries NCM
4-06 3-1-2006 Exceed budget appropriation
limits and establish cap bank
NCM
5-06 3-1-2006 Utility easement NCM
6-06 3-1-2006 General penalty amendment Ch. 1, Art. I
7-06 3-15-2006 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
8-06 4-5-2006 Bond NCM
9-06 Land use and development
amendment
Tabled
10-06 5-3-2006 Capital improvements NCM
§ DL-1 HARDING CODE § DL-1
1:632
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-06 5-17-2006 Street name approval NCM
12-06 6-21-2006 Development fees amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-07
13-06 5-17-2006 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 7
14-06 6-7-2006 Street name approval NCM
15-06 5-17-2006 Salaries amendment NCM
16-06 Land use and development
amendment
Tabled
17-06 8-16-2006 Dogs amendment Ch. 90, Art. I
18-06 8-16-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
19-06 10-18-2006 Motor vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 250, Art. I
20-06 10-18-2006 Bond NCM
1-07 3-7-2007 Exceed budget appropriation
limits and establish cap bank
NCM
2-07 2-21-2007 Salaries NCM
3-07 2-21-2007 Motor vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 250, Art. I
4-07 2-21-2007 Motor vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 250, Art. I
5-07 Not adopted
6-07 8-15-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
7-07 7-18-2007 Appropriation NCM
8-07 7-18-2007 Bond NCM
9-07 9-19-2007 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
10-07 9-19-2007 Street name NCM
11-07 10-3-2007 Appropriation NCM
12-07 10-17-2007 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
13-07 11-7-2007 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
14-07 12-19-2007 Fees Chs. 171 and 410
15-07 12-19-2007 Bond NCM
1-08 3-5-2008 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:633
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-08 3-5-2008 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 7
3-08 3-5-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
BOH
3-08
12-11-2008 Board of Health fees
amendment
Ch. 410
4-08 4-16-2008 Solid waste; recycling:
recycling
Ch. 338, Art. III
5-08 4-16-2008 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
6-08 5-21-2008 Administration of government
amendment; land use and
development amendment
Ch. 7; Ch. 225
7-08 6-4-2008 Ground lease agreement NCM
8-08 6-4-2008 Street dedication and right-ofway
easement
NCM
9-08 6-4-2008 Public improvements and
acquisitions
NCM
10-08 6-4-2008 Public improvements and
acquisitions
NCM
11-08 6-4-2008 Street naming NCM
12-08 8-6-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 171
13-08 7-9-2008 Acquisition NCM
14-08 8-6-2008 Personnel policies: Defined
Contribution Retirement
Program
Ch. 38, Art. III
15-08 10-1-2008 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 285
16-08 10-22-2008 Acquisition NCM
17-08 11-26-2008 Conveyance of land NCM
1-09 2-25-2009 Municipal budget
appropriation
NCM
2-09 3-18-2009 Salaries amendment NCM
3-09 5-20-2009 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
4-09 6-10-2009 Acquisition NCM
5-09 6-10-2009 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
§ DL-1 HARDING CODE § DL-1
1:634
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
6-09 6-10-2009 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
7-09 6-10-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 171
8-09 8-19-2009 Street vacation NCM
9-09 8-19-2009 Right-of-way permit
agreement
NCM
10-09 Street name change NCM
11-09 10-21-2009 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
12-09 10-21-2009 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
13-09 Street name change NCM
14-09 12-16-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 171
1-10 2-17-2010 Appropriation NCM
BOH
1-10
3-11-2010 Bathing facilities Ch. 405
2-10 2-17-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 171
BOH
2-10
3-11-10 Sewers and water: individual
subsurface sewage disposal
systems
Repealed by BOH
02-2015
3-10 2-17-2010 Land use and development
amendment; fees amendment
Ch. 225; Ch. 171
4-10 3-31-2010 Board of Health Fees
amendment
Ch. 410
5-10 3-31-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 171
6-10 3-31-2010 Motor vehicle regulations,
traffic and parking: general
provisions amendment and
emergency parking
prohibitions amendment;
parks amendment
Ch. 250, Arts. I and
III; Ch. 280
7-10 3-31-2010 Fees amendment; land use
and development amendment
Reintroduced as
Ord. No. 10-10
8-10 11-17-2010 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
9-10 6-16-2010 Motor vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 250, Art. I
10-10 6-16-2010 Fees amendment; land use
and development amendment
Chs. 171; 225
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:635
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-10 8-18-2010 Municipal services: qualified
private communities
Ch. 254, Art. I
12-10 8-18-2010 Appropriation NCM
13-10 8-18-2010 Appropriation NCM
14-10 8-18-2010 Fertilizer application Ch. 174
BOH
03-10
10-14-2010 Adoption of Code by Board of
Health
Ch. 401, Art. I
15-10 11-17-2010 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
Res. No.
10-205
12-15-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 171
BOH
04-10
12-29-2010 Board of Health fees
amendment
Ch. 410
BOH
05-10
12-29-2010 Board of Health fees
amendment
Ch. 410
01-11 2-16-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
02-11 3-23-2011 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
03-11 3-23-2011 Grading permits; streets and
driveways: road excavations
and connections amendment;
driveways amendment
Chs. 204; 346,
Arts. I and III
04-11 3-23-2011 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
05-11 5-18-2011 Capital improvements NCM
06-11 Not adopted
07-11 5-18-2011 Capital improvements NCM
08-11 7-13-2011 Games of chance Ch. 193
09-11 7-13-2011 Lighting, exterior Ch. 233
10-11 9-21-2011 Canvassing and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 123
11-11 9-21-2011 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
12-11 11-16-2011 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
13-11 11-16-2011 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
§ DL-1 HARDING CODE § DL-1
1:636
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-11 11-16-2011 Administration of government
amendment; New Vernon
Village Redevelopment Plan
amendment
Ch. 7; Ch. 302, Art.
I
15-11 11-16-2011 Regulation of towing services Ch. 250, Art. V
Res. No.
11-244
12-22-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 171
01-12 2-21-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
02-12 2-21-2012 Indemnification of officers and
employees amendment
Ch. 38, Art. I
03-12 5-30-2012 Appropriation NCM
04-12 Franchise Tabled
05-12 7-9-2012 Tampering with water
facilities and resources
Ch. 388, Art. II
06-12 7-9-2012 Lease agreement NCM
07-12 8-13-2012 Appropriation NCM
08-12 9-17-2012 Salaries NCM
09-12 11-19-2012 Appropriation NCM
Res. No.
12-198
12-10-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 171
01-13 3-11-2013 Municipal budget NCM
02-13 3-11-2013 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
03-13 6-10-2013 Capital miscellaneous NCM
04-13 7-8-2013 Appropriation NCM
05-13 8-12-2013 Acquisition of property NCM
06-13 10-15-2013 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
01-14 2-18-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 171
02-14 3-17-2014 Budget NCM
03-14 3-17-2014 Land acquisition funds
transfer
NCM
BOH
01-2014
5-8-2014 Salaries NCM
04-14 5-12-2014 Capital ordinance NCM
05-14 5-12-2014 Salaries NCM
06-14 5-12-2014 Limousines or livery service Ch. 235
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:637
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-14 6-9-2014 Sewer capital improvements NCM
08-14 Not adopted
09-14 Not adopted
10-14 Not adopted
11-14 9-9-2014 Street naming NCM
BOH
02-2014
11-13-2014 Board of Health fees
amendment
Ch. 410
12-14 11-24-2014 General Provisions
amendment
Ch. 1
Res. No.
14-143
12-15-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 171
Res. No.
15-053
2-9-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 171
01-15 3-9-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
02-15 3-9-2015 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 7
03-15 4-13-2015 Appropriation NCM
BOH
01-2015
5-14-2015 Salaries NCM
04-15 6-8-2015 Open space acquisition NCM
05-15 10-19-2015 Land use and development
amendment; driveways
amendment
Ch. 225; Ch. 346,
Art. III
BOH
02-2015
12-10-2015 Sewers and water: individual
subsurface sewage disposal
systems
Ch. 422, Art. III
Res. No.
15-161
12-14-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 171
BOH
01-2016
3-10-2016 Salaries NCM
BOH
02-2016
4-18-2016 Board of Health fees
amendment
Ch 410
Res. No.
16-107
8-22-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 171
01-16 CPI ordinance NCM
02-16 Capital ordinance NCM
03-16 Defeated
§ DL-1 HARDING CODE § DL-1
1:638
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
04-16 6-13-2016 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
05-16 Salaries NCM
06-16 Bond NCM
07-16 12-12-2016 Streets and driveways: brush
and hedges near roads and
intersections amendment
Ch. 346, Art. II
08-16 12-12-2016 Land use and development
amendment
Ch. 225
09-16 12-12-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 171
10-16 12-12-2016 Fees amendment; land use
and development amendment
Ch. 171; Ch. 225
Res. No.
16-143
12-12-2016 Fees amendment Not included
01-17 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
02-17 Appropriation NCM
BOH
1-2017
2-23-2017 Board of Health fees
amendment
Ch. 410
03-17 3-20-2017 Salaries NCM
04-17 5-15-2017 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 7
05-17 NCM
06-17 NCM
BOH
2-2017
7-13-2017 Sewers and water: public
sanitary sewer system
amendment
Ch. 422, Art. II
07-17 10-16-2017 Grading permits amendment;
land use and development
amendment
Ch. 204; Ch. 225
01-18 1-15-2018 Sale of Real Property NCM
02-18 3-12-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
03-18 4-9-2018 Appropriation NCM
04-18 4-9-2018 Appropriation NCM
05-18 4-9-2018 Bond NCM
06-18 7-9-2018 Land Use and Development
Amendment
Ch. 225
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:639
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-18 5-14-2018 Grading Permits Amendment;
Land Use and Development
Amendment
Ch. 204; Ch. 225
08-18 6-11-2018 Appropriation NCM
09-18 6-11-2018 Hazardous Substances Ch. 82
10-18 6-11-2018 Land Use and Development
Amendment
Ch. 225
11-18 6-11-2018 Land Use and Development
Amendment
Ch. 225
12-18 6-11-2018 Fees Amendment; Land Use
and Development Amendment
Ch. 171; Ch. 225
13-18 Defeated
14-18 Not Adopted
15-18 9-10-2018 Land Use and Development
Amendment
Ch. 225
16-18 9-10-2018 Running Bamboo Ch. 117
17-18 9-10-2018 Appropriation NCM
18-18 Not Adopted
19-18 9-10-2018 Peace and Good Order
Amendment
Ch. 285
20-18 11-19-2018 Streets and Driveways: Rightof-
Way Permits
Ch. 346, Art. V
21-18 11-19-2018 NCM
22-18 11-19-2018 NCM
23-18 11-19-2018 Land Use and Development
Amendment
Ch. 225
24-18
25-18 12-10-2018 Animals: Trapping of Foxes
and Coyotes
Ch. 90, Art. V
01-19 1-28-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 171
02-19 1-28-2019 Administration of Government
Amendment
Ch. 7
03-19 1-28-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 171
04-19 1-28-2019 Land Use and Development
Amendment
Ch. 225
05-19 1-28-2019 Land Use and Development
Amendment
Ch. 225
§ DL-1 HARDING CODE § DL-1
1:640
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-19 1-28-2019 Land Use and Development
Amendment
Ch. 225
07-19 4-15-2019 Naming of Street NCM
08-19 4-15-2019 Capital Ordinance NCM
09-19 4-15-2019 Sewer Capital Ordinance NCM
10-19 4-15-2019 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
11-19 Number not used
12-19 5-13-2019 Administration of Government
Amendment
Ch. 7
13-19 6-24-2019 Redevelopment Plan NCM
14-19 8-12-2019 Land Use and Development
Amendment
Ch. 225
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:641