Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions; General Penalty
[Adopted as Ch. 1, §§ 1-2 and 1-3, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 1-1. Definitions and rules of construction.
A. As used in this Code, and in any other ordinance of the Township, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this section,
unless the context clearly indicates another meaning or unless
otherwise specifically provided in another chapter of the Code or
ordinance of the Township:
CODE or THIS CODE — The Code of Ordinances, Hamilton Township,
New Jersey, as cited in Article II of this chapter.
COUNCIL and TOWNSHIP COUNCIL — The governing body of the
Township as provided for in the Mayor-Council Plan E of the Optional
Municipal Charter Law (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.).
COUNTY — Mercer County, New Jersey.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the Township government
established pursuant to Chapter 5, Administration of Government,
together with any agency or instrumentality of the Township
government assigned to such organizational unit by Chapter 5,
Administration of Government, or by the Mayor.
DIVISION — A unit of a department, as provided for in Chapter 5,
Administration of Government.
GENDER — Words importing the masculine gender only shall also mean
and include the feminine and neuter genders, and shall also apply to
firms, associations, corporations and other artificial persons.
MAYOR — The chief executive officer of the Township as provided for
in the Mayor-Council Plan E of the Optional Municipal Charter Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.).
MONTH — A calendar month, unless otherwise specifically provided.
N.J.S.A. — The latest edition of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
NUMBER — Words importing the singular number only shall include
the plural number, and words importing the plural number only shall
include the singular number.
OFFICE, OFFICER, DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION OR OTHER
AGENT OR AGENCY — The naming of any officer, department, board,
commission or other agent or agency shall be construed as if followed
by the words "of Hamilton Township, New Jersey." Any such reference
shall be deemed to include any person authorized by law to perform
the duties of any such office, officer, department, board, commission or
other agent or agency.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation, utility, governmental agency or other entity capable of
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
§ 1-2. Violations; penalties. [Amended 8-21-2002 by Ord. No.
02-027; 2-7-2006 by Ord. No. 06-007]
being sued. Whenever used in any section prescribing and imposing
a penalty, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall mean
the partners or members thereof, and, as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
SHALL; MAY — "Shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STREET — Includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes,
viaducts and all other public highways in the Township.
TENSE — The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and
the future tense includes the present tense.
TIME — The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed
by excluding the first and including the last day, and, if the last day is a
Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Hamilton in the County of Mercer and
State of New Jersey.
WRITING and WRITTEN — Includes printing, typewriting and any
other mode of communication using paper or similar material which is
in general use, as well as legible handwriting.
YEAR — A calendar year, unless otherwise specifically provided.
B. Any term not specifically defined in this section or in any other chapter
of the Code or ordinance of the Township shall be construed according
to its common usage.
C. In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the
provisions of the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than
those of any law, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the
Code shall control. Where the provisions of any law, other ordinance or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions
of such law, other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
A. General penalty.
(1) Unless a specific penalty is provided elsewhere in the Code, in state
law or in other ordinances of the Township for a particular
violation, any person who shall violate any provision shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by one or more of the following
penalties: by a fine not exceeding $2,000, or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or by a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of the judge.
§ 1-1 HAMILTON CODE § 1-2
1:4
(2) The maximum penalty provided in this subsection is not intended to
state an appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any
lesser penalty, including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may
be appropriate for a particular case or a particular violation.
B. Continuing violations. Where applicable, and for the purpose of
assessing penalties, the continuation of a particular violation for each
successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person
allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may be
punished as provided in Subsection A of this section for each separate
violation.
C. Additional remedies. The imposition of a penalty as provided in
Subsection A of this section, or as specifically provided in any other
chapter of this Code, or in another ordinance of the Township, shall be
in addition to any injunctive or remedial relief which is authorized
under the laws of the state, with the same force and effect as though
provided for in this Code. Such penalty shall not be deemed to be in lieu
of any provision for revocation or suspension of any license or permit.
D. Repeat offender. Any person who is convicted of violating an ordinance
within one year of the date of a previous violation of the same ordinance
and who was fined for the previous violation shall be sentenced by a
court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine
imposed by the court upon a person for a repeated offense shall not be
less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed for a violation
of the ordinance, but shall be calculated separately from the fine
imposed for the violation of the ordinance.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:5

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
§ 1-3. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Hamilton of
a general and permanent nature adopted by the Council of the Township of
Hamilton, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections
by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 583, together with
an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the
"Code of the Township of Hamilton," hereinafter known and referred to as
the "Code".
§ 1-4. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force. This ordinance also supersedes the Code of Ordinances,
Hamilton Township, New Jersey, adopted November 1, 1994, by Ord. No.
94-050, amended and supplemented.
§ 1-5. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Municipal Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Hamilton by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Hamilton" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:7
§ 1-8. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Hamilton, pursuant to law, shall cause this
Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the
public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-9. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
authorized by the Township. The Clerk shall also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-11. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township
of Hamilton to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $2,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing same.
§ 1-12. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-8 HAMILTON CODE § 1-13
1:8
§ 1-13. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity of constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-14. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-15. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-14 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to February 7, 2017.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
§ 1-16. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinances adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A1 attached hereto and made a part hereof are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-16B, the chapters, articles and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or repealed by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 7-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-029." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 1-15 HAMILTON CODE § 1-16
1:10
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil emergencies — See Ch. 12.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 45.
Special law enforcement officers — See Ch.
66.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:11

Part 1
General Provisions
ARTICLE I
Purpose; Definitions
§ 5-1. Purpose of chapter.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to establish departments; allocate
the Township's functions, powers and duties among and within the
departments; establish official relationships; and prescribe standards and
procedures for the conduct of the public business, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 5-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Business Administrator appointed pursuant to the
Charter and this Code, or any Acting Administrator serving in place of the
Business Administrator pursuant to the Charter or ordinance.
CHARTER — The Mayor-Council Plan E of Chapter 210 of New Jersey Laws
of 1950, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented, and any
and all statutory provisions of the state applicable to the municipality.
DIRECTOR — The administrative head of a department.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township.
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:13

Part 2
Executive Branch
ARTICLE II
Mayor
§ 5-3. Executive power.
The executive power of the Township shall be exercised by the Mayor
pursuant to the Charter.
§ 5-4. General powers and duties.
§ 5-5. Appointment power.
A. The Mayor shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the
Township. He shall:
(1) Enforce the Charter and ordinances of the Township.
(2) Supervise all departments of the Township government.
(3) Require each department to make an annual report and such other
reports of its work as he deems desirable.
(4) Appoint all officers and employees for whose selection or
appointment no other provision is made by the Charter or
ordinance.
(5) From time to time make such recommendations for action by the
Council as he may deem to be in the public interest.
(6) Report annually at the beginning of the year to the Council and the
public on the work of the previous year and on the condition and
requirements of the Township government.
B. The Mayor may, subject to law, direct any municipal department,
division or bureau to perform the work, either in part or in whole, of any
other department, division or bureau, and, at the request of the
director, require an employee of another department to perform
services in the department of the director making such request.
A. The Mayor shall appoint the director of each department with the
advice and consent of the Council. Each department head shall serve
during the term of office of the Mayor appointing him and until the
appointment and qualification of his successor.
B. The Mayor may, at his discretion, remove any department head after
giving him notice and an opportunity to be heard. Prior to removing the
department head, the Mayor shall file written notice of his intention
with the Council, and such removal shall become effective on the 20th
day after the filing of the notice unless the Council prior thereto adopts
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:15
§ 5-6. Participation in Council meetings; calling of special
meetings.
§ 5-7. Veto power.
All ordinances adopted by the Council shall be submitted to the Mayor, and
he shall, within 10 days after receiving an ordinance, either approve the
ordinance by affixing his signature thereto or return it to the Council by
delivering it to the Municipal Clerk, together with a statement setting forth
his objections to the ordinance or to any item or part of it. No ordinance
or any item or part thereof shall take effect without the Mayor's approval
unless the Mayor fails to return the ordinance to the Council within 10 days
after it has been presented to him, or unless the Council, on reconsideration
warrant after the third day following its return by the Mayor, shall, by a vote
of two-thirds of the members, resolve to override the Mayor's veto.
§ 5-8. Acting Mayor.
The Mayor shall designate the Business Administrator, any other
department head or the Municipal Clerk to act as Mayor whenever the
Mayor shall be prevented, by absence from the Township, disability or other
cause, from attending to the duties of his office. During such time, the
a resolution by a two-thirds vote of the whole membership of the
Council disapproving the removal.
C. The Mayor shall have such further appointing power with the advice
and consent of the Council, or otherwise, as is provided by general law
or this Code.
D. Whenever a vacancy exists in any office required by the Charter or this
chapter to be filled by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council, and there is no holdover incumbent, the Mayor may
temporarily fill a vacancy (in the absence of any contrary provision in
the Charter or ordinances) by appointing an acting officer, including the
designation of himself as acting Business Administrator in the event of
a vacancy in that office. The appointee shall have all the functions,
powers and duties of the office until it shall be permanently filled. Any
such appointment shall terminate 90 days after the date of the
appointment unless the Council shall, by resolution, authorize one or
more extensions of such period.
A. The Mayor may attend meetings of the Council and may take part in
discussions of the Council, but shall not vote except in the case of a tie
on the question of filling a vacancy in the Council, in which case he may
cast the deciding vote.
B. The Mayor may, and upon written request of a majority of the member
of the Council shall, call a special meeting of the Council. In the call he
shall designate the purpose of this special meeting, and no other
business shall be considered.
§ 5-5 HAMILTON CODE § 5-8
1:16
person so designated by the Mayor shall possess all of the rights, powers
and duties of the Mayor. Whenever the Mayor has been unable to attend to
the duties of his office for a period of 60 consecutive days for any of the
reasons stated in this section, an Acting Mayor shall be appointed by the
Council, who shall succeed to all the rights, powers and duties of the Mayor
or the then-acting Mayor.2
§ 5-8.1. Notification of Council when Acting Mayor designated.
[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-054]
Whenever the Mayor shall designate an Acting Mayor to serve for at least
24 consecutive hours, the Council shall be formally notified of such
designation at the time the designation is made or within a reasonable time
thereafter.
§ 5-9. Office of Weights and Measures. [Added 11-2-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-049]
Superintendent of Weights and Measures. The Superintendent of Weights
and Measures shall be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 51:1-42
et seq. He shall possess sufficient scientific knowledge to properly inspect,
examine and report on the technical conditions of standard weights and
measures and have thorough knowledge of weights and measure laws
and proper methods involved in testing, weighing and measuring devices
against established standards. He shall supervise the testing of weighing
and measuring devices against established standards and shall supervise
the testing of such devices used in trade within his jurisdiction at least once
a year and shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law.
2. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-57, Office for the Disabled, which previously followed this
section, was deleted 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029.
§ 5-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-9
1:17

Part 3
Legislative Branch
ARTICLE III
Membership; Powers; Meetings
§ 5-10. Membership of Council; term of office of Council members.
The Township Council shall consist of five members elected at large by the
voters of the Township at the general election. The terms of the members
of the Council shall be four years, except that, of those first elected, two
shall serve for four-year terms and three for two-year terms. The length of
terms of the respective members of the first Council shall be determined
by lot immediately after the organization of the Council next following the
election.
§ 5-11. Legislative power of Council.
The legislative power of the Township shall be exercised by the Township
Council except as may be otherwise provided by general law.
§ 5-12. General powers of Council.
The Council, in addition to such other powers and duties as may be
conferred upon it by the Charter or otherwise provided by general law, may:
§ 5-13. Time and place of regular meetings.
At its organizational meeting, the Council shall provide for regular meetings
at a time and place within the Township. The resolution may provide that
when such a day falls upon a legal holiday the meeting shall be held on the
same hour on the next succeeding day that is not a legal holiday.
§ 5-14. Special meetings.
The President of the Council may, and upon written request of a majority of
the members of the Council shall, call a special meeting of the Council. The
request and call for such a special meeting shall specify the purpose of the
meeting, and no other business shall be transacted at the meeting.
A. Require any municipal officer, in its discretion, to prepare and submit
sworn statements regarding his official duties and the performance
thereof and otherwise to investigate the conduct of any department,
office or agency of the Township government.
B. Remove any Township officer other than the Mayor or a member of the
Council for cause, upon notice and an opportunity to be heard.
§ 5-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-15
1:19
§ 5-15. Election of President and Vice President; temporary
presiding officer.
The Council, at its annual organizational meeting, shall elect a President
and a Vice President to serve for one-year terms each and until the election
and qualification of their successors. In the absence of both President
and Vice President of the Council, the Council shall elect a temporary
presiding officer, who shall have the functions, powers and duties of the
President during his absence. Upon the arrival of the President or the Vice
President, as the case may be, the officer presiding shall relinquish the chair
immediately upon the conclusion of the particular item of business before
the Council.
§ 5-16. Annual audit.
The Council shall cause to be made an annual audit of the Township's
accounts and financial transactions as required by law. Such annual audit
shall be made by a registered municipal accountant of the state appointed
by the Council.
§ 5-17. Conformance with Open Public Meetings Act.
The Council shall conduct all meetings in conformity with the Open Public
Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 5-15 HAMILTON CODE § 5-17
1:20
ARTICLE IV
Council Procedures
§ 5-18. Governing rules.
Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, by law or in this chapter, the
Council shall be governed in questions of order, organization and conduct
of business by the current edition of Robert's Rules of Order in all cases to
which applicable.
§ 5-19. Time of meetings; adjourned meetings; attendance at
meetings by officers or employees.
All meetings of the Council shall be held at such times as are provided by
this chapter. An adjourned meeting shall be considered a continuation of
the preceding meeting, and the business of the Council shall be resumed
where it was left at the last adjournment. Any Township official or employee
of the Township shall attend regular or special meetings of the Council if
requested by the Council to do so.
§ 5-20. Powers and duties of President. [Amended 4-7-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-022]
The President of the Council, chosen in the manner and for the term
prescribed by this chapter, shall:
§ 5-21. Agenda.
An agenda for each regular meeting of the Council shall be prepared by the
Municipal Clerk under the supervision of the President of the Council.
A. Appoint such special committees of the Council as may be authorized by
motion or resolution.
B. Preside at all meetings of the Council and of the committee of the
whole.
C. State the questions and announce the results on all matters on which
the Council may vote.
D. Rule on all questions of order, subject to approval by the Council.
E. Sign all ordinances and resolutions adopted in his presence, and in his
absence the Vice President shall sign ordinances and resolutions
adopted in his presence.
F. Designate the seating arrangement of the members of Council.
G. Have such other functions, powers and duties as the Council may from
time to time prescribe.
§ 5-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-22
1:21
§ 5-22. Quorum call.
At the opening of each meeting of the Council, the Municipal Clerk shall call
the roll, and the names of those present shall be recorded in the minutes.
Three members of the Council shall constitute a quorum. If a quorum is not
present 1/2 hour after the appointed time for any meeting, the presiding
officer or the Municipal Clerk may declare the meeting adjourned.
§ 5-23. Order of business.
The order of business at each meeting of the Council shall be as follows:
§ 5-24. Distribution and reading of minutes.
The Municipal Clerk shall, so far as practicable, prepare and distribute to
the Council the minutes of each meeting promptly after the meeting. The
minutes of any meeting may be approved without reading whenever they
have been distributed at least 24 hours prior to the time of approval.
§ 5-25. Roll call votes and minutes. [Amended 4-7-1993 by Ord. No.
93-022]
The vote upon every motion, resolution or ordinance shall be taken by roll
call in order by the Municipal Clerk, which roll call shall commence with
the member of Council seated to the left and shall end with the member of
Council seated on the right when facing the Council. The Council President
shall be polled last. The yeas, nays and abstentions shall be entered in the
minutes. Upon the call of roll, any member may discuss or explain his vote.
The minutes of each meeting shall be signed by the presiding officer and by
the Clerk.
§ 5-26. Nominations and appointments.
A. Roll call.
B. Pledge of allegiance.
C. Minutes of previous meeting.
D. Communications.
E. Applications.
F. Resolutions.
G. Second and final reading of ordinances.
H. First reading of ordinances.
I. Hearing of citizens.
J. Comments by the Council.
K. Adjournment.
§ 5-22 HAMILTON CODE § 5-26
1:22
§ 5-27. Rules of debate.
§ 5-28. Addressing Council.
A. Nominations submitted by the Mayor shall be considered by the Council
at its next regular meeting. Any member of the Council may move a
nomination.
B. With respect to appointments to be made by the Council, any member
of the Council may nominate as many candidates as there are offices to
be filled. The Council shall consider such nominations, and, where there
is a single office to be filled, the sense of the Council on the
appointment shall be taken as to each nominee, and the nominee
receiving the majority shall be deemed appointed. When there is more
than one office to be filled by appointment, such as on a board,
commission or authority, the same procedure shall be followed with
respect to each office separately until the total number of appointments
to be made has been completed. In the discretion of the chair, a group
of nominations may be considered at once when there is no apparent
division in the Council as to the nominees included in the group.
A. The President of the Council shall not be deprived of any right to vote or
of any other rights, powers or duties of a Council member by virtue of
occupying the office of President of the Council.
B. A member of the Council shall be entitled to the floor only upon
recognition by the Chair, but such recognition shall only determine the
sequence of speaking and no Council member shall be denied the
privilege of the floor. Once a member has been recognized and taken
the floor, he shall not be interrupted for any reason other than a call to
order, and in such case the Chair shall rule promptly on the point of
order and the speaker be allowed to proceed if he is in order.
C. The Council member who has made a motion shall be entitled to the
privilege of closing debate.
D. A motion to reconsider may be made by a Council member on the
prevailing side, and such motion may be made only at the same meeting
or an adjournment thereof at which the action was taken.
E. In all matters, except public hearings on second reading of ordinances
and except upon consent of the Council President, each person
addressing the Council pursuant to this section shall be required to
limit his remarks to five minutes and shall at no time engage in any
personally offensive or abusive remarks. The Chair shall call any
speaker to order who violates any provision of this rule.
F. Upon the moving and seconding of a question, it shall be placed before
the Council without the need for the Chair to state the question and
shall be available for discussion and vote.
§ 5-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-28
1:23
§ 5-29. Decorum.
§ 5-30. Ordinances and resolutions.
The preparation, introduction and enactment of ordinances and resolutions
shall be governed by the provisions of § 5-34.
§ 5-31. Filing of reports and resolutions.
All reports to the Council and all resolutions shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk and entered in the minutes of the Council.
A. Persons other than Council members may be permitted to address the
Council in the proper order of business. A person present may, upon
recognition of the Chair and with the consent of four-fifths of the
Council, be heard in the order of communications and petitions and at
such other times as the Council may specifically permit. No person shall
address any remark or question to any specific Council member, nor
shall any person be permitted to address the Chair while a motion is
pending. A Council member may, through the Chair, respond to any
communication or address received pursuant to this action.
B. Except upon consent of the Council, each person addressing the
Council pursuant to this section shall at no time engage in any
personally offensive or abusive remarks. The Chair shall call any
speaker to order who violates any provision of this rule.
A. Conduct of Council members. Each member of the Council shall
cooperate with the Chair in preserving order and decorum, and no
member shall by conversation or otherwise delay or interrupt the
proceedings of the Council or disturb any member while speaking or
fail to abide by the orders of the Council or its President except as
specifically permitted by the rules set out in this article.
B. Conduct of public. Any person who shall disturb the peace of the
Council, make offensive or abusive remarks or conduct himself in a
boisterous manner while addressing the Council shall be forthwith
barred by the presiding officer from further audience before the
Council, except that, if the speaker shall submit to proper order under
the rules set out in this article, permission for him to continue may be
granted by a majority vote of the Council.
C. Sergeant at Arms. The Council may request the Department of Public
Safety to designate a member of the uniformed division to serve as
Sergeant at Arms at Council meetings. If requested, the Department
shall designate an officer to act as Sergeant at Arms, and he shall carry
out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the
purpose of maintaining order and decorum at such meetings.
§ 5-28 HAMILTON CODE § 5-32
1:24
§ 5-32. Suspension of rules.
Any rule of the Council may be suspended by a four-fifths vote of the
Council.
§ 5-33. Adjournment.
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided without
debate.
§ 5-33.1. Video recording of Council meetings by members of the
general public. [Added 7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-033]
A. Members of the general public have the right to video record portions
or all of an open public meeting of the Council, excluding closed or
executive session discussions. To minimize the possibility of disrupting
the public meeting of the Council, any member of the public ("citizen")
who wishes to video record portions or all of the public meeting must do
so in accordance with the following guidelines:
(1) The citizen must provide the Municipal Clerk, or his or her
designee, with no less than 10 minutes' verbal notice prior to the
scheduled beginning of a public meeting of his or her intention to
exercise his or her right to video record the public meeting.
(2) The citizen must have completed setup of his or her video recorder,
including cell phones, and any related equipment by no less than
five minutes prior to the scheduled start time of the public meeting.
As to the location of the video recorder and equipment, the same
may only be set up so as not to interfere with the viewing of the
meeting by any other member of the public as determined by the
Council President.
(3) The video recorder and any associated equipment utilized by the
citizen must be compact, quiet, and generally unobtrusive. No
more than one video recorder, and no added lighting, may be used
by any citizen. The video recorder and all associated equipment
may not take up more than 20 square feet of space. So as not to
interfere with the meeting, no citizen is permitted to use any video
recorder or associated equipment that makes any beeping sounds
or other noises. Should beeping sounds or any other noise emanate
from the video recorder or associated equipment at any time
during the public meeting, the citizen shall be required to cease
video recording immediately.
(4) If the video recorder or associated equipment requires connection
to electricity, the connection to electricity may be made only by a
standard plug which can easily and properly connect to the nearest
electricity socket. If at any time the video recorder or associated
equipment "blows a fuse" or causes a loss of power in the meeting
room, the citizen must immediately cease video recording and shall
§ 5-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-33.1
1:25
not be allowed to continue video recording with any recorder or
equipment that requires connection to electricity. The citizen will
also be required to reimburse the Township for any costs
associated with any damage to Township property and/or costs for
turning power back on.
(5) The citizen may not disrupt the public meeting with his or her
recording equipment. The citizen may not set up or use the video
recorder or equipment in such a way as to block or obstruct the
view of other members of the public of the Council proceedings.
The video recording by the citizen may only be done in a manner
that does not violate § 5-29 and must be generally orderly and
unobtrusive. The citizen may not continually exit and re-enter the
meeting room, or continuously move around within the meeting
room, during the public meeting. The citizen must remain with the
video recorder and equipment at all times, except for any period of
time during which the citizen is making a comment in his turn
during any public comment portion of the public meeting. The
citizen may not "narrate" the proceeding, or speak into any video
recorder or microphone. The citizen may not engage in any verbal
conversation, discourse or comment whatsoever, unless the citizen
is making a formal comment during his or her turn during any
public comment portion of the public meeting.
(6) If the citizen chooses to cease video recording at any time during
the public meeting, he or she may do so; provided that the citizen
may not commence removal (except for a hand-held video recorder)
or begin to disassemble any video recorder or associated
equipment until there is a break of at least five minutes of the
public meeting or until the public meeting has concluded.
(7) An unedited/unabridged copy of any video recording of the
proceedings shall be provided to the Township of Hamilton
Municipal Clerk within 10 business days where it shall be kept in
accordance with the Municipal Agencies General Records
Retention Schedule issued by the New Jersey Department of the
Treasury, Division of Revenue and Enterprise Services, Records
Management Services.
B. These guidelines are intended to ensure that the right of the public to
video record official public meetings of the Council does not interfere
with the business of the Council or other citizens' right of access to the
proceedings.
§ 5-33.1 HAMILTON CODE § 5-33.1
1:26
ARTICLE V
Ordinances and Resolutions
§ 5-34. General requirements.
§ 5-35. Certification of passage over veto.
Whenever an ordinance has been reconsidered by the Council following
a veto by the Mayor, the Municipal Clerk shall append to such ordinance
a certification of the action of the Council upon such reconsideration in
substantially the following form:
A. All ordinances shall be prepared by the Township Attorney upon
direction of the Council or the Mayor. Prior to introduction, each
proposed ordinance or resolution requiring or permitting
administrative action may be submitted to the Administrator and the
department head concerned, each of whom shall submit to the Council
an opinion as to the administrative implications of the proposed
ordinance or resolution.
B. An ordinance or resolution may be introduced by any member of the
Council. Each ordinance and resolution shall be limited to a single
subject, which shall be expressed in its title.
C. All ordinances shall be introduced, read, heard and enacted in the
manner provided by general law. Each ordinance passed by the Council
shall be promptly delivered by the Municipal Clerk to the Mayor and he
shall, within 10 days after receiving any ordinance, either approve the
ordinance by affixing his signature thereto or return it to the Council by
delivering it to the Municipal Clerk, together with a statement setting
forth his objections thereto or to any item or part thereof. No ordinance
or any item or part thereof shall take effect without the Mayor's
approval, unless the Mayor fails to return an ordinance to the Council
within 10 days after it has been presented to him, or unless the Council,
upon reconsideration thereof on or after the third day following its
return by the Mayor, shall, by a vote of 2/3 of the members, resolve to
override the Mayor's veto.
D. No ordinance other than the local budget ordinance shall take effect
less than 20 days after its final passage by the Council and approval by
the Mayor where such approval is required, unless the Council shall
adopt a resolution declaring an emergency and at least 2/3 of all
members of the Council vote in favor of such resolution.
E. All ordinances and resolutions shall be consecutively numbered and
recorded by the Municipal Clerk. At the close of each year, with the
advice and assistance of the Township Attorney, the Municipal Clerk
shall bind, compile or codify all the ordinances and resolutions, or true
copies thereof, of the municipality which then remain in force and
effect. He shall also properly index the record books, compilation or
codification of ordinances and resolutions.
§ 5-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-35
1:27
I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above ordinance adopted by the Council on
the _____ day of _____ was delivered to the Mayor on the _____ day of _____,
_____ and was returned to me on the _____ day of _____, _____, together
with the Mayor's statement of the reasons for which he was constrained
to withhold his approval of such ordinance, item or part thereof. On
reconsideration thereof on the _____ day of _____, _____, (the Council duly
resolved by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of its members to enact such
ordinance, item or part thereof notwithstanding the Mayor's veto.) or (the
Mayor's veto was sustained.)
Clerk
§ 5-36. Certification when ordinance not returned by Mayor.
Whenever an ordinance shall take effect without the Mayor's signature by
reason of his failure to return it to the Council by filing it with the Municipal
Clerk within 10 days after it has been presented to him, the Municipal Clerk
shall append to such ordinance a certificate in substantially the following
form:
I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above ordinance was adopted by the Council
on the _____ day of _____, _____, and was presented to the Mayor duly
certified on the _____ day of _____, _____, and upon his failure to sign it
or return and file it with the Clerk within 10 days thereafter, the said
ordinance took effect in like manner as if the Mayor had signed it.
Dated:
Clerk
§ 5-37. Filing of reports, resolutions and other documents.
The Council shall file with the Municipal Clerk all petitions, resolutions or
other papers considered by it on each matter. All reports to the Council and
all resolutions shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk.
§ 5-35 HAMILTON CODE § 5-37
1:28
ARTICLE VI
Municipal Clerk
§ 5-38. Appointment; term of office; general duties.
The Council shall appoint a Municipal Clerk for a term of three years.
Prior to his appointment, he shall be qualified by training and experience
to perform the duties of his office. He shall serve as Municipal Clerk of
the Council, keep its minutes and records of its proceedings, maintain and
compile its ordinances and resolutions as the Charter may require and
perform such other functions as may be required by law.
§ 5-39. Specific duties.
A. Custodian of records. The Municipal Clerk shall have custody of and
safely keep all records, books and documents of the Township, except
those committed by Charter or ordinance to any other office or
transferred thereto by the Mayor. He shall, upon request and upon the
payment of the fees prescribed therefor, for the use of the Township,
furnish a certified copy of any such paper in his custody, under the
corporate Seal of the Township.3
B. Registrar of real property. The Municipal Clerk shall maintain a record
of all real property which the Township may acquire, sell or lease. The
records shall be in such form and contain such information as the
Division of Local Finance in the Department of Community Affairs of the
state shall prescribe. They shall be available for inspection in the office
of the Municipal Clerk.
C. Corporate Seal. The Municipal Clerk shall cause the Corporate Seal to
be affixed to instruments and writings when authorized by ordinance or
resolution of the Council or when necessary to exemplify any document
on record in his office or to certify any act or paper which from the
records in his office appears to have been a public act of the Township
or a public document. He shall not affix the Seal or cause or permit it to
be affixed to any other instrument or writing or other paper unless
required by law or ordinance.
D. Insurance; surety bonds; contracts; licenses. The Municipal Clerk,
subject to law, shall:
(1) Be the depository and custodian of all official surety bonds
furnished by or on account of any officer or employee, except his
own bond, which shall be placed in the custody of the Township
Treasurer; of all insurance policies upon or with respect to risks
insured for the benefit of the Township or to protect it against any
claim, demand or liability whatsoever; and of all formal contracts
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 5-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-39
1:29
§ 5-40. Deputy Municipal Clerk.
for work, labor, services, supplies, equipment and materials to
which the municipality may be a party.
(2) Have custody of all leases of property owned by the Township.
(3) Be the depository for and have custody of all performance bonds
running to the Township as obligee, or any other form of security
given by any contractor, subdivision developer or other person on
account of work done or to be done in or for the Township, and
maintain a reference file on such items.
(4) Administer the provisions of the Township ordinances with
reference to the licensing of occupations and activities for which
licenses are required by law or ordinance to be obtained from the
Municipal Clerk.
(5) Issue such licenses as may be required by the State Alcoholic
Beverage Control Law, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the ordinances of
the Township.
E. Perform all functions. The Municipal Clerk shall perform all the
functions required of municipal clerks by the General Election Law
(N.J.S.A. Title 19) and any other law or ordinance, and have such other,
different and additional functions, powers and duties as may be
prescribed by law or ordinance or delegated to him by the Council.
A. Appointment and term. There shall be an office of Deputy Municipal
Clerk of the Township appointed by the Council, who shall hold the
office for a term of five years from and after the date of appointment
thereto.
B. Duties. The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall act in place of the Municipal
Clerk during any temporary absence, disability or disqualification of the
Municipal Clerk. He shall perform all duties required by law, and shall
perform such other duties as shall be assigned to him by the Municipal
Clerk.
§ 5-39 HAMILTON CODE § 5-40
1:30
Part 4
Departments
ARTICLE VII
Generally
§ 5-41. Departmental organization. [Amended 8-21-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-027]
The Township government shall to the maximum feasible extent have
organization in the departments as provided by the Charter, with the goal
of achieving maximum efficiency and effectiveness in the government. The
principal departments of the Township government shall be:
§ 5-42. Separate boards and agencies not assigned to department.
The following boards and agencies of Township government are not
assigned to any department:
A. Department of Administration.
B. Department of Finance.
C. Department of Law.
D. Department of Public Safety.
E. Department of Community Planning and Compliance.
F. Department of Public Works.
G. Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services.
H. Department of Water Pollution Control.
I. Department of Technology and Economic Development.
A. Municipal Court.
B. Planning Board.
C. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
D. Alcoholic Beverage Control Board.
E. Library Board.
F. Board of Public Officers.
G. Board of Assessment Commissioners.
H. Park and Recreation Advisory Committee.
I. Economic Development Advisory Commission.
§ 5-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-42
1:31
§ 5-43. Powers and duties of department heads.
Department heads shall be appointed and removed as provided by the
Charter, and, except as otherwise provided by this Code, each department
head shall serve during the term of the Mayor appointing him and until
the appointment and qualification of his successor. A director may
simultaneously serve in a subordinate position in his department, as may
any other employee, without additional compensation. Under the
supervision of the Mayor and subordinate to the Charter and this Code,
each department head shall:
J. Landlord-Tenant Relations Commission.
K. Environmental Advisory Commission.4
L. Cultural Affairs Advisory Commission.
M. Redevelopment Agency.
N. Rent Leveling Commission.
A. Subject to the provisions of the civil service and with the approval of the
Mayor, appoint subordinate officers and employees within the
respective departments.
B. Direct and supervise the work of the department and its employees
through the divisions established by this Code.
C. Assign functions, powers and duties of subordinate officers and
employees within the department and modify such assignments as need
appears.
D. Delegate to division heads such of the power as he may deem necessary
for efficient administration.
E. Report at least annually to the Mayor and Council, in such form as shall
be approved by the Business Administrator, on the work of the
department during the preceding year and the goals of the department
for the upcoming year and the goals of the department for the next
three years. [Amended 7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-034]
4. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 2-192(12), Human Relations Advisory Commission, and Sec.
2-192(14), Youth Advisory Commission, which previously followed this subsection, were
repealed 3-19-2013 by Ord. No. 13-012. Former Sec. 2-192(13), Advisory Board of Health,
which previously followed this subsection, was repealed 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029.
Former Sec. 2-192(15), Construction Board of Appeals, which previously followed this
subsection, was repealed 8-8-2012 by Ord. No. 12-038.
§ 5-42 HAMILTON CODE § 5-43
1:32
ARTICLE VIII
Department of Administration
§ 5-44. Establishment; organization. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-029]
There shall be a Department of Administration, the director of which shall
be the Business Administrator, who shall serve the Township in a fulltime
capacity. The Department shall consist of a Division of Personnel, a
Division of Purchasing and a Division of the Budget. Unless another person
is appointed in such capacity, the Business Administrator shall serve as the
head of each of these divisions.
§ 5-45. Qualifications and duties of Business Administrator.
§ 5-46. Division of Personnel.5
Within the Department of Administration there shall be a Division of
Personnel.
A. The Business Administrator shall be chosen solely on the basis of his
executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to
his actual experience in or his knowledge of the duties of his office. At
the time of his appointment he need not be a resident of the Township
or the state, but during his tenure of office he may reside outside the
Township only with the approval of the Council.
B. In addition to supervising or performing the functions of the divisions of
his department, the Business Administrator shall serve as liaison on
behalf of the Mayor to each of the principal departments of the
Township government. The Business Administrator shall also, subject to
the approval of the Mayor, prescribe and enforce rules and regulations
for the efficient management of the Township government, subject to
the Charter and this Code. He shall also perform such other duties as
the Mayor may from time to time prescribe.
A. The Superintendent of Personnel shall be the certifying agent for the
public employees' retirement system of the state, consolidated police
and firemen's pension of the state, police and firemen's retirement
system of the state, old-age and survivors insurance system, and
hospitalization, medical, surgical and other major medical group
insurance plans for employees.
B. The Division of Personnel shall:
(1) From time to time review the civil service job classification of the
Township, including unclassified service and all positions lying
outside the civil service system. Subject to the approval of the
Mayor, there shall be prepared and installed a Township personnel
5. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 45, Personnel Policies.
§ 5-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-46
1:33
§ 5-47. Division of Purchasing.6
Under the supervision of the Business Administrator, the Division of
Purchasing shall be responsible for the purchase of all materials, supplies,
equipment and contractual services used by any department of the
Township government. All purchases shall be made in accordance with
the procedures prescribed by this Code and any other ordinances of the
Township.
§ 5-48. Division of Budget.
Under the supervision of the Business Administrator, the Division of Budget
shall prepare and compile budget studies, analyses and schedules, assist
in the conduct of departmental budget hearings and otherwise assist the
Mayor in such manner as he shall require in the preparation of the annual
municipal budget. This function shall be carried out in accordance with
the further provisions of this Code concerning the preparation and
administration of the budget.
program, including classification and reclassification, a pay plan,
performance standards and uniform evaluation procedures and all
other personnel policies.
(2) Provide and maintain a complete system of central personnel
records of all Township officers and employees.
(3) Review and make positive recommendations concerning all
personnel actions of any department prior to their taking effect.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 5-46 HAMILTON CODE § 5-48
1:34
ARTICLE IX
Department of Finance
§ 5-49. Establishment; organization. [Amended 8-21-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-0277]
There shall be a Department of Finance headed by the Director, who may
be the Business Administrator, the Chief Financial Officer of the Township
or another qualified individual. The Division of Tax Assessment, the Division
of Revenue Collection and the Division of Accounts and Control are each
assigned to the Department of Finance for general administrative and
supervisory purposes. It is recognized that each of these divisions largely
performs statutory duties and in such areas performs its function
independently of departmental supervision.
§ 5-50. Powers and duties of Director. [Amended 9-2-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-030]
The Director of the Department of Finance, subject to the direction and
supervision of the Mayor:
A. May be the Chief Financial Officer of the Township or may appoint a
certified municipal finance officer within the Department of Finance as
Chief Financial Officer with the advice and consent of the Mayor, who
shall act as chief custodian of Township funds.
B. Shall account for and preaudit and control all Township revenues and
expenditures.
C. Shall prescribe, install and enforce a uniform system of accounts,
including forms, standards and procedures, for the use of all
departments of the Township government and of all agencies expending
Township funds.
D. Shall be responsible for the safety and investment of the Township's
funds, the management of the Township debt, including bond and note
issues, the development of financial policies for recommendation to the
Mayor and the safeguarding of the Township's financial interests to the
fullest extent.
E. Shall be responsible for the collection and payment of all payroll
deductions.
F. Shall have custody of all investments and invested funds of the
Township or in its possession in a fiduciary capacity, except as
otherwise provided by law, and have the safekeeping of all bonds and
notes for transfer, registration or exchange, and invest or deposit all
moneys not required for current operation in interest-bearing accounts.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 5-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-51
1:35
§ 5-51. Division of Accounts and Control.8
Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of Accounts
and Control. Under the direction and supervision of the Director/CFO, the
Division shall:
§ 5-52. Division of Tax Assessments.
The Division of Tax Assessments is assigned to the Department of Finance
for the general purpose of administrative supervision but without regard
to the independent duties of the office. The head of the Division of Tax
Assessments shall be the Tax Assessor. The Tax Assessor shall be appointed
to serve for a four-year term commencing on July 1 in the year of his
appointment as provided by law. He shall have, perform and discharge all
of the functions, powers and duties prescribed for Assessors by general law
and municipal ordinance. Prior to his appointment, the Assessor shall be
qualified by training or experience or a combination thereof in evaluation
A. Maintain and operate the Township's central bookkeeping and
accounting records according to sound accounting principles and in
accordance with the requirements of the Director of the State Division
of Local Government Services.
B. Audit all receipts and disbursements of the Township government and
of each of its departments and preaudit all bills, claims and demands
against the Township, including payrolls, and require each department
head to certify that any materials, supplies and equipment have been
received and accepted as specified and that the services have been duly
rendered.
C. Control all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not
exceeded and maintain such books and records as may be required for
the proper exercise of such budgetary control.
D. Review each proposed expenditure and commitment under an
encumbrance system to be made on behalf of any department for
conformity with state law, the Charter and the ordinances of the
Township, and authorize only such expenditures and commitments as
conform to all the requirements of this chapter.
E. Install, operate and maintain a central payroll system and all social
security, pension and insurance records for personnel of all
departments.
F. Submit a monthly report to the Township Council and Mayor of
revenues, expenditures, cash balances and investments held, including,
in the case of cash balances and investments, the name of the
depositories, type of account or investment, date of maturity, interest
rate and location of investments held for safekeeping.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 5-51 HAMILTON CODE § 5-52
1:36
and assessment of real and personal property. Unless protected by any
other provision of law, he shall possess a valid Tax Assessor's certificate.
The Tax Assessor shall:
§ 5-53. Division of Revenue Collections.
The Division of Revenue Collections is assigned to the Department of
Finance for the general purpose of administrative supervision but without
regard to the independent duties of the office. The Tax Collector shall
be the head of the Division and shall be appointed for a four-year term
commencing on January 1 of the year of his appointment as provided by law.
He shall have, perform and exercise all the functions, powers and duties as
are provided by general law and ordinance. He shall receive and collect all
moneys assessed or raised by taxation or assessment and other municipal
charges assigned to the Division. He shall keep proper records and report to
the Director at least once a month on all receipts and deposits made by him
and shall in such report account for all moneys for which he is responsible.
He shall keep a current record of all tax title liens, advising the Director
promptly as such liens become subject to foreclosure under the law. He shall
enforce the payment of delinquent taxes by the means provided by law as
soon as they become delinquent. He shall also perform such other duties as
are prescribed by law and municipal ordinance. He shall be responsible for
all tax searches required to be furnished relating to the property taxes and
other municipal charges or liens of the Township.
A. Maintain adequate assessment records of each separate parcel of real
property assessed or exempted.
B. Maintain a current Tax Map of the Township as a public record and
cause to be recorded thereon all changes in ownership or character of
the real property assessed, employing for that purpose the facilities of
the Division of Engineering and other divisions and departments as may
be required.
§ 5-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-53
1:37

ARTICLE X
Department of Law
§ 5-54. Establishment; organization.
There shall be a Department of Law, the head of which shall be the
Township Attorney. The Township Attorney shall serve full-time. There shall
be assigned to the Department of Law for administrative purposes and for
the purpose of reporting on work loads and results of cases the Office
of Public Defender and the Office of Prosecutor-Police Legal Advisor. It is
understood that each of these two attorney positions is independent as
regards the carrying out of the duties as an attorney, and such positions
shall in no way be subject to the jurisdiction of the Municipal Attorney in
the independent pursuit of the litigation with which they are charged.
§ 5-55. Duties of Township Attorney.
A. It shall be the duty of the Township Attorney to attend all meetings of
the Council. He shall advise the Council, the Mayor, the department
heads and officers of the Township in all matters of law. He shall
represent the Township in all judicial and administrative proceedings in
which the Township or any of its officers or agencies may be a party or
have an interest. He shall give all legal counsel and advice where
required by the Council or the administration and shall, in general,
serve as the legal advisor to the Council and the administration in all
matters of Township business.
B. In furtherance of such general powers and duties but without limitation
thereto, the Township Attorney shall:
(1) Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents,
contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions made, executed or
adopted by or on behalf of the Township.
(2) Subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council, conduct appeals
from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any interest of the
Township as he may determine to be necessary or desirable.
(3) Subject to the approval of the Council, have power to enter into any
agreement or compromise or settlement of any litigation in which
the Township is involved.
(4) Render opinions in writing upon any question of law submitted to
him by the Mayor or the Council with respect to their official
powers and duties and perform such duties as may be necessary to
provide legal counsel to the Mayor and the Council in the
administration of Township affairs.
(5) With the approval of the Mayor, appoint special counsel as may be
required and approved, including but not limited to counsel
required in relation to any federally aided or state-aided planning,
renewal, development or redevelopment project.9
§ 5-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-56
1:39
§ 5-56. Duties of Public Defender. [Amended 9-21-1994 by Ord. No.
94-041; 10-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-029; 5-6-1998 by Ord. No. 98-022]
The duties of the Public Defender shall be as follows:
A. He shall attend all sessions of the Municipal Court as required and shall
serve as the defense attorney for any and all indigent defendants
charged with the violation of the Disorderly Persons Act or Motor
Vehicle Act or any other offense or charge which carries with it a
penalty of substantial fine, incarceration or loss of driving privileges, or
any other charge or complaint which the Supreme Court of the state
has determined entitles such defendants to have counsel provided.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Municipal Judge of the Township to
ascertain whether such indigent defendants desire the services of a
public defender and are in fact indigent, and determine whether or
not the charges sufficiently warrant the assignment of the Public
Defender and, in such cases, to make the actual assignment to the
Public Defender.
(2) If the Public Defender ascertains that such defendant so assigned is
not in fact indigent, he will so advise the Judge, who will make the
final determination in regard to whether such defendant is entitled
to the services of the Public Defender.
(3) Any person applying for representation by a Municipal Public
Defender shall be required to pay an application fee as set forth in
Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code; provided, however, that
the Municipal Court may postpone or waive the payment of all of
said fee if the Court determines, in its discretion, that the payment
of said fee will impose an unreasonable burden on the person
seeking representation by the Municipal Court Public Defender.
Any person otherwise requesting and receiving the assistance of a
Municipal Public Defender while appearing before the Municipal
Court shall be required to pay an administrative fee not to exceed
the fee as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees; provided, however, that
the Municipal Court may postpone or waive the payment of all of
said fee if the Court determines, in its discretion, that the payment
of said fee will impose an unreasonable burden on the person.
[Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
B. When the indigent defendant is represented by the Public Defender and
is found guilty of charges against him, the Public Defender shall advise
the defendant as to the possibility of filing an appeal and, if he deems it
appropriate, shall take the necessary steps with the County Public
Defender's Office and shall make definite arrangements as to whether
the Municipal Public Defender or the County Public Defender shall
perform the services incidental and necessary to the appeal.
9. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(6), regarding the serving of the Township Attorney as
attorney for the Planning Board, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 18-052.
§ 5-56 HAMILTON CODE § 5-56
1:40
§ 5-57. Powers and duties of Municipal Prosecutor-Police Legal
Advisor.
The Municipal Prosecutor-Police Legal Advisor shall:
C. The Public Defender shall provide the Township Attorney with a
monthly report outlining his activities and including the number of
cases handled and the disposition thereof, and the number of appeals
and their disposition.
A. Participate in and prosecute all cases when necessary or practical in the
Municipal Court of the Township, including all criminal and quasicriminal
matters and all complaints by Township officials, inspectors
and department heads, and shall, in addition, serve as the attorney for
all police officers in such proceedings.
B. Have the power and authority, to the extent not inconsistent with any
statutes of the state or ordinances of the Township, to settle,
compromise, downgrade or dismiss any complaints when in his
judgment the best interests of the Township will be served.
C. Act as police legal advisor, including keeping the Director of Public
Safety, the Chief of Police, officers and police members advised as to the
changes in the state statutes or ordinances of the Township and as to
significant and current developments of judicial decisions.
D. Formulate and conduct a continuing educational program for the Police
Division, which shall include appropriate memoranda, courses and
lectures on administration, modern law enforcement procedures,
proper filing of complaints, search and seizure, the issue of warrants
and other pertinent activities normally carried on by the Police Division.
E. Provide a legal opinion upon any legal, police or Municipal Court matter
when requested by the Mayor, Township Council, Municipal Judge or
Township Attorney, the Chief of Police, any senior police officer or any
department head of the Township.
F. Represent the Township, Municipal Court and Township police officers
on appeal from any decision rendered by the Municipal Court.
G. Provide the Municipal Attorney with a monthly report outlining the
activities of his office, including the number of cases handled,
disposition, courses given and other activities.
§ 5-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-57
1:41

ARTICLE XI
Department of Public Safety
§ 5-58. Establishment; organization. [Amended 9-23-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-045]
There shall be a Department of Public Safety, the head of which shall
be the Director. Within the Department of Public Safety there shall be a
Police Division, Special Police Officers, the Office of Municipal Emergency
Management and the Office of Juvenile Advisor.
§ 5-59. Police Division. [Amended 7-6-1994 by Ord. No. 94-032;
8-21-2002 by Ord. No. 02-027; 2-4-2004 by Ord. No. 04-007;
9-23-2004 by Ord. No. 04-045; 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-004;
9-3-2008 by Ord. No. 08-042]
A. There is hereby created in and for the Township a Police Division which
shall consist of no more than one Chief of Police, four captains, 12
lieutenants, and such number of sergeants and police officers as
authorized by separate ordinance.
B. The Police Division shall preserve the public peace; protect life and
property; detect, arrest and prosecute offenders of the laws of New
Jersey and the ordinances of the Township; direct and control traffic;
provide attendance and protection during emergencies; provide
appearances in court; cooperate with all other law enforcement
agencies; and provide training for the efficiency of its members and
officer.
C. The Director of Public Safety, or in the absence of the Director of Public
Safety, the Mayor, shall be designated as the appropriate authority as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. The appropriate authority shall be
responsible for the overall performance of the Police Division. The
appropriate authority shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations
for the government of the Police Division and for the discipline of its
members.
D. The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Division and shall be
directly responsible to the appropriate authority for its efficiency and
day-to-day operations. Pursuant to policies established by the
appropriate authority, the Chief of Police shall:
(1) Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police
Division and any special emergency directive for the disposition
and discipline of the Division and its members and officers;
(2) Serve as the hearing officer for all disciplinary matters within the
Police Division. In those disciplinary matters where the Chief of
Police cannot serve as hearing officer, the appropriate authority or
his/her designee shall act as the hearing officer;
§ 5-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-59
1:43
§ 5-60. Special police officers.10 [Amended 8-21-2002 by Ord. No.
02-027]
The Mayor may appoint from time to time special law enforcement officers
in accordance with state law for terms not exceeding one year. The special
law enforcement officers shall possess and exercise all the powers and
duties provided by said statutes during their term in office, but shall not
be continued as regular members of the Police Division and shall not
be entitled to tenure. The Chief of Police may authorize special law
enforcement officers when on duty to exercise the same powers and
authority as regular members of the Police Division including the carrying
of firearms and the power of arrest.
§ 5-61. Civilian section. [Amended 9-23-2004 by Ord. No. 04-045]
The civilian section of the Police Division shall consist of the following:
(3) Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the Police Division;
(4) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers;
(5) Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the
efficient operation of the Police Division to be exercised under the
Chief's direction and control; and
(6) Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as
shall be prescribed on the operations of the Police Division during
the preceding month and make such other reports as may be
requested by the appropriate authority.
E. No person shall be appointed to the Police Division who is not qualified
as provided in the New Jersey Statutes. The appropriate authority may
also require that an applicant for appointment to the Police Division
shall successfully complete a physical, mental and psychological
examination.
A. Police Surgeon. The Police Surgeon conducts all medical examinations
of police officers, including new patrolmen, to determine their fitness.
He makes recommendations related to continued service of members,
examines the members of the force who are about to retire because of
age or physical disability, gives emergency medical treatment to
members of the force who are injured in line of service, assigns them to
hospitals, visits them and gives post-hospital treatment, gives
emergency medical treatment at the scenes of accidents, examines
members of the police force returning to active service from sick leave,
and keeps needed medical and other records in files. The Police
Surgeon is a physician licensed to practice in the state, with a minimum
of one year of experience as a physician.
10.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 66, Special Law Enforcement Officers.
§ 5-59 HAMILTON CODE § 5-61
1:44
§ 5-62. Juvenile Advisor.
B. Police Matron. The Police Matron, under the general direction of the
Police Division, guards and searches apprehended females and
performs related work as assigned. She helps to maintain order and
discipline among female prisoners, searches female prisoners, assists
police officers in the questioning of prisoners and gives needed first aid
in case of accidents.
C. Public Safety Telecommunicators. The Public Safety Telecommunicator
receives complaints from the public concerning crimes and police
emergencies; broadcasts orders to police radio patrol vehicles or
patrolmen to investigate complaints; relays instructions or questions
from remote units; records calls, broadcasts any complaints that are
received; prepares and maintains a variety of records, such as police
logs, blotters and files; and does related work as required.
D. School traffic guard. The school traffic guard regulates and directs the
movement of schoolchildren at a street intersection, paying particular
attention to their safety, and performs other related work as required.
E. Other personnel. The section also consists of clerical workers and other
personnel assigned to the Police Division.
A. Appointment. There may be an officer of the Township known as the
Juvenile Advisor, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council for a term of one year beginning January 1 in
the year in which his appointment shall be made.
B. Duties. The duties of the Advisor shall be part-time. He shall work
under and be directly responsible to the Director of Public Safety. He
shall have referred to him through the Director of Public Safety all
matters involving juvenile delinquency in the Township and shall handle
all matters involving juvenile delinquency which are not inconsistent
with the power and authority now exercised by the Municipal Judge and
other public officials. In addition, he shall:
(1) Initiate investigations, hold investigations and hearings, counsel
and advise on matters dealing with juvenile delinquency.
(2) Make records and reports of his investigations, hearings and
conferences, which shall be confidential in nature. He shall
coordinate with the various authorities and departments,
particularly the Police Division, in all matters affecting juveniles
and juvenile delinquency.11
(3) Issue notices and orders necessary for the purpose of enforcing
compliance with matters dealing with investigations.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 5-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-62
1:45
§ 5-63. Office of Municipal Emergency Management.
§ 5-64. Protective custody for DUI arrestees. [Added 9-17-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-039]
(4) Perform any of the other duties required of him by any other
ordinance of the Township.
A. There shall be an Office of Emergency Management, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. App. A:9-40.1 et seq. and Executive Order No. 101, in the
Department of Public Safety, and there shall be a Coordinator of
Emergency Management.
B. The Coordinator of Emergency Management shall be responsible for
the planning, coordinating, directing and control of emergency
management operations.
C. All departments of the Township shall cooperate with and assist the
Office.
A. Any person who is arrested for operating a motor vehicle in violation of
N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 shall be held in protective custody at an appropriate
police or other facility where the person's condition may be monitored.
The person shall be released from protective custody when that person
is considered to no longer be a danger to himself or others. A person
may be considered to no longer be a danger to himself or others when
the person's blood alcohol concentration is less than 0.05%, the person
is no longer under the influence of any intoxicating liquor or narcotic,
hallucinogenic or habit-forming drug to the extent that the person's
facilities are impaired, together with any other relevant criteria.
B. In no event shall the Township's Police Department hold a person
arrested for operating a motor vehicle in violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 in
the protective custody set forth in this section for a period of longer
than eight hours without providing an appropriate hearing before a
Municipal Court Judge.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, provided that it is not a
detriment to the public safety, the Township's Police Department may,
because of the age, health or safety of the arrested person, release the
person pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.22 et seq., or
provide an appropriate alternative to protective custody. The Township,
its Police Department, and the individual police officers and
representatives shall be immune from liability of any kind if a person is
released from custody pursuant to the provisions of this subsection.
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring the use of state
police facilities by the Township for purposes of implementing the
protective custody provided for in this section.
§ 5-62 HAMILTON CODE § 5-65
1:46
§ 5-65. Mutual aid agreement for emergency police service. [Added
12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05-047]
A. Mutual aid agreements established. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156
and N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1 et seq., there are hereby established mutual
aid agreements among and between the Township of Hamilton and each
of the aforementioned municipalities in the County of Mercer, New
Jersey, which shall become effective upon the adoption by one or more
of the aforementioned municipalities (hereinafter referred to as
"participating municipalities") of reciprocal ordinances to provide
mutual aid in police services in case of emergency. This agreement shall
apply whenever this municipality may have an emergency within its
boundaries requiring additional police assistance to protect life and
property, and whenever any of the aforementioned municipalities may
experience a similar emergency.12
B. Emergency defined, S.O.P. For purposes of this section, the term
"emergency" shall be defined to include situations in which the number
of available police officers in a participating municipality is insufficient
to meet the public need in a particular situation and situations where
police aid involving special expertise, training, or equipment is required
in order to protect life and property or to assist in suppressing a riot or
disorder. No formal declaration of emergency is required to implement
the provisions of the mutual aid agreement.
C. Requests for assistance. The Police Chief, Police Director, or acting
head of the Police Department, or Mayor, or chief executive officer of a
participating municipality is hereby authorized to request assistance
from the Chief or other head of the Police Department of any other
participating municipality to provide aid in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-156 et seq.
D. Provision of assistance. A participating municipality shall provide police
assistance when a valid request in accordance with this agreement to
supply personnel is made, to the extent possible without endangering
persons or property within the confines of the providing municipality.
E. Powers, rights, immunities. The members of the providing
municipality's Police Department supplying aid shall have the same
powers, authorities, rights, and immunities as the members of the
police force of the requesting municipality when aid is rendered
therein. Said members shall also have, while so acting, such rights and
immunities as they may otherwise enjoy in the performance of their
normal duties in the municipality rendering such assistance.
12.Editor's Note: In addition to the Township of Hamilton, the communities referenced in
§ 5-65A are as follows: the Township of East Windsor, the Township of Ewing, the Borough
of Hightstown, the Township of Hopewell, the Township of Lawrence, the Borough of
Pennington, the Borough of Princeton, the Township of Princeton, the City of Trenton, the
Township of Washington, and the Township of West Windsor. Said municipalities were
identified as desiring to enter into mutual aid agreements in the recitals included in Ord.
No. 05-047.
§ 5-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-65
1:47
F. County Critical Incident Management Plan. These mutual aid
agreements established herein by and between the aforementioned
municipalities in the County of Mercer shall further authorize mutual
police aid and assistance under the County Critical Incident
Management Plan as established by the Mercer County Prosecutor as
the chief law enforcement official in the county. The plan provides for a
response by specially trained regional emergency response/special
weapons and tactics team in the event of certain hostage, barricade,
sniper, high-risk armed apprehensions, terrorist, or similar situations
occurring within a municipality within the County of Mercer.
G. Benefits, injury, death. Members of the police force of the providing
municipality suffering injury, or their legal representatives, if death
results while rendering assistance in the requested municipality, shall
be entitled to all such salary, pension rights, workers' compensation, or
other benefits, as they would have accrued if such injury or death had
occurred in the performance of duties in their own municipality, with
such benefits to be the responsibility of the providing municipality.
H. Reimbursement.
(1) A municipality receiving police assistance hereunder pursuant to
the terms of the County Critical Incident Management Plan shall
not be required to directly reimburse the regional team for services
so provided. The member municipalities shall, however, otherwise
support the function of the respective regional response teams by
providing the necessary manpower, equipment, and supplies on an
ongoing annual basis pursuant to the terms of the County Critical
Incident Management Plan.
(2) Where emergency police aid is otherwise provided under
circumstances outside of the County Critical Incident Management
Plan, reimbursement shall be pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156, or
such other terms and conditions for reimbursement specifically
agreed to between specific municipalities.
I. Internal affairs. Any complaints of an internal-affairs nature made
against an officer for conduct while serving in a municipality other than
his/her home municipality pursuant to this mutual aid agreement shall
be investigated by appropriately designated police officials from the
home municipality. This investigation may be assisted by police officers
from the municipality where the alleged incident occurred. Any
allegations of potential criminal conduct by an officer shall be
immediately referred to the Mercer County Prosecutor's Office for
review.13
J. Effective date. This section shall take effect upon final passage and
publication according to law. It shall become effective with respect to
this municipality's activities with another participating municipality,
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 5-65 HAMILTON CODE § 5-65
1:48
§ 5-66. Employment of off-duty police officers. [Added 7-22-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-033; amended 12-9-2004 by Ord. No. 04-051; 3-16-2005
by Ord. No. 05-006; 4-22-2010 by Ord. No. 10-012]
when such other participating municipality has adopted an ordinance
reciprocal to this one, and such ordinance has become effective in that
municipality.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a policy regarding
the hiring and use of off-duty Hamilton Township police officers.
(1) Members of the Police Division shall be permitted to accept policerelated
employment only during off-duty hours and only at such
time as will not interfere with the efficient performance of regularly
scheduled or emergency duty for the Township.
(2) Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty police officers shall
first obtain the approval of the Chief of Police or his designee,
which approval shall be granted if, in the opinion of the Chief of
Police or his designee, such employment would not be inconsistent
with the efficient functioning and good reputation of the Police
Division, and would not reasonably endanger or threaten the safety
of the officer or officers who are to perform the work.
B. Insurance requirement.
(1) No party or employer shall employ any off-duty Township police
officer in order to perform the services of security guard, traffic
control officer or plain clothes surveillance officer without having
first filed with the Township's Municipal Clerk a certificate of
comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of not less
than $1,000,000 combined single limits for any one occurrence
with respect to injuries and damages suffered or caused by
Township police officers while in the employ of the party or
employer. Said certificate shall list the Township, the Township's
Police Division and municipal officials, representatives and
employees as additional insureds.
(2) No certificate of insurance required by this section shall be deemed
filed with the Municipal Clerk unless it has first been approved by
the Township's Municipal Attorney.
(3) Any and all policies of insurance evidenced by any certificate filed
hereunder shall be maintained by the party or employer in full
force and effect at all times while any Township police officer is
employed by such party or employer. Upon the change or renewal
of any such policy of insurance, the party or employer shall
forthwith file with the Municipal Clerk a new and current
certificate of insurance in compliance with the foregoing
provisions.
§ 5-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-66
1:49
(4) In the event of an emergency, which results in the person or entity
being precluded from complying with the requirements of this
subsection, the Chief of Police or his designee shall have the
authority to waive said insurance prerequisite prior to approving
the use of off-duty officers for certain police-related employment.
C. Hold harmless. In addition to the aforesaid requirements, the party or
employer shall indemnify and hold harmless the Township, the
Township's Police Division and the municipality's officials,
representatives and employees, from and against any claim, liability,
damage or expense that may arise out of or relate to the actions of:
(1) Any Township police officers employed by the party or employer,
including any claims concerning the alleged negligence of the
Township's police officers; and
(2) The party or employer, its employees, officers and representatives.
D. Escrow accounts.
(1) Except as provided herein below, any party or employer requesting
the services of an off-duty Township police officer shall estimate the
number of hours such law enforcement services are required,
which estimate shall be approved in writing by the Chief of Police
or his designee, and shall establish an escrow account with the
Chief Financial Officer of the Township by depositing an amount
sufficient to cover the rates of compensation and administrative
fees set forth in Subsection F herein below for the total estimated
hours of service.
(2) If the amount required to be deposited with the Township pursuant
to Subsection D(1) herein above exceeds $20,000, an escrow
deposit of $20,000 shall be required. Said $20,000 deposit shall be
maintained until such time as the amount required to be deposited
for all remaining services on any given project shall be less than
$20,000, and then such lesser amount shall be required to be
maintained.
(3) Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty Township police
officers, the Chief of Police or his designee shall verify that the
balance in the escrow account of the party or employer requesting
services is sufficient to cover the compensation and fees for the
number of hours specified in the request for services. The Chief of
Police or his designee shall not post a request for services from any
party or employer unless all fees and compensation required in the
manner described above have been deposited with the Township's
Chief Financial Officer. No officer shall provide any such services
for more hours than are specified in the request for services.
(4) In the event the funds in such an escrow account should become
depleted, services of off-duty police officers shall cease and
requests for further or future services shall not be performed or
§ 5-66 HAMILTON CODE § 5-66
1:50
posted until additional funds have been deposited in the escrow
account in the manner prescribed above.
(5) The party or person requesting such services shall be responsible
for ensuring that the sufficient funds remain in the escrow account
in order to avoid any interruption of services.
(6) Houses of worship, private schools, charities and local public
schools shall be exempt from the requirements for the posting of an
escrow deposit and from the Township administrative fee described
in Subsection F, Rates of compensation; administrative fees;
payment for service, below. [Amended 6-20-2017 by Ord. No.
17-024; 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
(7) In the event of an emergency, which results in the person or entity
being precluded from timely complying with the requirements of
this subsection, the Chief of Police or his designee shall have the
authority to waive the escrow account prerequisite and approve the
use of off-duty officers for certain police-related employment. This
waiver shall be limited to the escrow account/prepayment aspect of
this subsection. The person or entity requesting the law
enforcement services shall remain fully responsible for paying for
same. In the event the person or entity requesting the off-duty
police services fails to submit payment within 30 days of the
approval of the use of the off-duty police officers, the Township
shall not be responsible for paying the subject officers for their offduty
services. The police officers will be limited in their remedies to
pursuing payment from the person or entity who requested, and
received, the services.
E. Requests for services. All requests to the Township for services of offduty
police officers for a period of one week or longer shall be
forwarded to the Chief of Police for posting at least 10 days before such
services are required. The Chief of Police or his designee may relax this
time restriction in the event of an emergency. Any police officers, when
so employed, shall be treated as an employee of the Township;
provided, however, that wages earned for outside employment shall not
be applied toward the pension benefits of police officers so employed,
nor shall hours worked for outside employment be considered in any
way as compensable overtime.
F. Rates of compensation; administrative fees; payment for services.
Rates of compensation for contracting the services of off-duty Township
police officers, including an administrative fee, for the following
assignments shall be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township
Code: [Amended 9-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-036; 7-18-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-029]
(1) For all nontraffic assignments.
(2) For all traffic assignments.
§ 5-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-66
1:51
(3) For all construction project traffic assignments.
G. Use of marked police vehicles. In the event that a party or employer
employs any off-duty Township police officer pursuant to this section, in
addition to any compensation to be paid to the Township pursuant to
the requirements herein, there shall also be a fee as set forth in Chapter
215, Fees, per hour per vehicle for the use of marked police vehicles.
[Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
H. Penalty. Any person or entity who employs off-duty Township police
officers in order to perform the above services without first having
complied with the requirements of this section shall be subject to the
fines set forth in § 1-2 of the Code of the Township of Hamilton for each
day that the party or entity employs any Township police officer, unless
a waiver of said requirements has been granted by the Chief of Police or
his designee.
§ 5-66 HAMILTON CODE § 5-66
1:52
ARTICLE XII
Department of Community Planning and Compliance
§ 5-67. Establishment; organization; purpose. [Amended 6-5-2008
by Ord. No. 08-031; 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-065]
There shall be a Department of Community Planning and Compliance, the
head of which shall be the Director. Within the Department of Community
Planning and Compliance there shall be a Division of Engineering, a
Division of Planning, a Division of Inspections, and a Division of Housing
Inspections and Landlord Compliance. The Department manages and
coordinates the activities of the four divisions in an efficient and compliant
manner.
§ 5-68. Division of Engineering.
§ 5-69. Division of Planning.
A. Qualifications and authority of Township Engineer. The Township
Engineer shall serve as the Superintendent of the Division of
Engineering. He shall be a duly licensed professional engineer of the
state.
B. Duties of Township Engineer. The Township Engineer shall perform
such duties as are prescribed by general law and ordinance and, in
addition, shall:
(1) Prepare or cause to be prepared plans, designs and specifications
for public works and improvements undertaken by the Township
either on force account or by public contract.
(2) Provide and maintain surveys, maps, plans, specifications and
control records with respect to public works and facilities owned or
operated by the Township.
(3) Provide technical and engineering advice and assistance to other
Township departments and divisions as needed and as directed by
the Director of the Department of Community Planning and
Compliance.
C. Surrender of Township property on termination of service. All papers,
documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating to the
administration of engineering duties of the Engineer shall be and
remain the property of the Township. Upon termination of his services
with the Township, the Engineer shall forthwith surrender to any
successor all such property.
A. Township Planner. The Township Planner shall serve as the
Superintendent of the Division of Planning.
(1) Qualifications. The qualifications of the Township Planner shall be
as follows:
§ 5-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-69
1:53
§ 5-70. Division of Inspections. [Amended 11-2-1994 by Ord. No.
94-049; 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-065]
The Division of Inspections shall be headed by a Superintendent, and within
the Division there shall be the Uniform Construction Code Enforcing
Agency, and all officials which are a part thereof, as established by Township
ordinance. The Superintendent of the Division shall emphasize the
coordinated nature of the various inspection functions so that each
inspector shall be responsible for seeking to identify and call to the
attention inspection problems that lie outside his particular jurisdiction.
(a) Graduation from a four-year course at a college of recognized
standing with a major course of study in planning, engineering,
architecture, political science, economics, geography,
landscape architecture, public administration or sociology, or,
in substitution thereof, responsible experience in municipal,
county, regional or state planning on a four-year basis, and a
valid license as a professional planner.
(b) Thorough knowledge of philosophy and principles of planning
and the problems involved in such work.
(2) Duties. The Township Planner shall be responsible for the
organizing, promoting and making of surveys; collection and
compilation of data; conducting investigations and analyses of this
data; the drawing and drafting of maps and charts; and the
interpretations and transpositions of statistical data into visual
form. The Township Planner shall serve as staff to the Planning
Board and, as such, shall assist in preparing and revising the
Master Plan and the administering of a long-term comprehensive
planning service.
B. Office of Housing. There shall be an Office of Housing established
within the Division of Planning under the direction and supervision of
the Chief of the Office of Housing. Subject to the Charter and this Code,
this Office shall:
(1) Administer the various housing programs set up in the Township to
provide housing for families eligible to participate in the program
for low- and moderate-income persons approved in the state and
federal government.
(2) Administer the various Township programs established for the
purpose of rehabilitation of existing housing under applicable local,
state and federal programs.
(3) Undertake any additional related duties as may be directed by the
Director of Community Planning and Compliance.
A. Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency. The various officials
comprising the Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency shall
have such qualifications as are specified in the Uniform Construction
§ 5-69 HAMILTON CODE § 5-70
1:54
§ 5-70.1. Division of Housing Inspections and Landlord Compliance.
[Added 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-065]
The Division of Housing Inspections and Landlord Compliance shall be
headed by a Chief Housing Inspector. The Chief Housing Inspector shall
serve as the Superintendent of the Division of Housing Inspections and
Landlord Compliance. The purpose of this Division is to perform inspections
related to the sale or rental of residential housing units, license landlords,
register rental units and register and perform inspections on abandoned
properties.
Code Act and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. The
powers and duties of such officials shall be as specified in state laws
and regulations and as otherwise designated in Township ordinances.14
A. Housing Inspector. The Housing Inspector shall be appointed with
regard to his or her qualifications and experience in performing the
duties of his or her office. He or she shall be charged with making
housing code inspections and in general enforcing the housing code of
the Township.
14.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 167, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 5-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-70.1
1:55

ARTICLE XIII
Department of Public Works
§ 5-71. Establishment; organization.
There shall be a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be the
Director. Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a Division of
Roads and a Division of Buildings and Grounds.
§ 5-72. Division of Roads.
The Division of Roads shall be headed by a Road Superintendent and shall
be responsible for the maintenance and repair of all roads and drains in
the Township. In addition, the Division shall provide, operate and maintain
the facilities for the collection and disposal of refuse and garbage at such
times and in such manner as may be authorized by the Superintendent and
shall be in charge of and shall operate and maintain the facilities of the
sanitary landfill. The Division shall perform the assembly, installation and
maintenance of traffic control signs and the painting of traffic lines, and
perform related work as required, which shall include the operation and
maintenance of the streetlighting system of the Township, except that the
Police Division shall check for streetlight outages.
§ 5-73. Division of Buildings and Grounds.
The Division of Buildings and Grounds shall maintain all Township buildings
and grounds, all Township-owned property and park facilities, including
lawns and shrubs. The work of this Division shall be under the supervision
of the Division Superintendent, who shall:
A. Supervise and work with a group of employees engaged in the cleaning
and maintenance of buildings and grounds.
B. Inspect, analyze and determine the cleaning work to be done and the
materials needed; establish, maintain and develop effective work plans
for subordinates; and supervise and take a leading part in the cleaning,
maintenance and repair of buildings and grounds.
C. Supervise and take a leading part in the reconditioning, care and
maintenance of grounds and parking areas; make inspections of the
buildings and grounds to note significant conditions and see that
needed work is done; and paint, store, safeguard, distribute and
supervise the proper use of needed equipment, materials and supplies.
D. Supervise all aspects of park maintenance and repair operations.
§ 5-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-73
1:57

ARTICLE XIV
Department of Water Pollution Control
§ 5-74. Establishment; organization. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-029]
There shall be a Department of Water Pollution Control, the head of which
shall be the Director. Besides the Director, the Department shall consist
of the Plant Superintendent, the Chief Plant Operator, the Construction
and Maintenance Foreman and such other personnel as may be necessary,
who shall have such authority as provided by ordinance and in N.J.S.A.
40A:26A-1 et seq., the Municipal and County Sewerage Act.
A. Plant Superintendent. The Plant Superintendent shall make and
execute plans for the effective utilization of available equipment and
supervise the employees under his jurisdiction. He shall prepare clear,
sound, accurate and informative reports containing findings,
conclusions and recommendations and shall supervise the obtaining,
storing, safeguarding, distributing and proper use of needed materials,
equipment and supplies and do related work as required.
B. Chief Plant Operator. The Chief Plant Operator shall be directly
responsible to the Plant Superintendent and shall be responsible for:
(1) The operation, maintenance and repair of the water pollution
control plants.
(2) The valves and other equipment, and have charge of and perform
the work involved in operating, repairing, adjusting and regulating
chemical feed machines, chlorinators, sludge digestion pumps, flow
meters and other equipment. He shall have charge of and perform
the work involved in checking and adjusting the flow and levels in
the various tanks and sludge chambers as required; have charge of
and perform the work involved in maintaining proper liquid levels
and pressure accumulators; and read and check gas meters, check
flow charts and regulate gas cocks.
C. Construction and Maintenance Foreman. The Construction and
Maintenance Foreman shall be directly responsible to the Plant
Superintendent and shall be responsible for:
(1) The construction of new lines and laterals, manholes, extensions of
the system and such other construction as may be necessary.
(2) All maintenance and repairs outside the plant facilities, including
replacement of lines, repairs of leaks, flushing of sewers, and
observation, both visual and mechanical, of all lines and
equipment.
(3) The operation, maintenance and repair of all automatic pumping
stations of the Township.
§ 5-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-74
1:59

ARTICLE XV
Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services
§ 5-75. Establishment; organization. [Amended 8-21-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-027]
There shall be a Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans
Services, the head of which shall be the Director. Within the Department of
Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services, there shall be a Division
of Health, a Division of Recreation, an Office of Senior Citizens Programs
and an Office of Veterans Services.
§ 5-76. Division of Health. [Amended 8-21-2002 by Ord. No. 02-027]
A. Organization. The Health Officer shall be the Superintendent of the
Division of Health. He shall be appointed with regard to specialized
training and experience in public health and be the holder of a health
officer's license issued by the State Department of Health. Within the
Division of Health there shall be such sanitary inspectors as may be
provided for from time to time by the Council.
B. Duties and qualifications of sanitary inspectors.
(1) It shall be the duty of the sanitary inspectors to:
(a) Inspect the sanitation of yards, alleys and buildings in any
assigned district and make investigations in case of dog bites
and rabies.
(b) Enforce the ordinances concerning ragweed eradication.
(c) Collect samples of water and milk for examination.
(d) Make inspections to enforce the sanitary and the health laws.
(e) Inspect homes and note violations of the sanitary health laws,
and, when violations are found, determine and cause the
taking of proper corrective action.
(f) Inspect restaurants and other eating places and give testimony
in court cases.
(g) Make special investigations and reports and perform related
work as required.
(2) To be eligible for appointment as a sanitary inspector, an individual
shall have the qualifications required by N.J.S.A. 26:3-20 and other
applicable statutes.
C. Additional units of Division. There are further assigned to the Division
of Health the Public Health Nurse, the Bureau of Vital Statistics, the
Township Physician and the Division of Animal Control.
§ 5-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-77
1:61
§ 5-77. Emergency powers of Health Officer regarding
contaminated or unwholesome food.
§ 5-78. Division of Recreation.
The Division of Recreation shall be headed by the Superintendent. The
Division shall:
A. Whenever the Health Officer finds that the public safety will not permit
delay, he may exercise one or more of the following powers without
having to resort to legal proceedings and without the necessity of
giving notice or holding any hearing which would otherwise be required
under any provision of this Code:
(1) Power to prevent the sale of food. The Health Officer may prohibit
the importation into the Township or sale of any food, drink or other
item intended for human consumption or use from a source
suspected of being infected, contaminated, unsanitary, unhealthy
or dangerous.
(2) Power to seize and destroy food. The Health Officer may order the
seizure and destruction of any food, drink or other item intended
for human consumption which is unwholesome or dangerous or
likely to cause sickness or injury to the persons who consume it.
B. Any person knowing of anything being offered for sale as food for
human consumption which he has reason to believe is spoiled,
contaminated or otherwise unfit for human consumption shall
immediately report such fact to the Health Officer.
A. Administer and operate the Township's parks, playgrounds and playing
fields, facilities for indoor and outdoor sports and athletic and
recreational programs and activities for children and adults.
B. Administer and operate the Township's community centers, social
centers and recreational functions and activities relating thereto.
C. Sponsor and administer cultural activities in cooperation with other
public and private agencies and organizations.
D. Use and operate public school property upon the approval and
agreement of the Board of Education to the extent that such property
may be adaptable and available for recreational programs and purposes
of the Division.
E. Plan and develop public recreational areas and facilities; promote and
direct a year-round program of leisure activities for children, youth and
adults of the Township; stimulate the constructive use of leisure time of
residents of the Township; and work toward the reduction of
delinquency and the optimum coordination and development of public
and private recreational facilities within the Township.15
§ 5-77 HAMILTON CODE § 5-79
1:62
§ 5-79. Office of Senior Citizens Programs.
The Office of Senior Citizens Programs shall be headed by a Supervisor, who
shall:
§ 5-80. Office of Veterans Services. [Added 8-21-2002 by Ord. No.
02-027]
The Office of Veterans Services shall:
§ 5-81. Animal Control. [Added 8-21-2002 by Ord. No. 02-027]
Certified animal control officers, as defined by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq.,
employed by the Township shall have the following power and authority:
A. Administer all senior citizens programs (social, recreational and
medical, etc.), throughout the Township.
B. Serve as coordinator between the Township and all other levels of
government for procurement of public funds and technical assistance
relative to senior citizens programs.
A. Coordinate quality-of-life programs for veterans.
B. Serve as coordinator between the Township and all other levels of
government for the procurement of assistance relative to veterans and
their families.
C. Provide assistance to veterans in obtaining state and federal
entitlements, and provide advise and support to veterans who are
reentering civilian life.
A. Enforce all state laws and Township ordinances enacted for the
protection of animals, including, but not limited to, animal control,
animal cruelty and animal welfare;
B. Investigate and sign complaints concerning any violation of an animal
control, animal welfare or animal cruelty law of the state or ordinance
of the Township; and
C. Act as an officer for the detection of offenders against the animal
control, animal welfare and animal cruelty laws of the state and
ordinances of the Township.
15.Editor's Note: Former § 2-355, pertaining to Division of Public Assistance, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 8-21-2002 by Ord. No. 02-027.
§ 5-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-81
1:63

ARTICLE XVI
Department of Technology and Economic Development
[Added 8-21-2002 by Ord. No. 02-027]
§ 5-82. Establishment; organization.
There shall be a Department of Technology and Economic Development, the
head of which shall be the Director, who shall serve the Township in a fulltime
capacity. The Department shall consist of the Office of Technology and
the Office of Economic Development. Unless another person is appointed in
such capacity, the Director shall serve as the head of these offices.
§ 5-83. Office of Technology.
The Office of Technology shall:
§ 5-84. Office of Economic Development.
The Office of Economic Development shall be responsible for:
A. Continuously evaluate and improve the technological infrastructure of
the Township's governmental operations;
B. Establish policies and standards to ensure the security and integration
of improved technology throughout the municipal operation;
C. Provide assistance to the Township's municipal agencies to ensure
efficient and effective service to the residents of the Township through
the use of technology;
D. Assess and monitor the Township's technological investments so as to
take advantage of newer, more cost-effective methodologies.
E. Coordinate strategies to make municipal technological operations "user
friendly" to promote better communications between governmental
departments and with members of the public.
A. Attracting new quality ratables to expand the Township's revenue base
while providing improved employment opportunities for residents and
enhancing the quality and variety of goods and services offered to the
community;
B. Coordinating efforts to enable established businesses to continue to
thrive and expand as business residents of the community;
C. Establishing and maintaining communications with the Township's
business community so as to optimize the Township's economic
development and quality of life;
D. Establishing initiatives to encourage a strong and diversified local
economy.
§ 5-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-84
1:65

Part 5
Boards, Commissions, Committees And Agencies
ARTICLE XVII
Alcoholic Beverage Control Board
§ 5-85. Designation of Council.
The Council shall serve as the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board and shall
be the issuing authority for the Township pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 99, Alcoholic Beverages, Article II, Licensing and Regulation.
§ 5-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-85
1:67

ARTICLE XVIII
Board of Assessment Commissioners
§ 5-86. Establishment; membership.
There shall be a Board of Assessment Commissioners composed of three
residents of the Township who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council.
§ 5-87. Powers and duties.
The members of the Board of Assessment Commissioners shall levy
assessments against property owners who shall benefit from improvements
made by the installation of curbs, sidewalks and water main installations.
§ 5-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-87
1:69

ARTICLE XIX
Board of Public Officers
§ 5-88. Establishment; membership.
There shall be a five-member Board of Public Officers appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. The Board, which shall
include the Superintendent of the Division of Engineering, the
Superintendent of the Division of Planning and one other official appointed
by the Mayor, shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor, and any member may
be removed with or without cause.
§ 5-89. Powers and duties.
The Board of Public Officers shall have such powers and duties as are
set forth in Chapter 146, Buildings, Unfit or Abandoned. The Board shall
delegate functions thereunder only to agents or employees provided by
the Council and shall delegate only those functions that are authorized by
resolution of the Council.16
16.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 2, Art. V, Division 5, Construction Board of Appeals, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 8-8-2012 by Ord. No. 12-038. See now Ch.
167, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 5-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-89
1:71

ARTICLE XX
Cultural Affairs and Performing Arts Advisory Commission
§ 5-90. Establishment; membership; duties. [Amended 6-19-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-023]
There shall be a Cultural Affairs and Performing Arts Advisory Commission,
which shall consist of not more than nine members to be appointed by
the Mayor, with advice and consent from Council, to serve without
compensation for a term of one year with extensions as approved by
Council. One member of the Cultural Affairs and Performing Arts Advisory
Commission shall be appointed by the Council from among the members
of the Township Council. The Cultural Affairs and Performing Arts Advisory
Commission shall work together with organizations and individuals in the
performing arts to encourage and guide the development of cultural
activities and performing arts throughout the Township. The Commission
should encourage the performance of both professional and amateur groups
of all performing arts, such as, but not limited to, drama, dance and music,
and shall encourage the development of cultural activities.
§ 5-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-90
1:73

ARTICLE XXI
Economic Development Advisory Commission
§ 5-91. Establishment; membership. [Amended 3-4-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-005]
There is hereby established for the Township an Economic Development
Advisory Commission, to consist of citizens, not to exceed 25 in number,
as the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council may from time
to time appoint. The members shall serve for three-year terms, except that
the members first appointed to the Commission shall be appointed on a
staggered basis.
§ 5-92. Officers. [Amended 6-5-2008 by Ord. No. 08-032]
The members of the Economic Development Advisory Commission shall
choose annually from among its members a Chairman and such other
officers as they may deem necessary. The Mayor and Director of Technology
and Economic Development shall be ex officio members of the Commission.
§ 5-93. Purpose. [Amended 6-5-2008 by Ord. No. 08-032; 10-6-2010
by Ord. No. 10-034]
The Economic Development Advisory Commission shall constitute the
corporate instrumentality of the Township for the following purposes:
A. To study, analyze and promote various business development initiatives
to attract business and industry to locate in or expand their operations
in the Township.
B. To advertise the availability and benefits of Township industrial,
commercial, office, retail buildings and land sites to prospective
developers, tenants, investors and corporate entities.
C. To inquire into, survey and publicize the extent, advantages, and utility
of available buildings and vacant land sites in the Township, whether
private sector or municipally owned.
D. To periodically survey existing business and industry in the Township to
ascertain any problems or concerns they may be experiencing that
impacts negatively on their business operations and address these
needs that could potentially result in their closure and/or relocation out
of the Township.
E. To develop and promote events that recognize selected business and
industry operations who have substantially contributed to the economic
well-being of the Township by providing employment opportunities for
its residents.
F. To develop and promote various events such as business networking
opportunities, seminars, business card exchanges, ground breaking
events, and business promotion activities.
§ 5-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-94
1:75
§ 5-94. Reports.
The Economic Development Advisory Commission shall make a semiannual
report to the Mayor and Council, setting forth in detail its operations and
transactions.
§ 5-95. Funding. [Added 6-5-2008 by Ord. No. 08-03217]
There shall be appropriated in each annual budget of the Township such
sum as may be determined by the Mayor and Council to be necessary for the
purpose of providing funding to administer this Commission. Any funding
above and beyond that provided by the Township and raised through
activities of this Commission may be accepted only upon prior approval by
the Mayor or his designee.
§ 5-96. Trust account. [Added 10-8-2008 by Ord. No. 08-057]
The Economic Development Advisory Commission shall be permitted to
establish and maintain a trust account, upon prior approval by the Mayor
or his designee, for the purpose of carrying out those purposes enumerated
in § 5-93 of this chapter. The trust account shall be set up requiring two
signatures, the Treasurer of the Commission and the Township Chief
Financial Officer.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 5-94 HAMILTON CODE § 5-96
1:76
ARTICLE XXII
Environmental Advisory Commission
§ 5-97. Establishment.
The Township Environmental Advisory Commission is hereby established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 through 40:56A-5.
§ 5-98. Membership; associate members. [Amended 3-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-006]
A. The Environmental Advisory Commission shall consist of not more than
seven members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Council, one of whom shall also be a member of the Planning Board
and all of whom shall be residents of the Township. The members shall
serve without compensation. The Mayor shall annually designate one of
the members to serve as Chairman and presiding officer of the
Commission. The terms of office of the first Commissioners shall be for
one, two or three years, to be designated by the Mayor in making his
appointments. Their successors shall be appointed for terms of three
years and until the appointment and qualification of their successors.
The Mayor or Council may remove any member of the Commission for
cause, on written charges served upon the member and after a hearing
thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or
by counsel. A vacancy on the Commission occurring otherwise than by
expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as an original appointment.
B. The Mayor may appoint four associate members for a term of one year.
Each year all four terms shall expire. The associate members shall not
be entitled to vote with the Commission.
C. The Mayor shall appoint two alternate members, designated as
Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2, to serve for terms of two years. The
terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be two years for
Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2 so that the term of not
more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the
appointing authority for the unexpired term only. An alternate member
shall not be permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has either
directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest. An alternate
member may, after public hearing if he or she requests one, be removed
by the governing body for cause. An alternate member may participate
in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the
absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
§ 5-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-99
1:77
§ 5-99. Powers and duties generally.
The Environmental Advisory Commission is established for the protection,
development or use of natural resources, including water resources, located
within the territorial limits of the Township. The Commission shall have
power to conduct research into the use and possible use of the open
land areas of the Township and may coordinate the activities of unofficial
bodies organized for similar purposes, and may advertise, prepare, print
and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which, in its
judgment, it deems necessary for its purposes. It shall keep an index of
all open areas, publicly or privately owned, including open marshlands,
swamps and other wetlands, in order to obtain information on the proper
use of such areas, and may from time to time recommend to the Planning
Board plans and programs for inclusion in the Master Plan and the
development and use of such areas. The Commission shall have such
additional powers as are conferred by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 5-100. Recommendation of acquisitions.
The Environmental Advisory Commission may recommend, for the approval
of the Council, the acquisition of property, both real and personal, in the
name of the Township, by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease, for
any of its purposes, and shall administer the property for such purposes,
subject to the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may
be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement,
including a conservation easement, covenant or other contractual right,
including a conveyance on conditions or with limitations or reversions, as
may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future
use of or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other
lands and water areas in the Township.
§ 5-101. Records and reports.
The Environmental Advisory Commission shall keep records of its meetings
and activities and make a semiannual report to the Mayor and Council.
§ 5-102. Auxiliary personnel.
The Environmental Advisory Commission may appoint such clerks and other
employees as it may from time to time require, provided that such
appointments shall be within the limits of funds appropriated to it by the
Council in the Council's discretion.18
18.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 2, Art. V, Division 9, Human Relations Advisory Commission,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed 3-19-2013 by Ord. No. 13-012.
§ 5-99 HAMILTON CODE § 5-102
1:78
ARTICLE XXIII
Library Board
§ 5-103. Public library established.
There is hereby established in the Township the Hamilton Township Free
Public Library.
§ 5-104. Membership; appointment of members; purpose.
[Amended 3-19-2008 by Ord. No. 08-009]
A Board of Trustees consisting of nine members shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council as provided by law in
N.J.S.A. 40:54-9, which Board shall hold in trust and manage all property of
the library as provided for by law.
§ 5-105. Compensation of members; expenditures.
The members of the Library Board of Trustees shall receive no
compensation for their services and shall not incur any expense or enter
into any obligations to an amount in excess of the annual appropriation for
library purposes and of the funds on hand.
§ 5-106. Reports.
The Library Board of Trustees shall semiannually make a report of its
transactions and accounts and the state and condition of the library to the
Mayor and Council.
§ 5-107. Powers and duties.
The Library Board of Trustees shall have all the powers conferred by statute
and shall comply with applicable statutes.
§ 5-108. Maintenance of library.
The Council shall annually appropriate and raise by taxation the money
necessary for the support and maintenance of the library as provided for by
law.
§ 5-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-108
1:79

ARTICLE XXIV
Municipal Alliance Committee on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse
§ 5-109. Findings; policy.
Alcoholism and drug abuse are significant community health issues. The
Township has addressed such issues through various substance abuse
education, prevention and public awareness programs. It is recognized
that attainment of the goal of reducing alcoholism and drug abuse in our
community will be fostered by cooperation and active participation by the
Township with those county and state agencies established to address
such problems. Therefore, the Township reaffirms its policy to promote the
health, safety, morals and welfare of the citizens of the Township by the
creation of the Township Municipal Alliance Committee on Alcoholism and
Drug Abuse for the purpose of supplementing existing substance abuse
education, prevention and public awareness programs.
§ 5-110. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
COMMITTEE — The Township Municipal Alliance Committee on Alcoholism
and Drug Abuse.
§ 5-111. Creation; membership; compensation. [Amended
6-22-1994 by Ord. No. 94-023]
There is hereby created a Municipal Alliance Committee on Alcoholism and
Drug Abuse, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-9, consisting of 11 members. The
following individuals shall serve as ex officio members of the Committee:
the Mayor, the Chief of the Division of Police, the Presiding Judge of the
Township Municipal Court and the Superintendent of the Township School
District. Designees of ex officio members may attend meetings of the
Committee on behalf of said ex officio member, which designees are
empowered to vote on all matters before the Committee. Seven private
citizens who reside in the Township shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council, selected on the basis of their
qualifications and fitness for service on the Committee. Committee
members shall serve without compensation.
§ 5-112. Term of office of private citizen members.
The terms of the private citizen members of the Committee shall be three
years, except that, of those first appointed, one shall serve a three-year
term, one shall serve a two-year term and one shall serve a one-year
term. The terms of the private citizen members shall continue until their
respective successors are appointed.
§ 5-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-113
1:81
§ 5-113. Removal of members.
Any member of the Committee may be removed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council for cause on written charges served upon
the person, and after a hearing thereon, where the person shall be entitled
to be heard and present evidence in person or by counsel.
§ 5-114. General powers and duties.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-7, the Committee shall identify alcoholism and
drug abuse prevention, education and community needs in the Township in
consultation with the county local advisory committee on alcoholism and
drug abuse; implement programs established via the county annual alliance
plan; and seek funds in conjunction with the Council from appropriate
county and state authorities in support of substance abuse programs.
§ 5-115. Organizational meeting.
The Committee shall organize at its first meeting, which shall be held
within 30 days of appointment of all Committee members as set forth in
this article, at which time the Committee shall select a Chairperson and
Secretary as provided for in this article and provide for regular meetings at
a time and place within the Township.
§ 5-116. Chairperson; Secretary. [Amended 6-5-2008 by Ord. No.
08-033]
There shall be a Chairperson of the Committee elected by its members, who
shall serve for a one-year period and until a successor is selected by the
Committee. There shall be a Secretary of the Committee appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. The Secretary shall serve
for a one-year term.
§ 5-117. Conformance with Open Public Meetings Act; minutes.
The Committee shall conduct its regular meetings in accordance with the
Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq. Accurate minutes of all
meetings shall be kept and filed with the Secretary of the Committee.
§ 5-118. Quorum.
A majority of the whole number of regular members shall constitute a
quorum. If a quorum is not present one hour after the appointed time for
any meeting, the presiding officer shall declare the meeting adjourned.
§ 5-119. Reports.
The Committee shall make a semiannual report to the Mayor of its activities,
including receipt and disbursement of funds.
§ 5-113 HAMILTON CODE § 5-120
1:82
§ 5-120. Statutory authority.
The Township Municipal Alliance Committee on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse
shall be appointed pursuant to and have such authority provided by N.J.S.A.
26:2BB-9 and by other ordinances of the Township applicable thereto.
§ 5-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-120
1:83

ARTICLE XXV
Municipal Court
§ 5-121. Establishment; authority.
There shall be a Municipal Court in the Township pursuant to the provisions
of state law, to be known as the "Municipal Court of the Township of
Hamilton, Mercer County." The Municipal Court shall have a seal bearing
the impress of the name of the court. The court shall be held in the
Municipal Court, or such other place as the Council shall designate from
time to time, and shall exercise all the functions, powers, duties and
jurisdiction conferred by law upon municipal courts.
§ 5-122. Municipal Judges.
There shall be a Presiding Municipal Judge and other Municipal Judges as
may be allowed by law, appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the Council for a term of three years. The Presiding Municipal Judge shall
be responsible for the administration of the Court, as well as assignment of
cases to Judges.
§ 5-123. Administrator.
There shall be an Administrator of the Municipal Court, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor and who shall perform the functions and duties
prescribed for him by law, by the rules applicable to Municipal Courts and
by the Municipal Judge. His duties shall include but not be limited to:
A. Carrying out the rules, regulations, policies and procedures relating to
the operation of the court.
B. Interviewing and speaking to persons wishing to file criminal
complaints or wishing information in this regard, and receiving
complaints and dispensing information relating to court matters.
C. Maintaining the financial records of the court.
D. Attending court; recording pleas, judgments and dispositions;
arranging trial calendars; signing court documents; and preparing and
issuing warrants and commitments.
E. Taking and preparing bail bonds, recognizances and their security in
lieu thereof; making inquiry concerning their sufficiency and equity;
and receiving and accounting for fines and costs.
F. Interviewing persons on informal police court matters to determine if
there is a basis for formal action and, if necessary, issuing summonses
requiring court appearances; and maintaining and classifying records
and files.
G. Maintaining, forwarding, receiving and reporting such records, reports
and files as are required by the State Director of Motor Vehicles.
§ 5-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-124
1:85
§ 5-124. Deputy Administrators.19
There may be Deputy Administrators of the Municipal Court appointed by
the Mayor, who shall perform the functions assigned by the Municipal Judge
and by the Municipal Court Administrator.
§ 5-125. Fee for search of record.20
The Municipal Court shall charge a fee as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of
the Township Code, for all searches of record in the office of the Municipal
Court.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 5-124 HAMILTON CODE § 5-125
1:86
ARTICLE XXVI
Park and Recreation Advisory Committee
§ 5-126. Establishment.
There shall be and is hereby created a committee known as the "Park and
Recreation Advisory Committee."
§ 5-127. Membership.
The Park and Recreation Advisory Committee shall consist of not more than
15 members, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council for three-year terms, except that the first members
shall be appointed as follows: 1/3 for three years, 1/3 for two years and the
remainder for one year. All members shall be residents of the Township and
all shall serve without compensation. The Mayor may appoint a nonmember
of the Committee to serve as Secretary to the Committee at such
compensation as shall be determined by the Council. The Township Planner
and the Parks and Recreation Superintendent shall be ex officio members of
the Committee.
§ 5-128. Officers.
There shall be a Chairman of the Park and Recreation Advisory Committee
elected by its members, who shall serve as Chairman for a period of one
year and until his successor is elected. There may be any other officers as
the Committee may deem necessary.
§ 5-129. Purpose.
The Park and Recreation Advisory Committee shall aid in the planning for
the development of the Township parklands in an effective, logical and
properly balanced manner so as to benefit every segment of the total
population of the Township. The Committee may periodically review all
recreational programming of the Township and may make
recommendations for the expansion of programming to provide activities
to serve the respective recreational interests of every segment of the total
population of the Township.
§ 5-130. Public hearings or meetings.
The Park and Recreation Advisory Committee may hold public hearings or
meetings concerning matters relating to park and recreational programs
and projects under study, with the advice and consent of the Mayor.
§ 5-131. Reports and recommendations.
The Park and Recreation Advisory Committee shall make a semiannual
report of its activities to the Mayor and Council and periodically make such
recommendations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes set out in
this article.
§ 5-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-131
1:87

ARTICLE XXVII
Planning Board
§ 5-132. Establishment; membership; powers.
There shall be a Planning Board for the Township, which shall be appointed
pursuant to and shall have such powers as are provided by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. and by other ordinances of the Township pertaining to land use.21
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 550, Land Development.
§ 5-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-132
1:89

ARTICLE XXVIII
Redevelopment Agency
§ 5-133. Establishment.22
There shall be a Township Redevelopment Agency, which shall be appointed
pursuant to and shall have such powers as are provided by N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-1 et seq., the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, and by other
ordinances of the Township pertaining to redevelopment of the area of the
Township commonly known as the "Town Center."
§ 5-134. Findings; policy.
§ 5-135. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AGENCY — The Township Redevelopment Agency.
GOVERNING BODY — The Council of the Township.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township.
A. It is hereby declared that there exists in the Township an area
commonly known as the "Town Center"; that the area is a blighted area
or area in the process of becoming blighted, as defined by N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-3, by reason of inadequate planning of the area; that such area
has been and will continue to be harmful to the physical, social and
economic well-being of the community, necessitating excessive and
disproportionate expenditure of public funds for the safeguarding of the
health, safety, morals and welfare of the citizens of the Township; and
that the clearance, planning, construction and redevelopment of the
area will promote the public health, safety, morals and welfare,
stimulate the proper growth of the area, preserve existing values and
maintain taxable values of properties within or contiguous to the area,
and encourage the sound growth of the community.23
B. Therefore, as a matter of legislative determination, it is hereby declared
to be the policy of the Township to promote the health, safety, morals
and welfare of the citizens of the Township by the creation of the
Township Redevelopment Agency for the purpose of replanning such
area commonly known as the Town Center and of holding, redeveloping
or disposing of the area in such manner that it shall become available
for economically and socially sound development by private or public
enterprise, or by a combination of both.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 5-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-135
1:91
PROJECT — The Township Town Center project.
PROJECT AREA — The area of the Township commonly known as the Town
Center.
REDEVELOPER — Any person or public agency that shall enter into or
propose to enter into a contract with the agency for the redevelopment of
the area or any part thereof under the provisions of this article.
REDEVELOPMENT — The clearance, replanning, development and
redevelopment; the rehabilitation of any improvements; and the
construction and provision for construction of commercial, industrial, public
or other structures and the grant or dedication of spaces as may be
appropriate or necessary in the interest of the general welfare for streets,
parks, playgrounds or other public purposes, including recreational and
other facilities incidental or appurtenant thereto, in accordance with the
Master Plan or any part thereof or redevelopment plan approved by the
Council.
REDEVELOPMENT AREA — The area commonly known as the "Town
Center."
REDEVELOPMENT PLAN — The plan for redevelopment of all or any part
of the redevelopment area.
§ 5-136. Membership; term of office. [Amended 3-19-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-010]
A Redevelopment Agency is hereby established consisting of nine
Commissioners. The Council shall appoint six Commissioners, the Mayor
shall appoint two Commissioners, and the Commissioner of the State
Department of Community Affairs shall appoint one Commissioner. The
terms of the Commissioners appointed by the Council and Mayor shall
be for five years, except that, of those first appointed, two shall serve
five-year terms, one shall serve a four-year term, one shall serve a threeyear
term, one shall serve a two-year term, and one shall serve a oneyear
term. Any Commissioner appointed by the Mayor or the Council shall
be a resident of the Township at the time of appointment. The terms
of these Commissioners shall continue until their respective successors
are appointed and have qualified. The Commissioner appointed by the
Commissioner of the State Department of Community Affairs shall serve at
the pleasure of the Commissioner of the State Department of Community
Affairs.24
§ 5-137. Meetings.
At its organizational meeting, the Redevelopment Agency shall provide for
regular meetings at a time and place within the Township. The resolution
may provide that, when such a day falls upon a legal holiday, the meeting
24.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-715, Powers (of the Redevelopment Agency), which
previously followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 5-135 HAMILTON CODE § 5-137
1:92
shall be held on the same hour on the next succeeding day that is not a legal
holiday.
§ 5-138. Chairman and Vice Chairman.
The Redevelopment Agency, at its annual organizational meeting, shall elect
a Chairman and Vice Chairman from among the Commissioners, to serve
for one-year terms each and until the election and qualification of their
successors.
§ 5-139. Staff.
The Redevelopment Agency may employ a secretary, technical experts and
such other officers, agents and employees, permanent and temporary, as
it may require, and shall determine their qualifications, duties and
compensation. The Agency may call upon the Municipal Attorney or may
employ its own counsel and staff for such legal services as it may require.
§ 5-140. Conflicts of interest.
No Commissioner or employee of the Redevelopment Agency shall acquire
any interest, direct or indirect, in any project or redevelopment area or in
any property included or planned to be included in such area, nor shall he
have any interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or proposed contract
for materials or services or in any property to be furnished or used in
connection with the project or redevelopment area. If any Commissioner
or employee of any agency owns or controls an interest, direct or indirect,
in any property included or planned to be included in the project or
redevelopment area or in any contract or proposed contract, he shall
immediately disclose the interest in writing to the Agency, and such
disclosure shall be entered upon its minutes. Failure so to disclose such
interest shall constitute misconduct in office. Upon such disclosure, such
Commissioner or employee shall not participate in any action by the Agency
affecting such property or contract.
§ 5-141. Removal of Commissioners.
A Commissioner of the Redevelopment Agency may be removed by the
Council for inefficiency or neglect of duty or misconduct in office, provided
that he is served with a copy of the charges at least 10 days prior to a public
hearing thereon and is afforded an opportunity to be heard at such hearing,
in person or by counsel. In the event of the removal of any Commissioner, a
record of the proceedings, together with the charges and findings thereon,
shall be filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 5-142. Budget; report of transactions.
The Township shall make an estimate of the amount of money required by
the Redevelopment Agency for the administrative and other purposes of the
Agency and may appropriate and advance such amounts to the Agency and
as it deems necessary. The Agency shall:
§ 5-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-142
1:93
§ 5-143. Continuation of Redevelopment Agency. [Added 1-20-2004
by Ord. No. 04-005]
The Township Redevelopment Agency, established pursuant to the
"Redevelopment Agencies Law," P.L. 1949, c. 306 (N.J.S.A. 40:55C-1 et seq.),
repealed by the "Local Redevelopment and Housing Law," P.L. 1992, c. 79
(N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.), shall continue to exercise its redevelopment
functions and powers in accordance with the Local Redevelopment and
Housing Law, as amended from time to time. The Redevelopment Agency
shall conform to and also be subject to the requirements of the "Local
Authorities Fiscal Control Law," P.L. 1983, c. 313 (N.J.S.A. 40A:5A-1 et seq.).
§ 5-144. Powers. [Added 1-20-2004 by Ord. No. 04-005]
In addition to all such powers as are specifically granted to the
Redevelopment Agency pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., and as may
otherwise be generally allowed pursuant to other applicable statutes,
regulations and ordinances, the Redevelopment Agency shall also have the
power and authorization to:
A. Annually submit to the Township an estimate of all income and
expenses for the redevelopment project, which shall include all its
indebtedness, including payments necessary to meet interest and
principal payments on bonds issued pursuant to this article. Such
estimate shall be subject to such changes as the Township may
prescribe. No such estimate shall be effective unless it is approved by
the Council, and no expenditures or disbursements for any
redevelopment project shall be made by the Agency except in
accordance with an estimate, or any amendments or modifications
thereof, so approved by the Council.
B. File with the Township a detailed report of all its transactions, including
a statement of all revenues and expenditures, without exception, at
monthly, quarterly or annual intervals as the Township may prescribe.25
A. Implement and carry out the components of all current and future
redevelopment plans and projects.
B. Inquire into, survey and publicize the extent, advantages and utility of
vacant land and other dormant and underutilized properties located in
the Township.
C. Classify such land and properties according to their adaptability for the
establishment and development thereon of various types of economic
activities.
D. Study and analyze business trends, requirements and developments to
ascertain the opportunities for economic expansion in the Township.
25.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-722, Township Town Center Project Redevelopment Plan,
adopted 9-6-1995 by Ord. No. 95-039, which previously followed this section, was moved to
Ch. 550, Land Development, Art. III, District Regulations.
§ 5-142 HAMILTON CODE § 5-144
1:94
E. Advertise the business advantage and opportunities and the availability
of suitable sites and facilities in the Township and otherwise initiate and
pursue appropriate efforts to encourage and accomplish economic
development and expansion within the Township.
F. Cooperate with other Township departments, agencies, committees and
local civic organizations to promote, encourage and assist economic
development within the Township.
G. Arrange for the sale or lease of the Township's vacant lands to
businesses whose location thereon is best calculated, in the judgment of
the Redevelopment Agency, to advance the interests of the Township
and its citizens.
H. Exercise such other powers as may be reasonably necessary and
appropriate to accomplish its purposes and goals in accordance with
applicable laws and regulations.
§ 5-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-144
1:95

ARTICLE XXIX
Rent Leveling Commission
§ 5-145. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO TENANTS — Fit for habitation as defined by the
statutes, codes and ordinances in full force and effect in the Township and
occupied or unoccupied and offered for rent.
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX — The Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage
Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W), United States city average, as
published periodically by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States
Department of Labor.
HOUSING SPACE — Includes that portion of a dwelling rented or offered
for rent for living and dwelling purposes to one individual or family unit,
together with all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment,
facilities and improvements connected with the use or occupancy of such
portion of the property.
LANDLORD — The person letting, owning or managing an individually
administered residential multiple-family dwelling situate within the
Township.
RENT — The entire consideration paid by a tenant for the use or occupation
of property. There shall not be allowed a surcharge on any lease executed
subsequent to May 6, 1981, which automatically advances as the price of a
particular item advances. Any lease executed prior to May 5, 1981, which
presently provides for such surcharge shall have such increase limited to
the increase allowable under § 5-162 until the expiration of the lease.
RESIDENTIAL MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — Any individually
administered building, structure or complex of one or more stories or a
portion thereof and any land appurtenant thereto containing four or more
residential multiple-family dwelling units. Excluded from this definition are
motels, hotels or other buildings or structures serving transients.
RESIDENTIAL RENTERS CONSUMER PRICE INDEX — The rent,
residential index (all urban wage earners and clerical workers: United
States city average), as published periodically by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, United States Department of Labor.
TENANT — The person to whom a residential multiple-family unit is let
situate in the Township.
§ 5-146. Establishment; membership.
There is hereby created a Rent Leveling Commission consisting of five
members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council, selected on the basis of their qualifications and fitness for service
§ 5-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-146
1:97
on the Commission. Of the five members, one each shall be of the following
two classes: a landlord as defined in this article and a tenant as defined in
this article. The other three members shall be of neither class. Of the five
members, all shall be residents of the Township, except those of the class of
landlord.
§ 5-147. Conflicts of interest.
Any member of the Rent Leveling Commission shall disqualify himself from
participation in any phase of any dispute, controversy or claim whatsoever
involving a residential multiple-family dwelling in which he has or has
had any security, ownership, management, leasehold or other interest of
whatever nature. Such disqualification shall not be mandatory if the
member's interest in the residential multiple-family dwelling was
extinguished more than five years preceding his appointment. This shall
not prevent a member from disqualifying himself for any other legal, valid
reason.
§ 5-148. Term of office.
Members of the Rent Leveling Commission and alternates shall be
appointed for two years. For those members initially appointed under this
article, the Class 1 and 2 members shall be appointed for terms of one year,
and the Class 3 members shall be appointed for terms of two years.
§ 5-149. Funding.
There shall be appropriated in each annual budget of the Township such
sum as may be determined by the Mayor and Council to be necessary for
the purpose of administering this article.
§ 5-150. Staff.
There shall be a Secretary and an Attorney to the Rent Leveling Commission
appointed by the Mayor to terms of one year on the effective date of this
article.
§ 5-151. Organizational meeting; officers.
The Rent Leveling Commission shall organize at its first meeting, as set
forth in this article, and thereafter annually at the first regular meeting of
the calendar year, and shall, at such meeting, choose from among its Class
3 members, a Chairman and such other officers as it may deem necessary.
§ 5-152. Alternate members.
There shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Council two alternates to each of the three classes of members of the
Rent Leveling Commission: two landlord alternates; two tenant alternates;
and two non-landlord, non-tenant alternates. An alternate may vote on
§ 5-146 HAMILTON CODE § 5-152
1:98
matters already in progress upon certification that he has reviewed all prior
proceedings in the matter and is familiar therewith.
§ 5-153. Removal of members.
Any member of the Rent Leveling Commission or alternate may be removed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council for cause, on
written charges served upon the person, and after a hearing thereon where
the person shall be entitled to be heard and present evidence in person or
by counsel.
§ 5-154. Quorum.
A majority of the whole number of regular members of the Rent Leveling
Commission shall constitute a quorum. If a quorum is not present, including
alternates, one hour after the appointed time for any meeting, the presiding
officer shall declare the meeting or hearing adjourned.
§ 5-155. Special meetings.
A special meeting of the Rent Leveling Commission may be called at any
time upon request of a majority of the members of the Commission. The
request and call for a special meeting shall specify the purpose of the
meeting. The call for such special meeting shall be served by the Chairman
upon each Commission member at least 72 hours prior to the time for which
the meeting is called. Upon the call for a special meeting, the Chairman or
other designated officer shall forthwith give notice thereof by telephone or
telegraph at such place previously designated by the Commission members
for that purpose. All such meetings shall be in conformity with the state
Open Public Meetings Act of 1975.26
§ 5-156. Minutes.
Accurate minutes of all meetings, complaints and decisions of the Rent
Leveling Commission shall be kept and filed monthly with the Secretary of
the Commission. Minutes in conformity with the state Open Public Meetings
Act of 1975 shall be kept.
§ 5-157. Rules of procedure.
In the absence of specific direction from this article, as amended from time
to time, and of Commission rules and regulations, Robert's Rules of Order
shall govern conduct of the Rent Leveling Commission.
§ 5-158. Administrative regulations.
The Rent Leveling Commission may adopt such administrative rules and
regulations as it deems necessary to implement this article, with the
26.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 5-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-158
1:99
approval of the Business Administrator. Such rules and regulations shall be
filed with the Municipal Clerk.
§ 5-159. Subpoena power.
The Rent Leveling Commission shall have the power to subpoena witnesses,
books and records pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.
§ 5-160. Confidentiality of information.
Insofar as the state Open Public Meetings Act of 1975 permits, whenever
any material, the disclosure of which constitutes an invasion of individual
privacy, is to be discussed by the Rent Leveling Commission, a request for
confidentiality may be made and shall be honored.
§ 5-161. Appeals.
Appeal of any decision of the Rent Leveling Commission may be had to any
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 5-162. Limitations on rent increases.
A. Establishment of rents between a landlord and a tenant in all
residential multiple-family dwellings shall hereafter be determined by
the provisions of this article. At the expiration of a lease or at the
termination of the lease of a periodic tenant, no landlord who furnished
heat to tenants may request or receive a percentage increase which is
greater than the average of the percentage increase in the Consumer
Price Index and the percentage increase in the Residential Renters
Consumer Price Index released during the July preceding the notice of
increase. No landlord who does not furnish heat to tenants may request
or receive a percentage increase which is greater than 60% of the
average of the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index and
the percentage increase in the Residential Renters Consumer Price
Index released during the July preceding the notice of increase.
B. No landlord may increase the rent of any one tenant more than once in
each twelve-month period; provided, however, that, should rent of any
one tenant not be increased for a period of 12 months, the maximum
allowable increase shall be the average of the percentage increase in
the Consumer Price Index and the percentage increase in the
Residential Renters Consumer Price Index for the preceding 12 months
multiplied by the number of months since previous increase divided by
12. This provision shall not apply to situations where rent has not been
increased in over 24 months.
C. Allowable increases in rent may be rounded off to the nearest dollar
figure.
D. No landlord may request or receive any increase in rent unless and until
it has been certified to the Township that the landlord has remitted the
§ 5-158 HAMILTON CODE § 5-162
1:100
§ 5-163. Powers and duties; adjudication procedure.
most recent rebate due the tenant under the provisions of the Tenants'
Property Tax Rebate Act, N.J.S.A. 54:4-6.2 et seq.
A. Powers and duties generally. The Rent Leveling Commission shall have
the power and duty to hold hearings and adjudicate:
(1) Hardship increase in rents. This is rental in addition to the
permitted increase. The Commission shall not permit a total
increase which is more than a just and reasonable rate of return. In
determining just and reasonable rate of return, the tax assessment
divided by the average ratio of assessed to true value as
promulgated on the October 1 preceding the application for
increase of the premises shall be the basis.
(a) If a landlord cannot meet his mortgage payments, maintenance
costs or other costs, he may appeal to the Commission for a
hardship increase in rent, and the Commission may grant the
landlord a hardship rent increase to meet these payments.
Prior to any such appeal to the Commission, a landlord must
post in the lobby of each building or, if no lobby is present, in a
conspicuous place in and about the premises, a notice of the
appeal, setting forth the basis for the appeal. The notice must
be posted for at least 15 days prior to the proposed filing of the
appeal.
(b) A landlord may also seek a hardship increase in rental for
major capital improvements or services. The landlord must
notify each tenant by certified mail or personal service of the
total cost of the completed capital improvement or service, the
number of years of useful life of the improvement, as claimed
by the landlord for purposes of depreciation for income tax
purposes, the average cost of the improvement, the total
number of square feet of the residential multiple-family
dwelling, the total square feet occupied by the tenant and the
capital improvement surcharge he is seeking from each tenant.
The landlord seeking a capital improvement or service
surcharge shall appeal for the surcharge to the Commission,
which shall determine if the improvement is a major
improvement and, if so, shall permit such increase, provided
that it is clearly demonstrated to be necessary for the health,
safety and general welfare of the tenants. If the increase is
granted, it shall not be considered rental and calculated in any
other hardship increase in rental applications.
(2) Decrease in rental. Decreases in rental are those permitted by the
Commission upon application of a tenant, after which the
Commission has adjudicated that there has been a significant
decrease in maintenance, repairs, facilities or services or a
combination thereof.
§ 5-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-163
1:101
B. Regulatory powers. The Commission may adopt such administrative
rules and regulations, both procedural and substantive, as it deems
necessary and appropriate to implement this article and to facilitate its
administration, with the approval of the Business Administrator. Such
rules and regulations may not be inconsistent with or contrary to the
provisions of this article, but must be consistent with the intent and
spirit of this article. Such rules and regulations shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk of the Township.
C. Adjudicatory powers. The Commission may entertain applications by
landlords or tenants for rulings interpreting and applying the provisions
of this article, and may hold hearings to make findings of fact under this
article. The Commission may rule and declare, in response to an
application, the actions of any person to be in violation of or in
compliance with this article.
D. Enforcement powers. The Commission may enforce the provisions of
this article by seeking declaratory and injunctive relief in a court of
proper jurisdiction.
E. Adjudication procedure.
(1) All applications to the Commission shall be in writing on forms
prescribed by the Commission, and filed with the Commission
Secretary. Upon receipt, the Secretary shall forward a copy to all
members and alternates and schedule the application for the next
regularly scheduled meeting. The Secretary shall notify each
applicant and respondent of the scheduled time and date, with
ordinary mail being sufficient.
(2) The burden of proof shall be on the applicant.
(3) All parties may be heard, call witnesses, be represented by counsel
and offer any relevant evidence or material.
(4) Applications for a hardship increase in rent under Subsection
A(1)(a) and (b) of this section must be filed not later than 90 days
prior to the proposed effective date of the increase. Applications for
a decrease in rent under Subsection A(2) of this section must be
filed within 90 days of the alleged significant decrease in
maintenance, repairs, facilities or services. Proof of service upon
the affected tenant or landlord, as the case may be, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, must
accompany each application. Any applications not complying with
the provisions of this article shall not be considered.
(5) Any appeals under Subsection A(1)(a) and (b) of this section must
be supported by an audit prepared by a public accountant.
(6) The Commission may grant, deny or modify any application under
Subsection A(1)(a) or (b) or Subsection A(2) of this section, and its
decision shall be binding on all parties.
§ 5-163 HAMILTON CODE § 5-163
1:102
§ 5-164. New tenancies. [Amended 8-21-2002 by Ord. No. 02-028]
§ 5-165. Notification of tenants of application for rent increase.
Any landlord seeking an increase in rents shall notify the tenant by certified
mail or by personal service, on a form approved by the Business
Administrator, of the calculations involved in computing the increase,
including all information required in order to compute the formula as set
forth in § 5-162, as well as the rental charged for the apartment under the
terms of the most recent prior lease. A copy of the forms shall be filed
with the Secretary of the Rent Leveling Commission at the time of notice to
tenants.
§ 5-166. Decrease in maintenance, repairs, facilities or services.
Any significant decrease in maintenance, repairs, facilities or services shall
be deemed an added rent and may result in a decrease in rents as provided
in § 5-163. In addition, it may be deemed a reprisal and subject the landlord
to penalties provided in § 5-167. Significant decrease in maintenance,
repairs, facilities or services is a factor to be considered in all applications
under this article. If the Commission shall determine that there has been
a significant decrease in maintenance, repairs, facilities or services, it
may also order that a pro rata share of all rentals collected from the
residential multiple-family dwelling be placed in escrow, shall appoint a
trustee to take custody of such account, shall direct the trustee to provide
the maintenance, repairs, facilities or services in accord with public bidding
laws and to pay therefor out of the escrow, and shall order the landlord to
(7) Nothing in this section shall be construed to interfere with
contractual obligations.
F. Application fee. The fee for an application to the Rent Leveling
Commission is set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.27
A. For all tenancies commencing after September 1, 2002, in the event the
occupancy of a dwelling unit shall be terminated by the tenant
occupying that unit, or possession of the unit is obtained by the landlord
pursuant to lawful, court-ordered eviction, the landlord shall be
permitted to increase the rent of the vacated dwelling unit without
restriction thereafter. Said dwelling unit shall not be subject to the
restrictions on increase in rent as set forth in this article.
B. An exception to this provision shall be for any tenant whose leasehold is
in existence on or before September 1, 2002. If such a tenant moves
from one apartment unit to another apartment unit in the same
residential multiple-family dwelling, the tenant shall pay market rate at
the commencement of the new tenancy, and thereafter shall pay only
the applicable allowable increase as set forth in this article.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 5-163 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-166
1:103
pay the trustee a reasonable fee for his services. The order shall continue
so long as the landlord fails to provide the required maintenance, repairs,
facilities and services.
§ 5-167. Violations and penalties.28
Except as otherwise provided, a willful violation of any provision of this
article or of an order of the Rent Leveling Commission shall be punishable
pursuant to § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code of the Township of
Hamilton. A violation affecting more than one leasehold shall be considered
a separate violation.
§ 5-168. Waiver of rights prohibited.
Any written or oral provision in any agreement whereby the rights
conferred under this article are waived is deemed against public policy, void
and unenforceable.
§ 5-169. Refund of rent in excess of allowable increase.
Any rent increase, notice of which was issued subsequent to May 5, 1981,
the date of introduction of the ordinance from which this article is derived,
to the extent that such increase is in excess of that which is permitted by
this article, is hereby deemed to be null and void, and such excess rent shall
be refunded to the tenant by the landlord forthwith.
§ 5-170. Initial rents.
The owner of housing space or a multiple dwelling being rented for the first
time shall not be restricted in the initial rent he charges. Any subsequent
rental increases, however, shall be subject to the provisions of this article.
§ 5-171. Interpretation of article.
This article, being necessary for the welfare of the Township and its
inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.
§ 5-172. Landlord to pay housing inspection fee.
No landlord may charge any person the fee payable to the Township for
inspection pursuant to Chapter 268, Housing Standards.29
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
29.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 2, Division 17, Youth Advisory Commission, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 3-19-2013 by Ord. No. 13-012.
§ 5-166 HAMILTON CODE § 5-172
1:104
ARTICLE XXX
Zoning Board of Adjustment30
§ 5-173. Establishment; membership; powers.
There shall be a Zoning Board of Adjustment for the Township, which shall
be appointed pursuant to and shall have such powers as are provided
by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and by other ordinances of the Township
pertaining to land use.31
30.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 550, Land Development, Art. VI, Zoning Board of Adjustment;
Planning Board.
31.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 2, Division 19, Cable Television Advisory Commission (added
2-21-2001 by Ord. No. 01-010); and former Ch. 2, Division 20, Advisory Commission on the
Status of Women (added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No. 03-008 and amended 1-21-2004 by Ord. No.
04-006), which immediately followed this section, were repealed 3-19-2013 by Ord. No.
13-012.
§ 5-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-173
1:105

ARTICLE XXXI
Shade Tree Commission
[Added 5-21-2003 by Ord. No. 03-020]
§ 5-174. Creation.
There shall be a Shade Tree Commission of the Township of Hamilton.
§ 5-175. Membership; appointment; terms.
The Shade Tree Commission shall consist of five residents of the Township
appointed by the Mayor. The terms of office of the Commission members
shall commence upon the day of their appointment, and shall be for the
respective periods of one, two, three, four and five years.
§ 5-176. Powers and duties.
The Commission hereby created shall be an advisory commission, with
the power and authority to advise the administration in the regulation,
planting, care and control of shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery
upon and in the streets, highways, public places, parks and parkways within
the jurisdiction of the Township, except state highways unless the State
Department of Transportation shall assent thereto, and county highways,
parks and parkways unless the Mercer County Shade Tree Commission
shall assent thereto, and shall exercise all powers and rights and be subject
to all duties provided in N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 et seq., as amended and
supplemented.
§ 5-177. Records and reports.
The Commission shall keep records of its meetings and activities and make
a semiannual report to the Mayor and Council.
§ 5-178. Auxiliary personnel.
The Commission may appoint such clerks and other employees as it may
from time to time require and as may be within the limits of funds
appropriated to it by the Council.32
32.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 2, Division 22, Health Advisory Commission (added 5-7-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-027); and former Ch. 2, Division 23, Advisory Commission on Technology
(added 5-7-2008 by Ord. No. 08-025), which immediately followed this section, were
repealed 3-19-2013 by Ord. No. 13-012.
§ 5-174 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-178
1:107

ARTICLE XXXII
Advisory Commission on Public Safety
[Added 5-7-2008 by Ord. No. 08-026]
§ 5-179. Establishment; membership.
There is hereby established an Advisory Commission on Public Safety for
the Township to be composed of nine regular members and two alternate
members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council. The Mayor and Chief of Police shall be ex officio members of this
Commission.
§ 5-180. Alternate members.
§ 5-181. Officers.
The members of the Advisory Commission on Public Safety shall choose
annually from among its members a Chairperson and such other officers as
they may deem necessary.
§ 5-182. Term of office.
Each regular member shall serve for three years, except that the first
members shall be appointed as follows: 1/3 for three years, 1/3 for two years
and the remainder for one year. Each alternate member shall serve for three
years, except that the terms of the alternate members as first appointed
under this article shall be three years for Alternate No. 1 and two years for
Alternate No. 2. Any appointment to fill a vacancy shall be for the unexpired
term of that member only.
§ 5-183. Purpose.
The Advisory Commission on Public Safety shall act in an advisory capacity
to the Mayor and make recommendations for the development of policies
and procedures in general to improve the state of public safety of the
community.
§ 5-184. Meetings.
The Advisory Commission on Public Safety shall meet monthly at a time and
place determined by the membership.
A. The Mayor shall designate at the time of appointment the alternate
members as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
B. Alternate members may participate in discussion of the proceedings but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that an alternate member
may vote instead of a regular member. In the event that a choice must
be made as to which alternate is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
§ 5-179 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-185
1:109
§ 5-185. Funding.
There shall be appropriated in each annual budget of the Township such
sum as may be determined by the Mayor and Council to be necessary for the
purpose of providing the sole source of funding to administer this article.
§ 5-186. Reports and recommendations.
The Advisory Commission on Public Safety shall make a semi-annual report
of its activities to the Mayor and Council and periodically make such
recommendations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes set out in
this article.33
33.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 2, Division 25, Sayen Gardens Commission (added 6-4-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-029); and former Ch. 2, Division 26, Municipal Board of Ethics (added
5-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-030), which immediately followed this section, were repealed
3-19-2013 by Ord. No. 13-012.
§ 5-185 HAMILTON CODE § 5-186
1:110
ARTICLE XXXIII
Mayor's Commission on Persons with Special Needs
[Added 8-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-020]
§ 5-187. Establishment; membership.
There is hereby established the Mayor's Commission on Persons with
Special Needs for the Township to be composed of 17 individuals appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. A Council person
and a person from the administration shall be two of the Mayor's 17
appointments.
§ 5-188. Officers.
The Mayor shall choose annually, from among the members of the Mayor's
Commission on Persons with Special Needs, a Chairperson and such other
officers as he may deem necessary.
§ 5-189. Term of office.
Each member shall serve for three years, except that the first members
shall be appointed as follows: six for three years, six for two years and five
for one year. Any appointment to fill a vacancy shall be for the unexpired
term of that member only.
§ 5-190. Purpose.
The Mayor's Commission on Persons with Special Needs shall act in an
advisory capacity to the Mayor and make recommendations for policies and
programs in all matters related to the best interests of individuals with
physical and developmental disabilities within the Township.
§ 5-191. Meetings.
The Mayor's Commission on Persons with Special Needs shall meet monthly
at a time and place determined by the membership.
§ 5-192. Funding.
The Mayor's Commission on Persons with Special Needs shall be
authorized, with the approval of the Council, to expend any monies
necessary to fulfill its purposes under this article, provided that the
expenditures shall not exceed, exclusive of grants and gifts, the amount
annually appropriated by the Council for the Commission's use.
§ 5-193. Reports and recommendations.
The Mayor's Commission on Persons with Special Needs shall make a
semiannual report of its activities to the Mayor and Council and periodically
make such recommendations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes
set out in this article.34
§ 5-187 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-193
1:111
34.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 2, Division 28, Advisory Commission on Green Initiatives (added
9-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-030), which immediately followed this section, was repealed
3-19-2013 by Ord. No. 13-012.
§ 5-193 HAMILTON CODE § 5-193
1:112
ARTICLE XXXIIIA
Advisory Commission on Green Initiatives
[Added 5-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-017]
§ 5-193.1. Establishment; membership.
There is hereby established an advisory commission on green initiatives
under the Sustainable Jersey program. This advisory commission will be
known as the Green Team and will be a subcommittee of the Environmental
Commission reporting to the Chair of the Commission. Green Team
membership will consist of members of the Commission and any interested
residents of Hamilton Township appointed by the Mayor, subject to
Council's advice and consent.
§ 5-193.2. Officers.
The members of the Green Team shall choose annually from among its
members a chairperson and such other sub-chairs as they may deem
necessary.
§ 5-193.3. Term of office.
Members shall serve for three years. Any appointment to fill a vacancy shall
be for the unexpired term of that member only.
§ 5-193.4. Purpose.
The Green Team shall be responsible for advising the Mayor and Council
through the Chair of the Commission on how to best focus the Township's
efforts to improve its environmental sustainability and pursue local
initiatives and actions that will lead to Sustainable Jersey Municipal
Certification.
§ 5-193.5. Meetings.
The Green Team shall meet at least monthly at a time and place determined
by the membership.
§ 5-193.6. Funding.
There shall be appropriated in each annual budget of the Township such
sum as may be determined by the Mayor and Council to be necessary for
the purposes of providing the sole source of funding to administer the Green
Team.
§ 5-193.7. Reports and recommendations.
The Green Team shall make an annual report of its activities to the Chair
of the Commission and periodically make such recommendations as may be
necessary to carry out the purposes set out in this article.
§ 5-193.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-193.7
1:113

ARTICLE XXXIIIB
Nonprofit Advisory Commission
[Added by Ord. No. 18-046]
§ 5-193.8. Establishment; membership.
There is hereby established for the Township a Nonprofit Advisory
Commission, to consist of no more than 21 individuals, consisting of a
designee of the Hamilton YMCA, a designee of the John O. Wilson Center, a
designee of the Bromley Civic Center, a designee from each of 15 nonprofit
organizations providing services within the Township, of which nine shall
be appointed by the Mayor and six shall be appointed by the Council, the
Mayor or his or her designee, Hamilton Township Council liaison, and a
liaison from the Hamilton Township School District.
§ 5-193.9. Term of office.
The nine nonprofits appointed by the Mayor shall serve a two-year term or
until another nonprofit organization is appointed, whichever is later. The
six nonprofits appointed by the Council shall serve a one-year term or until
another nonprofit organization is appointed, whichever is later.
§ 5-193.10. Officers.
The members of the Commission shall choose annually from among its
members a chairperson, vice-chairperson, secretary and treasurer. The
Mayor or his or her designee, Hamilton Township Council liaison, and
Hamilton Township School District liaison shall be prohibited from serving
as an officer of the Commission.
§ 5-193.11. Purpose.
The Commission shall be responsible for advising the Mayor and Council
on fostering relationships among the Township and nonprofit organizations,
and among nonprofit organizations themselves, in order to improve the
services provided by nonprofit organizations to the Hamilton Township
community.
§ 5-193.12. Meetings.
The Commission shall meet at least six times per calendar year at the call of
the chairperson, but in no event shall the Commission meet more than once
in any one calendar month. Meetings shall be open to the public.
§ 5-193.13. Reports and recommendations.
The Commission shall make semiannual reports of its activities to the Mayor
and Council, setting forth in detail its operations and transactions, and
providing recommendations to the Mayor and Council as may be necessary
to carry out the purposes set forth in § 5-193.11.
§ 5-193.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-193.14
1:115
§ 5-193.14. Funding.
There shall be appropriated in each annual budget of the Township such
sum as may be determined by the Mayor and Council to be necessary for
the purpose of providing funding to administer this Commission.
§ 5-193.14 HAMILTON CODE § 5-193.14
1:116
Part 6
Public Records
ARTICLE XXXIV
Access to Records
§ 5-194. Generally. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5, all records which
are required by law to be made, maintained or kept on file by any board,
body, agency, department, commission, authority or official of the Township
shall be deemed to be public records. Public records as defined by N.J.S.A.
47:1A-1.1 shall be made available for inspection and copying during regular
business hours by the custodian of any such records. Copies of records shall
be made available upon the payment of such price as shall be established
by law.
§ 5-195. Fees for copies. [Amended 5-17-2000 by Ord. No. 00-018;
6-8-2000 by Ord. No. 00-020; 2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 14-005;
7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
§ 5-196. Copying by person requesting records. [Amended
7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
Where the documents in question are more than 100 pages in length, the
Municipal Clerk may permit the person requesting copies to use his own
copying machine, provided that there is no risk of damage or mutilation
of the documents and it would not be incompatible with the transaction
of public business. Such determination shall be completely within the
discretion of the Municipal Clerk. The daily fee in such case shall be as set
forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.
§ 5-197. Denial of examination of records.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 5-194, where it shall appear that the
records which are sought to be examined pertain to an investigation in
progress by any body, agency, commission, board, authority or official, the
right of examination may be denied if the inspection, copying or publication
of the records shall be inimical to the public interest; provided, however,
that this section shall not be construed to prohibit any body, agency,
commission, board, authority or official from opening such records for
public examination if not otherwise prohibited by law.
A. Fees for copies of public records shall be those set forth at N.J.S.A.
47:1A-5, except as otherwise specified in Chapter 215, Fees, of the
Township Code.
B. All other documents where multiple copies are available: at such cost as
set by resolution of the Council.
§ 5-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-197
1:117

Part 7
Budget And Expenditure Procedures
ARTICLE XXXV
Budget; Bidding; Purchasing
§ 5-198. Budget preparation.
§ 5-199. Administration of budget.
A. The budget shall be prepared by the Mayor with the assistance of the
Business Administrator. During the month of November, the Mayor
shall require all department heads to submit requests for
appropriations for the ensuing budget year and to appear before the
Mayor or the Business Administrator at public hearings which shall be
held during the month on the various requests. On or before January 15,
the Mayor shall submit to the Council his recommended budget,
together with such explanatory comment or statement as he may deem
desirable.
B. The Business Administrator, with the assistance of the Director of
Finance, shall prepare all estimates of non-property-tax revenues
anticipated for the support of each annual budget.
C. The budget document shall be prepared in such form as is required by
law for municipal budgets and in accordance with the Charter. There
shall be appended to the budget a detailed analysis of all items of
expenditure and revenue.
D. The Council may reduce any item in the Mayor's budget by a vote of the
majority of the Council, but an increase in any item shall become
effective only upon an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members of
the Council.
A. The Business Administrator shall supervise the administration of each
annual budget. In consultation with the Director of Finance, he shall
establish quarterly or other periodic allotment of appropriations as he
may deem necessary. Each department shall plan and administer its
expenditure program within the limits of these allotments.
B. If at any time during the budget year the Business Administrator shall
ascertain that the Township government is faced with the probability of
incurring a cash deficit for the current year, he shall reconsider the
work programs and allotments of the several departments. Upon such
reconsideration and with the approval of the Mayor, he may revise
budget allotments so as to forestall, as far as possible, the making of
commitments and expenditures in excess of the revenues to be realized
during the fiscal year. He shall file with the Director of Finance a copy
of such revised allotments, and the Director of Finance shall control all
expenditures within the limits thereof.
§ 5-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-200
1:119
§ 5-200. Awarding of contracts; bidding procedures; bidding
threshold. [Amended 8-18-2007 by Ord. No. 07-023; 2-9-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-003; 9-23-2010 by Ord. No. 10-028; 3-2-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-007]
A. Public bids received pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq. may be
received at a time and place designated by the Division of Purchasing.
Public bid openings shall be attended by, at least, a representative of
the Division of Purchasing, a Township Attorney and the Municipal
Clerk; provided, however, that, if one of these officials is unable to be
present, the bid opening shall be deemed official so long as the other
two officials are present.35
B. The Division of Purchasing is empowered to prepare specifications for
the performance of work or the purchases or furnishing or hiring of any
materials, supplies or services needed by the Township, to publicly
advertise for and receive bids on such work or purchases, to require
bidding deposits made in conjunction with bids and performance
security from contractors who are awarded bids, and, when desirable,
to establish regulations for the qualification of prospective bidders, to
require standard questionnaires for prospective bidders and classify
and reclassify prospective bidders, all in accordance with the Local
Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq. ("LPCL"). The
Purchasing Agent shall be permitted to award, without public bidding
and without Council resolution, any contract which does not exceed
$36,000, or the State of New Jersey threshold, whether greater or
lesser. Any contract which exceeds the $36,000, or the State of New
Jersey threshold, whether greater or lesser, shall be subject to the
requirements of the LPCL and this section.36
C. All advertisements for bids shall be published at least once, 10 days
prior to the date fixed to receive bids, in a newspaper of general
circulation within the Township area. All bids requiring public
advertisement shall designate the manner of submitting bids, the
method of receiving bids and the time and place for receipt of bids.
D. Bids received in advance shall remain sealed and shall only be opened
for examination at the time and place filed for the receipt of bids. At the
time and place set for the receipt of bids, all bids tendered shall be
publicly received and immediately unsealed and their contents
announced publicly in the presence of any present bidding parties or
their agents. The price and terms of the bids shall become incorporated
as a part of the minutes of the Council meeting at which the Council
takes action thereon.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 5-200 HAMILTON CODE § 5-200
1:120
§ 5-201. Standards and tests for items purchased.38
The Administrator shall establish and approve uniform standards for
requisitions and purchases through the Division of Purchasing. The
Department of Administration shall control the delivery of all supplies,
materials, equipment and other items purchased, and may make or cause
to be made proper tests, checks and inspections thereof. The Division
of Purchasing shall ascertain whether the supplies, materials, equipment
and other items purchased comply with the specifications, and shall cause
laboratory or other tests to be made whenever, in the opinion of the division
head, it is necessary to determine whether the materials or supplies
furnished are of a quality and standard required.
§ 5-202. Purchase controls.39
All purchases of any supplies, materials or equipment or contractual
services for the Township's account shall be made by the Division of
Purchasing pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the
department whose appropriation will be charged.
§ 5-203. Purchasing procedure.
E. The Council shall award the contract or reject all bids within 60 days
after receipt. The Council shall reserve the right at all times to reject
any and all bids received.
F. The security delivered with the bids shall be returned to the
unsuccessful bidders within three days, Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays excepted. The security of the successful bidder shall be
retained until a contract is executed and any performance security has
been submitted.
G. If an award of contract cannot be made within the sixty-day period, the
three lowest responsible bidders may agree to an extension in making
the award, which shall not exceed an additional 30 days.
H. In awarding the bid, any authorized formal contract shall be executed
by the Mayor and attested by the Municipal Clerk, and the seal of the
Township affixed thereto. In lieu of a formal contract, the Division of
Purchasing may issue a purchase order to the successful bidder for the
required purchase. The successful bidder shall then be required to
perform in accordance with the terms set forth in the specifications for
such items.37
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 5-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-203
1:121
A. Each department shall follow such procedure and use such forms for
purchasing as the Business Administrator shall prescribe. Upon request
of the Business Administrator, each department head shall submit a
complete statement of the work and labor under contract and the
materials, supplies and equipment which will be required by the
department during the ensuing year, half year or quarter year as the
Business Administrator may determine, according to the best estimate
of the department head. Such statement shall be in such form and detail
as the Administrator may require.
B. A certification from the Director of Finance that a sufficient
unencumbered balance of appropriation is available to pay therefor
shall accompany each purchase order.
C. Where purchases in excess of $500 are made without competitive
bidding, the Division of Purchasing shall obtain and record, wherever
possible, at least three price quotations for the item of purchase.
Whenever circumstances permit, the purchase shall be made from the
lowest of such quotations, price and other factors considered.40
D. The Business Administrator, through the Division of Purchasing, shall
establish a procedure for the purchase of any item required for the
immediate protection, public health, safety or welfare of the Township,
which will permit such emergency purchases to be made for specific
purposes in a manner other than that prescribed by this section.41
E. Except as the Business Administrator or such other officer as he may
designate may authorize in case of emergency, no purchase shall be
made and no bill, claim or voucher shall be approved unless the
procedures prescribed by or pursuant to the Charter and this chapter
have been followed.
F. Immediately upon delivery of any purchase item, the receiving
department shall make a record thereof on a form to be approved by the
Business Administrator, and the department's acceptance of delivery
shall be certified by the department head or by division superintendents
designated for this purpose by their director. A voucher properly
prepared and executed by the vendor shall be submitted to the
Treasurer, who shall not authorize payment unless and until he has first
examined a properly prepared and certified receiving report and has
satisfied himself that the items billed were properly authorized and
delivered in accordance with a duly issued purchase order or any
change thereof authorized by the Department of Administration.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 5-203 HAMILTON CODE § 5-204
1:122
§ 5-204. Disposal of surplus property.
The Department of Administration shall have the authority to declare any
Township-owned property as surplus or as not needed for public use by any
Township agency and may transfer such property to any other Township
agency or dispose of it by public sale pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-13.1.
§ 5-205. Disbursement of funds.
The method of disbursement of funds for any purpose shall be by check
drawn on the Department of Finance and, after being signed by the Mayor,
countersigned by the Finance Director.
§ 5-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-205
1:123
Chapter 12
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
§ 12-1. Statutory authority; purpose.
N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 and N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 authorize the governing body of every
municipality to enact regulations to preserve the public peace and order, to
protect property and to prevent and quell riots, disturbances and disorderly
assemblages, and, further, to enact regulations for the protection of persons
and property and for the preservation of public safety and welfare of the
Township and its inhabitants. The Township Council deems it necessary to
provide for appropriate authority and outline orderly procedure in order to
accomplish these purposes.
§ 12-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CIVIL EMERGENCY — Any riot, disturbance or disorderly assemblage
characterized by the use of actual force or violence, or any potential
threatened force or violence if accompanied by the immediate means of
doing so by five or more persons acting together without lawful authority.
CURFEW — A prohibition against any persons or particular class or age
group of persons walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any
street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the limits of the
Township, except persons officially performing their duties with reference
to the emergency.
§ 12-3. Declaration of state of emergency.
When in the judgment of the Mayor a civil emergency or the threat of a civil
emergency is deemed to exist, the Mayor shall, by regulation, determine
such an emergency to exist and immediately post notice thereof in at least
five conspicuous places within the Township.
§ 12-4. Emergency powers of Mayor.
Upon the determination and declaration of a state of emergency, the Mayor
is authorized to exercise the following powers; provided, however, that any
such powers shall not continue to be in force and effect for a longer period
than 48 hours unless, at the expiration of such period of time, the Mayor, by
regulation, shall extend the duration of the civil emergency:
A. Order a general curfew applicable to such portion of the Township or
age group within the Township as the Mayor might deem advisable to
be applicable, during such hours of the day and night as are necessary
for the protection of the public safety and welfare.
§ 5-205 HAMILTON CODE § 12-4
1:124
§ 12-5. Notice of emergency regulations.
Whenever a determination and declaration of a civil emergency is
promulgated and emergency powers are exercised by the Mayor, the
exercise thereof shall be incorporated in a regulation duly adopted by the
Mayor. Wherever practicable, a copy of the regulation shall be posted in a
prominent place at or near the various premises affected by the emergency
powers, and a copy thereof shall be delivered to the owners or occupants
of the premises or any responsible person in charge thereof. In no event,
however, shall the failure to post such notice or deliver a copy thereof
render the exercise of such powers ineffective or invalid.
Chapter 19
B. Order that all persons licensed under the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Law who dispense alcoholic beverages at retail, wholesale or for onpremises
consumption, as well as private groups or portions thereof
where the consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted, shall close
their establishments and cease operation of their businesses during the
hours or periods deemed necessary under the emergency.
C. Order the discontinuance of the selling, distributing or giving away of
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products, and order
the closing of all gasoline stations and other establishments the chief
activity of which is the selling, distributing and dispensing of liquid
flammable or combustible products, or limit the sale or distribution of
such gasoline and like products directly into the tanks of motor
vehicles.
D. Order the discontinuance of the selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character
whatsoever, and order that all such establishments or portions thereof
which engage in the sale, distribution, dispensing or giving away of
firearms or ammunition shall close and cease such activity.
E. Order that no person, other than the state police, National Guard, local
police authorities or any other person as may be authorized by the
Mayor, shall carry, hold or possess in any motor vehicle, carriage,
motorcycle or other vehicle, or carry on or about his clothes or person
or otherwise in his possession, or have in his control, alcoholic
beverages, narcotics, firearms, explosives or flammable materials of
any kind during the emergency, except as may be specifically
authorized by the Mayor.
F. Order that the state police, National Guard and Township police take
any and all measures required to quell disturbances and outbreaks of
violence, to secure areas within the Township, to prevent and deter
actual or threatened harm to persons or property, to prevent looting,
and generally take all action necessary to implement and effectuate the
regulations of this chapter as well as the statutes of this state and all
ordinances of the Township.
§ 12-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-5
1:125
CONTRACTING PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Political campaign practices — See Ch. 51.
§ 12-5 HAMILTON CODE § 12-5
1:126
ARTICLE I
Awarding Professional Services Contracts to Certain Campaign
Contributors
[Adopted 8-20-2003 by Ord. No. 03-037; amended in its entirety
11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 06-035 (Ch. 44, Art. III, of the 1994 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 19-1. Prohibition on awarding professional services contracts to
certain contributors.
A. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Township or its Purchasing Agent, or the purchasing agent of any
Township independent authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter
into a professional services contract to procure services from any
professional business entity, including those services awarded through
a "fair and open" process, if that entity has made any contribution of
money, or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions, and/
or loans, to a municipal campaign committee or fund of any candidate
for, or holder of, a public office within Hamilton Township having
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract, or campaign
committee financially supporting such candidate or officeholder, or to
any Hamilton Township municipal or Mercer County party committee,
or to any political action committee ("PAC"), that engages in the support
of municipal elections and/or municipal parties in excess of the
monetary thresholds specified in Subsection D of this section within one
calendar year immediately preceding the date of the contract or
agreement.
B. No professional business entity which enters into negotiations for, or
agrees to, any professional services contract with the Township or any
department or agency thereof or of its independent authorities for the
rendition of professional services, including those awarded pursuant to
a "fair and open" process, shall violate this section by making or
soliciting any contribution of money, or pledge of a contribution,
including in-kind contributions, or loans, to a municipal campaign
committee or fund of any candidate for, or holder of, a Hamilton
Township public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of
the contract, or campaign committee financially supporting such
candidate or officeholder or to any PAC that engages in the support of
municipal elections and/or municipal parties, or to any Hamilton
Township municipal or Mercer County party committee, between the
time of first communications between that business entity and Hamilton
Township regarding a specific professional services contract and the
later of the termination of negotiations or the completion of the
contract or agreement.
C. For the purposes of this article a "professional business entity" seeking
a professional services contract means an individual, including the
individual's spouse, if any, and any child living at home; person; firm;
corporation; professional corporation; partnership; organization; or
§ 19-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-1
1:127
§ 19-2. Contributions made prior to the effective date.
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions or loans, made by a professional business entity to the
municipal campaign committee or fund of any Hamilton Township municipal
candidate or officeholder, or any Hamilton Township municipal or Mercer
County party committee, shall be deemed a violation of this article, nor
shall an agreement for property, goods, or services, of any kind whatsoever,
be disqualified thereby, if that contribution was made by the professional
business entity prior to the effective date of this article.
§ 19-3. Contribution and disclosure statement by professional
business entity.
association. The definition of a "professional business entity" also
includes all principals who own 10% or more of the equity in the
corporation or business trust, partners, and officers in the aggregate
employed by the entity, as well as any subsidiaries directly controlled
by the professional business entity.
D. An individual meeting the definition of a "professional business entity"
under this section may annually contribute during the twelve-month
period prior to local government contract negotiations a maximum of
$300 each for a municipal campaign committee or fund of any
candidate for, or holder of, the Hamilton Township public office having
the ultimate responsibility for the award of a professional services
contract, and a maximum of $300 to any Hamilton Township municipal
or Mercer County party committee. However, any group of individuals
meeting the definition of "professional business entity" under this
section, including such principals, partners, and officers of the entity in
the aggregate, shall not annually contribute for any purpose in excess
of $2,500 to a municipal campaign committee or fund of all Hamilton
Township candidates, Hamilton Township municipal and/or Mercer
County party committees, and PACs referenced in this section
combined, during the twelve-month period prior to local government
contract negotiations.
E. "Professional services" shall have the same meaning as set forth in the
Local Public Contracts Act, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
F. The limitations set forth in Subsection D of this section shall not apply
in the event the subject contract is offered to the lowest responsible
bidder after public advertising for bids and quotes, pursuant to the
competitive contracting requirements of the Local Public Contracts Act,
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
A. Prior to awarding any professional services contract to procure services
with any professional business entity, the Township or any of its
purchasing agents or agencies, as the case may be, shall receive a
sworn statement from the professional business entity made under
penalty of perjury that the professional business entity has not made a
§ 19-1 HAMILTON CODE § 19-3
1:128
§ 19-4. Return of excess contributions.
A professional business entity or Hamilton Township candidate or
officeholder, a Hamilton Township municipal or Mercer County party
committee or PAC referenced in this article may cure a contribution which
violates § 19-1B or is in excess of the limits contained in § 19-1D, if, within
30 days after the general election following any such contribution, or upon
written notice of violation from the Township, whichever occurs sooner,
the professional business entity notifies the Township Council in writing
and seeks and receives reimbursement of the excess contribution from
the municipal committee or fund of a Hamilton Township candidate or
officeholder, any Hamilton Township municipal or Mercer County party
committee, as the case may be.
§ 19-5. Violations.
contribution in excess of the limits contained in § 19-1D, or in violation
of the time period and recipients specified in § 19-1A and B.
B. The professional business entity shall have a continuing duty to report
any violations of this article that may occur during the negotiation or
duration of a professional services contract. The certification required
under this subsection shall be made prior to entry into the contract with
the Township and shall be in addition to any other certifications that
may be required by any other provision of law.
C. The professional business entity shall append a "contribution disclosure
statement" to its sworn certification, which statement shall be a list
specifying the amount, date and the recipient of any and all
contributions reportable under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq., made by the
entity and its principals to or on behalf of any candidate, candidate
committee, joint candidates committee, continuing political committee,
or political party committee of, or within Mercer County for the time
period referenced in § 19-1 of this article. The professional business
entity shall have a continuing duty to update said statement during the
course of negotiations and/or contract performance, as the case may
be. No contract shall issue if the entity has failed to submit a
contribution disclosure statement.
A. All Hamilton Township professional services contracts shall provide
that it shall be a breach of the terms of the contract for a professional
business entity to violate the several provisions set forth in § 19-1 or to
conceal or misrepresent contributions given or received, or to make
contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the source or intended beneficiary of the contribution.
B. Any professional business entity who knowingly and intentionally fails
to reveal a contribution made in violation of the several provisions of
§ 19-1, or who knowingly and intentionally makes contributions through
intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the
source of the contributions, or the intended beneficiary shall be
§ 19-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-5
1:129
§ 19-6. Effective date.
This amended article shall become effective on November 1, 2006, and
shall govern the awarding of all Township professional services contracts
commencing on or after that date.
disqualified from eligibility for future professional services contracts
with the Township for a period of two calendar years from the date of
the violation.
C. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that failure to disclose a
contribution made in violation of this article is a knowing and
intentional act.
§ 19-5 HAMILTON CODE § 19-6
1:130
ARTICLE II
Awarding Public Redevelopment Agreements to Certain Campaign
Contributors
[Adopted 4-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06-018 (Ch. 44, Art. IV, of the 1994
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 19-7. Prohibition; definitions.
A. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Township, or the Township's Redevelopment Agency, as the case may
be, shall not enter into a redevelopment agreement, or otherwise
contract with any redeveloper concerning the redevelopment of any
area within the Township pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and
Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., as same may be amended, if
that redeveloper has made or solicited any contribution of money, or
pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions, to a municipal
campaign committee or fund of any candidate for, or holder of, public
office within the Township having responsibility for entering into or
awarding a redevelopment agreement, or for appointing those who
enter into the agreement on behalf of the Township, or to any Hamilton
Township municipal or Mercer County party committee, or to any
political action committee which regularly engages in the support of
municipal elections and/or municipal parties or which engages in the
support of Township municipal campaigns (PAC), within one calendar
year immediately preceding the date of the redevelopment agreement.
B. All redevelopment agreements or amendments thereto entered into by
the Township or the Township's Redevelopment Agency, as the case
may be, shall contain a provision prohibiting redevelopers as defined in
Subsection C from soliciting or making any contributions of money or
pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions, to a campaign
committee of any Township candidate or holder of public office within
the Township having responsibility for arranging, entering into or
approving the redevelopment agreement, or for appointing those who
enter into the agreement on behalf of the Township, or to any Township
political campaign committee, or to any Township or Mercer County
party committee, or to any political action committee which regularly
engages in the support of municipal elections and/or municipal parties
or which engages in the support of Township municipal campaigns
(PAC), from the time of first communication between the redeveloper
and the Township regarding a specific redevelopment project and the
later of the termination of negotiations or the completion of the terms of
the redevelopment agreement.
C. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
REDEVELOPER — Includes the definition set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-3, Definitions. The term "redeveloper" shall also include all
"subdevelopers" who are under contract with a redeveloper to perform
§ 19-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-7
1:131
§ 19-8. Contributions made prior to the effective date.
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a redeveloper to the municipal campaign committee
or fund of any Township municipal candidate or officeholder, or any
Township municipal or Mercer County party committee, shall be deemed a
violation of this article, nor shall an agreement for a redevelopment project
of any kind whatsoever be disqualified thereby, if the contribution was made
by the redeveloper prior to the effective date of this article.
§ 19-9. Contribution statement by redeveloper; reporting.
§ 19-10. Return of contributions.
A redeveloper may cure a violation of this article if, within 30 days after a
general election, the redeveloper notifies the Township Council in writing
and seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution from the municipal
committee or fund of a Hamilton Township candidate or officeholder, any
Hamilton Township municipal or Mercer County party committee.
§ 19-11. Violations.
redevelopment or rehabilitation work at any redevelopment project
within the Township. Furthermore, the definition of "redeveloper" shall
include the corporation, business trust or other entity that is
performing the redevelopment project within the Township, as well as
all partners and/or officers therein, and all principals who own 10% or
more of the equity in the corporation, business trust or other entity, as
well as any subsidiaries owned or controlled by the redeveloper.
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT — Includes the definition set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-3, Definitions.
A. Prior to arranging, entering into or approving a redevelopment
agreement with any redeveloper, the Township or the Township's
Redevelopment Agency, as the case may be, shall receive a certification
from the redeveloper that the redeveloper has not made any
contributions in violation of this article.
B. The redeveloper shall have a continuing duty to report any violations of
this article that may occur during the negotiation or duration of the
redevelopment agreement, and until all specified terms of the
agreement have been completed. The certification required under this
subsection shall be made prior to entry into the redevelopment
agreement with the Township, or the redevelopment agency, as the case
may be, and shall be in addition to any other certifications that may be
required by any other provision of law.
A. It shall be a breach of the terms of a Township redevelopment
agreement for a redeveloper to:
(1) Make or solicit a contribution in violation of this article;
§ 19-7 HAMILTON CODE § 19-11
1:132
(2) Knowingly conceal or misrepresent a contribution given or
received;
(3) Make or solicit contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution;
(4) Make or solicit any contribution on the condition or with the
agreement that it will be contributed to a campaign committee of
any candidate or holder of the public office of the Township;
(5) Engage or employ a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or
solicit any contribution, which if made or solicited by the
redeveloper itself, would subject that entity to the restrictions of
this article;
(6) Fund contributions made by third parties, including consultants,
attorneys, family members and employees;
(7) Engage in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent
of this article; or
(8) Directly, indirectly, through or by any other person or means, do
any act which would subject that entity to the restrictions of this
article.
B. Any redeveloper who knowingly and intentionally violates the terms of
Subsection A shall be disqualified from eligibility for any future
redevelopment agreements with the Township for a period of four
calendar years from the date of the violation.
§ 19-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-11
1:133

ARTICLE III
Competitive Process for Insurance, Insurance Consulting and
Professional Services Contracts
[Adopted 2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 13-005]
§ 19-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INSURANCE — Includes the purchase of insurance coverages, alternatives
to insurance such as self-insurance programs, as well as participation in
a joint self-insurance fund, risk management program or related services
provided by a contracting unit insurance group, or participation in an
insurance fund established by a local unit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10-6, or
a joint insurance fund established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10-36 et seq.
INSURANCE CONSULTING SERVICES — Includes all services associated
with procuring, evaluating and administering insurance, including but not
limited to brokerage, risk management or administrative services, and
claims processing or administration services, including such services
provided by a contracting unit insurance group, or an insurance fund
established by a local unit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10-6, or a joint insurance
fund established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10-36 et seq.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — As defined at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(6), services
rendered or performed by a person authorized by law to practice a
recognized profession, whose practice is regulated by law, and the
performance of which services requires knowledge of an advanced type in
a field of learning acquired by a prolonged formal course of specialized
instruction and study as distinguished from general academic instruction
or apprenticeship and training. For purposes of this article, however,
professional services shall not include professional artistic services as
defined at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(6). Counseling, medical and legal services shall
be excluded when following the competitive process would cause a harmful
delay. Professional services shall include financial services or insurance
services.
§ 19-13. Insurance contracting procedure.
A. Prior to entering into any contract to obtain insurance or insurance
consulting services, the Township shall secure full and open
competition among insurers, and insurance consulting service
providers, for the Township's business. The Township is hereby
authorized, and directed, to use the competitive contracting process set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4.3, 40A:11-4.4 and 40A:11-4.5 to secure such
competition, except to the extent this article requires additional
measures to better ensure maximum competition and fairness to all
interested parties.
§ 19-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-13
1:135
B. This open competition shall provide that at least 60, but not more than
120, days prior to the contract commencement date, the Township shall
advertise in the newspapers authorized to print legal notices for the
municipality, and in a newspaper circulated in at least five counties in
the state, and on the Township's website, a request for proposals to
provide insurance and insurance consulting services. The notice shall
advise the reader that details of the Township's insurance requirements
are available from the Municipal Clerk on request and shall include the
phone number of the Clerk.
C. The request for proposals shall be designed and drafted by the Business
Administrator, or his or her designee, and shall set forth such detailed
information as may be required for all proposers to understand and
possess equal information concerning the Township's insurance and
insurance consulting services needs, including the current terms of,
and fees or premiums paid for, such coverages or services, current
coverages, loss experience and anticipated or desirable needs with
respect to the relevant coverages or services sought. All requests for
proposal information, including claims, expense and loss data, shall be
made available to all proposers in both written and electronic format.
D. Responses to the request for proposal shall be submitted to the
Township at least 30 days prior to the anticipated commencement of the
contract.
E. At no time during the proposal solicitation process shall any official or
employee of the Township, or any officer, employee or representative of
any provider of insurance consulting services to the Township, convey
information, including price, to any potential proposer which could
confer an unfair advantage upon that proposer over any other potential
proposer.
F. A provider of insurance consulting services to the Township shall be
compensated for its services to or on behalf of the Township solely by
the Township. Compensation shall be set on a fixed fee or hourly basis,
or on such other common and readily comparable basis applicable to all
proposers and set forth in the request for proposal documents, provided
that compensation shall not be determined as a percentage of premium
costs.
G. No provider of insurance or of insurance consulting services to the
Township shall pay to any insurance consulting service provider to the
Township, or to any other third party, any form of compensation,
including but not limited to commissions, fees, incentives, bonuses,
rebates or any other thing of value, in consideration of obtaining the
Township's insurance or insurance consulting business.
H. No provider of insurance consulting services to the Township shall
accept any form of compensation, including but not limited to
commissions, fees, incentives, bonuses, rebates or any other thing of
value, from any provider of insurance, other insurance service provider,
§ 19-13 HAMILTON CODE § 19-13
1:136
§ 19-14. Professional services contracting procedure.
or any other third party, in consideration of obtaining or servicing the
Township's insurance or insurance consulting business.
I. Any person or entity proposing to provide insurance or insurance
consulting services to the Township shall certify in its proposal that it
shall neither pay nor accept any form of compensation, in consideration
of obtaining or servicing the Township's insurance or insurance
consulting business from any party other than the Township.
J. Any person or entity selected to provide insurance or insurance
consulting services to the Township shall certify at least annually and
prior to any renewal of its contract, that it has not paid nor accepted
any form of compensation, in consideration of obtaining or servicing the
Township's insurance or insurance consulting business from any party
other than the Township.
K. Any provider of insurance consulting service that assists the Township
in soliciting, evaluating, or selecting any provider of insurance or other
insurance consulting services to the Township shall disclose to the
Township the aggregate compensation, including but not limited to
commissions, fees, incentives, bonuses, rebates or any other thing of
value, it has received in each of the prior three years from each
provider of insurance or insurance consulting services solicited or
evaluated by the Township. Such disclosure shall be made as soon as
practicable, but in no event later than the date of the evaluation report
recommending an award by the governing body.
L. The request for proposals for any insurance or insurance consulting
services for the Township shall clearly establish the compensation
restrictions and the certification and disclosure requirements
established by this article as mandatory, nonwaivable terms, the
violation of which shall be grounds for:
(1) Terminating any contract resulting therefrom; and
(2) Requiring the insurer or insurance service provider to disgorge to
the public entity any compensation, including but not limited to
commissions, fees, incentives, bonuses, rebates or any other thing
of value, paid or received in violation of this article, and a
commensurate reduction in premiums to be paid by the public
entity for the affected coverage(s) in the future.
M. Whenever soliciting quotations for insurance coverage, the Business
Administrator or his or her designee shall use best efforts to obtain at
least three quotations.
A. The municipality shall award all contracts or agreements for the
provision of professional services on the basis of qualification based,
competitive negotiation.
§ 19-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-14
1:137
B. Professional service contract requests for proposal shall be published
by the posting of a public notice at least 10 days prior to the awarding
of any contract for professional services.
C. The public notice shall be:
(1) Prominently posted in the public place reserved for Sunshine Law
notices;
(2) Mailed, telephoned, telegrammed, or hand delivered to at least two
newspapers designated to receive such notices because they have
the greatest likelihood of informing the public within the
municipality, one of which shall be the official newspaper of the
municipality; and
(3) Filed with the Clerk of the municipality.
D. The public notice shall, at minimum, include:
(1) A description of the professional services needed, including, where
appropriate, a description of tasks involved.
(2) Threshold qualification requirements setting the highest possible,
minimum standards for qualifying to compete for the particular
services and tasks involved.
(3) Notice that standardized submission requirements and selection
criteria are on file and available at a stated location in the
Township.
(4) Deadline and place for all submissions.
E. Standardized submission requirements shall include:
(1) Names and roles of the individuals who will perform the task and a
description of their experience with projects similar to the matter
being advertised.
(2) References and record of success.
(3) Description of ability to provide the services in a timely fashion
(including staffing, familiarity and location of key staff).
(4) Cost details, including the hourly rates of each of the individuals
who will perform services and time estimates for each individual,
all expenses, and, where appropriate, total cost of "not to exceed"
amount.
F. The selection criteria to be used in awarding a contract or agreement
for professional services shall include:
(1) Qualifications of the individuals who will perform the tasks and the
amounts of their respective participation.
(2) Experience and references.
§ 19-14 HAMILTON CODE § 19-14
1:138
(3) Ability to perform the task in a timely fashion, including staffing
and familiarity with subject matter.
(4) Cost competitiveness.
G. All submissions shall be kept on file during the term of the related
contract, and shall be public records after the deadline for the
submission of proposals.
H. In the event that compliance with part or all of the requirements of this
article is impracticable as regards a particular contract or agreement,
the Township Council may waive part or all of the requirements by a
majority vote of the full Council together with publication of a
resolution setting forth with specificity the reasons such waiver is
required.
§ 19-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-14
1:139
Chapter 24
CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS
§ 19-14 HAMILTON CODE § 19-14
1:140
ARTICLE I
Volunteers for Youth-Serving Organizations
[Adopted 12-22-2004 by Ord. No. 04-057; amended 3-9-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-006; 5-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-016 (Ch. 2, § 2-281, of the
1994 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 24-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
COSPONSORED — The Township provision of funding or facilities,
including maintenance of facilities.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person's name and fingerprints with those on file with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, Identification Division and the State Bureau of Identification
in the Division of State Police.
NONPROFIT YOUTH-SERVING ORGANIZATION or ORGANIZATION — A
corporation, association or other organization established pursuant to Title
15 of the Revised Statutes, Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes or other
law of the state and is exempt from federal income taxes but excluding
public and nonpublic schools, and which provides sports-related activities
or services for persons younger than 18 years of age, in connection with
Hamilton Township sponsored or cosponsored sports programs or leagues.
REVIEW COMMITTEE or COMMITTEE — A three-member committee
consisting of the Superintendent of the Township's Division of Recreation,
the Township's Business Administrator and the Chief of the Hamilton
Township Police Division. The Committee shall be charged with the review
of all appeals by any employee or volunteer whose criminal history
background check reveals a disqualifying criminal conviction.
SPONSORED — Leagues and recreation run directly by the Hamilton
Township Recreation Division, including oversight, control and/or fiscal
contribution.
SUPERVISED — To have the direction and oversight of the performance of
others.
UNSUPERVISED — Not supervised or not under constant observation.
VOLUNTEER — Any person involved with a Hamilton Township-sponsored
or cosponsored sports program or league who has regular unsupervised
direct access to minors as a result of their involvement with the
organization.
§ 24-2. Request for criminal history record background checks;
costs.
§ 24-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-2
1:141
A. The Township of Hamilton requires that all nonprofit youth-serving
organizations request that the State Bureau of Identification in the
Division of State Police conduct a criminal history record background
check on each prospective and current employee and volunteer of the
organization. This criminal history background check shall be
conducted by the New Jersey State Police or its designated vendor for
that purpose. Each youth league must ensure that all employees and
volunteers comply with the instructions provided by the New Jersey
State Police or its designee. Each youth league must supply each
employee or volunteer with the necessary forms and information to
complete the process. There shall be a thirty-day grace period for each
new employee or volunteer of the youth-serving organization to make
application for this criminal history record background check. All
coaches must have their fingerprinting and applications completed by
the end of the thirty-day grace period.
B. The youth organizations shall request a criminal history record
background check only upon receipt of the written consent for such a
check from the prospective or current employee or volunteer with
direct unsupervised access to minors.
C. The Township shall bear the costs associated with conducting the
criminal history record background checks required by this article in
accordance with the fees established by the State Bureau of
Identification in the Division of State Police, and in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-2d. The initial expense is to be borne by the employee
or volunteer. Upon completing the processing, the youth organization
shall reimburse each employee or volunteer. The youth organization
will then submit to the Township a request for reimbursement by
showing how much is due, with proof of completion and names of
employees or volunteers. However, if an independent organization
agrees to bear the costs associated with conducting the background
checks required by this article, such costs shall be paid directly by such
organization and the Township shall have no obligation to pay such
costs, either directly or through reimbursement.
D. The state police or its designee shall inform the youth organization
whether the person's criminal history record background check reveals
a conviction of a disqualifying crime or offense as specified in § 24-3
below. Any information received by the youth organization shall be
communicated to the Hamilton Township Police Division, which
information shall be confidential, except as otherwise provided herein.
E. Any person who, by virtue of their occupation, is required by statute to
undergo a federal and state criminal history record background check
similar in nature to the requirements contained herein, and who can
provide proof of the results of such background check, or has obtained
clearance similar in nature to the requirements contained herein from
another municipality, organization, or similar entity, and can provide
proof of such clearance, is exempt from the requirements hereunder
until three years has elapsed since the most current background check.
§ 24-2 HAMILTON CODE § 24-3
1:142
§ 24-3. Conditions under which a person is disqualified from
service.
A person may be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer of a
nonprofit youth-serving organization if that person's criminal history record
background check reveals a record of conviction of any of the following
crimes and offenses:
§ 24-4. Limitations on access and use of criminal history record
information.
A. In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(1) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
such as criminal homicide; N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., such as assault,
reckless endangerment, threats, stalking; N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq.,
such as kidnapping; N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq., such as sexual assault;
or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq., such as robbery;
(2) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those crimes
and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:24-1 et seq.,
such as endangering the welfare of a child;
(3) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes;
(4) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes except Paragraph (4) of Subsection (a) of N.J.S.A.
2C:35-10.
B. In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in New
Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly persons
offenses described in this section.
A. Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to the
members of the review committee, as authorized by federal or state
statute, rule or regulation, executive order, local ordinance or
resolution regarding obtaining and disseminating of criminal history
record information obtained under this chapter.
B. The review committee shall limit its use of criminal history record
information solely to the individual for which it was obtained, and the
criminal history record information furnished shall not be disseminated
to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the records for
authorized purposes. This information shall be limited solely to the
authorized purpose for which it was given, and it shall not be
disseminated to any unauthorized persons. Any person violating federal
or state regulations governing access to criminal history records
information may be subject to criminal and/or civil penalties.
§ 24-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-5
1:143
§ 24-5. Challenge of accuracy of report.
A. A person is not presumed guilty of any charges or arrests for which
there are no final dispositions indicated on the criminal history record
background check. The state police shall make the initial
recommendation concerning the individual, based solely on the New
Jersey State Statutes, to the Hamilton Township Police Division who
shall provide the information to the review committee and advise the
review committee whether or not the individual is being recommended.
The review committee will receive a preprinted form on each individual
submitted to the state police for a background check. One form will be
for recommendation and the other will be for rejection. If there is a
rejection, the review committee may nonetheless allow the employee or
volunteer to participate in Township-sponsored or cosponsored
recreation. It is within the review committee's discretion to supersede
the state police recommendation.
B. Upon receipt of the information from the Hamilton Township Police
Division, the review committee shall promptly provide written notice to
a prospective or current employee or volunteer whose criminal history
record background check reveals a disqualifying conviction. The person
shall have 30 days from the receipt of that notice to petition the review
committee (in writing addressed to the Township's Business
Administrator) of an intention to challenge and/or review the accuracy
of the information received and the committee's determination. The
individual shall cite reasons substantiating the challenge and review. If
such individual provides documentation to the satisfaction of the
committee, the committee may, in its discretion and without a hearing
thereon, allow such individual to participate in Township-sponsored or
cosponsored recreation. If the documentation is not satisfactory, the
committee shall hold a hearing to consider the challenge and/or review
within 30 days of receiving notice of an individual's intention to
challenge. The committee must render its final decision within 30 days
of the hearing date.
(1) Where an individual with a disqualifying conviction was denied
prior to the enactment of this article and subsequently reinstated
by the review committee, such employee or volunteer shall only be
required to provide a copy of their criminal history record to the
Business Administrator stating that they have not been convicted of
any other offenses since their initial challenge to their denial. No
further challenge or hearing is required.
(2) Where an individual with a disqualifying conviction is denied
subsequent to the enactment of this article, such employee or
volunteer shall submit a copy of their criminal history record along
with a written challenge addressed to the Business Administrator
for committee review and possible hearing thereon.
C. Notwithstanding the criteria set forth in § 24-3 of this article, no person
shall be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer of a
§ 24-5 HAMILTON CODE § 24-5
1:144
nonprofit youth-serving organization, if the person can affirmatively
demonstrate rehabilitation to the review committee. In determining
whether a person has affirmatively demonstrated rehabilitation, the
review committee shall consider the following factors:
(1) The nature and responsibility of the position which the convicted
person would hold or has held, as the case may be;
(2) The nature and seriousness of the offense;
(3) The circumstances under which the offense occurred;
(4) The date of the offense;
(5) The age of the person and the victim (if any) when the offense was
committed;
(6) Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated incident;
(7) Any social conditions which may have contributed to the offense;
(8) Any evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in prison or
the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment received,
acquisition of additional academic or vocational schooling,
successful participation in correctional work-release programs, or
the recommendation of those who have had the person under their
supervision.
D. The review committee shall promptly advise an organization in writing
if a current or prospective employee or volunteer whose criminal
history record background check reveals a disqualifying offense has
affirmatively demonstrated rehabilitation under this article.
E. The potential demonstration of rehabilitation shall not apply to persons
who have been convicted, adjudicated, delinquent or acquitted by
reason of insanity, of any of the following crimes: aggravated sexual
assault; sexual assault; aggravated criminal sexual contact; kidnapping
pursuant to Paragraph (2) of Subsection c of N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1;
endangering the welfare of a child by engaging in sexual conduct which
would impair or debauch the morals of the child pursuant to Subsection
a of N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4; endangering the welfare of a child pursuant to
Paragraph (4) of Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4; luring or enticing
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:13-6; criminal sexual contact pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2C:14-3b, if the victim is a minor; kidnapping pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2C:13-2, or false imprisonment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:13-3, if
the victim is a minor and the offender is not the parent of the victim;
knowingly promoting prostitution of a child pursuant to Paragraph (3)
or Paragraph (4) of Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 2C:34-1; or an attempt to
commit any of these enumerated offenses.
F. When the review committee provides written notification to an
individual stating whether the criminal history record background
check performed pursuant to this article reveals a disqualifying offense,
§ 24-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-5
1:145
§ 24-6. Violations.
Failure to comply with the criminal history background check requirements
of this article may result in the Township withholding funding for the subject
program or league and/or prohibiting the use of Township facilities by that
program or league.
or stating that the person has affirmatively demonstrated rehabilitation
under this article, the review committee may file that written
notification with the Hamilton Township Police Division.
G. The Hamilton Township Police Division shall keep any such written
notification received from the review committee on file for three years
from the date it was issued.
H. The review committee may request the Hamilton Township Police
Division to review its files to determine if there is written notification on
file stating whether a criminal history record background check of a
current or prospective employee or volunteer revealed a disqualifying
offense, or stating that the person has affirmatively demonstrated
rehabilitation under this article. A current or prospective employee or
volunteer shall not be required to submit to another criminal history
record background check if such written notification was issued within
the past three years.
I. No person or entity shall be held liable in any civil or criminal action
brought by any party based on any written notification that may be on
file with the Hamilton Township Police Division pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
§ 24-5 HAMILTON CODE § 24-6
1:146
Chapter 33
INSURANCE FUND
§ 33-1. Establishment; purpose.
There is hereby established within the Township an Insurance Fund for the
following purposes:
§ 33-2. Appointment, term of office and compensation of Insurance
Fund Commissioners.
The Director of Finance, one local or elected official appointed by the Mayor
and one member of the Township Council to be selected by the Council shall
serve as Insurance Fund Commissioners. The Commissioners shall hold
office for two years or for the remainder of their terms of office as officials,
whichever shall be less, and until their successors have been duly appointed
and qualified. The Commissioners shall serve without compensation.
§ 33-3. Organization of Commissioners; election of Chairman.
The Insurance Fund Commissioners shall organize each year by election
from the membership of a Chairman.
§ 33-4. Powers of Commissioners.
A. To insure against any loss or damage, however caused, to any property,
motor vehicles, equipment or apparatus owned by it or owned by or
under control of any of its departments, boards, agencies or
commissions.
B. To insure against liability resulting from the use or operation of motor
vehicles, equipment or apparatus owned by or controlled by it or owned
by or under the control of any of its departments, boards, agencies or
commissions.
C. To insure against liability for its negligence and that of its officers,
employees and servants, whether or not compensated or part-time, who
are authorized to perform any act or services, but not including an
independent contractor within the limitation of the New Jersey Tort
Claims Act (N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.).
A. The Insurance Fund Commissioners shall have the following powers
and authority:
(1) To employ necessary clerical assistants, whose compensation shall
be fixed and paid by the governing body of the local unit in the
same manner as is that of other employees of the local unit.
(2) To invest the fund and all additions and accretions thereto in such
securities as it shall deem best suited for the purposes of this
article.
§ 24-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-4
1:147
§ 33-5. Commission Secretary.
§ 33-6. Maximum or minimum amount; disposition of excess.
The Mayor may designate the maximum or minimum amount of the
Insurance Fund at the time of the preparation of the annual budget and,
from time to time, provide for the disposition of any excess over and above
the maximum amount fixed or of the interest or profits arising therefrom
when the fund shall have reached the maximum limit.
Chapter 45
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Contracting procedures — See Ch. 19.
Criminal history background checks — See
Ch. 24.
Political campaign practices — See Ch. 66.
(3) To adopt rules and regulations for the control and investment of the
fund.
(4) To keep on hand at all times sufficient money, or have the money
invested in such securities as can be immediately sold for cash, for
the payment of losses to any buildings or property of the local unit
or liability resulting from the operation of publicly owned motor
vehicles, equipment or apparatus.
(5) To fix reasonable rates of premium for all insurance carried by the
Insurance Fund and effect all insurance in the Insurance Fund or
with any insurance company authorized to do business in this state.
B. Premiums for insurance, whether carried in the Insurance Fund or
placed with insurance companies, shall be paid to the Commissioners
by the board, commission, department, committee or officer having
charge or control of the property insured.
C. All insurance upon property owned or controlled by a local unit or any
of its departments, boards, agencies or commissions shall be placed
and effected by the Commissioners.
A. There shall be established the position of Secretary to the Insurance
Fund Commissioners. The Secretary shall be appointed by the Mayor
and shall serve at the pleasure of the Commission.
B. The annual salary of the Secretary shall not exceed $1 per year unless
otherwise established by ordinance or resolution of the governing body.
C. Vacancies in the position of Secretary shall be filled in the manner of
the original appointment.
§ 33-4 HAMILTON CODE § 33-6
1:148
§ 45-1. General policies.
§ 45-2. Abolition or modification of offices.
The Township Council may by ordinance abolish, increase, decrease or
modify the terms and compensation of any office of the Township, except
that the Township Council may not abolish or alter the terms of an office
that has been or is created by general law. Except where an office is
abolished, no decrease or modification of its terms and compensation shall
affect any incumbent holding such office for the duration of the term for
which he was appointed.
§ 45-3. Power of appointment.
All employees, officers and department heads of the Township shall be
appointed and promoted by the Mayor, except as may be otherwise provided
by ordinance, general law or civil service regulations.
§ 45-4. Qualifications of appointees.
Original appointments to fill vacancies or for new positions of the Township
shall be limited to qualified persons who have been interviewed or tested
concerning such factors as education, experience, aptitude, knowledge,
character and physical and mental fitness.
§ 45-5. Preference for Township residents and employees.
Provided they are qualified for the positions for which they have applied,
preference shall be given, in appointments to fill vacancies and new
positions of the Township, first, to employees of the Township, and,
secondly, to persons who are residents of the Township at the time of
their appointment. The Township Council may by ordinance provide that all
officers and employees shall be residents of the Township.
A. Employment in the Township shall be based on merit and fitness, free of
personal and political considerations.
B. Appointments, promotions and other personnel actions shall be on a
merit basis.
C. Qualified Township personnel shall be given first consideration for
vacancies and new positions.
D. The Township shall have a personnel manual, which shall be updated
periodically.42
42.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 33-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-6
1:149
§ 45-6. Residency requirement. [Amended 2-2-1994 by Ord. No.
94-002]
All persons appointed by the Mayor as employees of the Township shall be
residents of the Township at the time of application for employment, which
residency shall be continuously maintained up to and including the date of
appointment. See N.J.A.C. 4A:4-2.11(b). This section shall not apply to those
positions which are exempted from residency requirements by state statute.
§ 45-7. Application procedure.
§ 45-8. Grounds for rejection of applicants.
An applicant for employment with the Township may be rejected where he:
A. Applicants for employment with the Township shall apply on forms
provided by the Division of Personnel and which have been designed to
obtain pertinent information concerning the applicant's education,
training, experience, character and other factors necessary to
determine his fitness and qualification for service to the Township. All
applications shall be filed with the Division of Personnel.
B. The Division of Personnel shall be charged with processing all
applications for appointment to vacancies or new positions and
reporting thereon to the Administrator or department heads. Where it
appears that an applicant is otherwise qualified for employment, the
Division of Personnel shall require that the applicant furnish evidence
that he is physically fit for the position for which he seeks employment.
C. Application for membership in the Police Division shall be channeled
through the Division of Personnel in conjunction with the Chief of
Police.
A. Is not qualified for appointment to the position for which he has applied.
B. Is physically unfit to perform the duties of the position for which he has
applied.
C. Is addicted to the habitual or excessive use of drugs or intoxicants.
D. Has been convicted of any crime or offense, including disorderly
persons offenses involving moral turpitude.
E. Has received other than an honorable discharge from the Armed
Services of the United States.
F. Has been dismissed from previous employment for delinquency,
insubordination or misconduct.
G. Has practiced or attempted to practice any deception or fraud in his
application or in furnishing other evidence of eligibility for
appointment.
§ 45-6 HAMILTON CODE § 45-8
1:150
§ 45-9. Probationary period.
§ 45-10. Personnel file.
The Division of Personnel shall initiate a personnel file for each new
employee of the Township, and all records of such employee concerning
qualification, permanent status, work history, accumulated vacation and
sick leave, leave time and the like shall be maintained for such employee
in such file. The Division of Personnel shall make such files available for
inspection by the employee on a reasonable basis.
§ 45-11. Working hours.
The hours of work for employees of the Township, including lunch hours,
shall be as specified by the Mayor.
§ 45-12. Holidays.
H. Is not within age limits that have been established for the position for
which he seeks appointment.
A. Except when provided by law, every person appointed to a new position
of the Township shall be deemed to be on probation in the position to
which he shall have been appointed for a period of three months, but
such probation shall not affect the permanent status of any other
Township employment that such person may have achieved. To
determine whether he shall be granted permanent status or dismissed,
the employee or officer, prior to his completion of the probationary
period, shall be evaluated by the department head or division head, or,
in the case of a member or employee in the Police Division, by the Chief
of Police, and such evaluation shall be submitted to the Division of
Personnel. The Division of Personnel will require reports and
recommendations from immediate superiors and department heads for
this purpose.
B. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:17B-69, a probationary or temporary
appointment as a police officer may be made for a total period not
exceeding one year for the purpose of enabling a person seeking
permanent appointment to take a police training course as required by
law.
A. Due to the emergency nature of the work of the Police Division, the
provisions of this section shall not be applicable to members of the
Police Division.
B. Paid holidays observed by the Township shall be as specified in
respective labor agreements.
C. If any observed holiday falls on a Sunday, it shall be observed on the
following Monday.
§ 45-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-12
1:151
§ 45-13. Employee organizations.
Employees of the Township will be included in the following units:
§ 45-14. Fringe benefits.
Fringe benefits may vary in the groups listed in § 45-13, in which case
they will be outlined in their respective labor agreements as well as the
personnel policy manual.
§ 45-15. Outside employment.
Full-time employees of the Township shall not accept outside employment
or engage in outside business activities for more than 20 hours per week
without the prior approval of their department head. No such application
for permission to accept outside employment shall be granted unless there
is reasonable probability that such outside employment will not interfere
with the employee's performance. No employee shall engage in any outside
D. If an observed holiday falls on a Saturday, it shall be celebrated on the
preceding Friday.
E. If an official holiday is observed during an employee's vacation, he shall
be entitled to an additional vacation day. Should an official holiday
occur while an employee is on sick leave, he shall not have that holiday
charged against his sick leave.
F. Employees are eligible for holiday pay.
G. Employees who are on leave of absence without pay will not be eligible
for holiday pay.
A. Management employees.
B. Lower level supervisors bargaining unit. Majority representative:
Communications Workers of America, AFL-CIO, Local #1040.
C. Lower level supervisors bargaining unit. Majority representative:
Communications Workers of America, AFL-CIO, Local #1032.
D. Police superior officers bargaining unit. Majority representative:
Superior Officers Association.
E. Police rank and file bargaining unit. Majority representative: New
Jersey State Policeman's Benevolent Associations Inc. Local 66.
F. White collar bargaining unit. Majority representative: Communications
Workers of America, AFL-CIO.
G. White collar bargaining unit. Majority representative: American
Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, AFL-CIO, Local
2475.
§ 45-12 HAMILTON CODE § 45-15
1:152
employment or activity which will compromise his position with the
Township.
§ 45-16. Disciplinary action.
§ 45-17. Meritorious actions.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Township to recognize and
encourage meritorious actions on the part of its officers and employees.
To this end, letters of commendation concerning Township employees from
their superiors and from members of the public with whom they deal
shall be directed to the attention of the Mayor and then recorded in the
employee's personnel file. In addition, the Mayor may, on his own motion,
commend the work of particular officers and employees and cause such
commendation to be inserted in their personnel files.
§ 45-18. Code of Ethics. [Amended 3-19-2013 by Ord. No. 13-012;
10-20-2015 by Ord. No. 15-042]
A. General procedure. All employees of the Township who have acquired
permanent status, except those appointed by the Mayor pursuant to
§ 5-4A(4), shall be disciplined in accordance with civil service
regulations.
B. Hearings. Hearings with respect to disciplinary actions and grievances
shall be conducted in accordance with civil service rules and
regulations or respective labor agreements.
C. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to members of
the Police Division, who shall be governed by the provisions established
by the Council.
A. Township officers and/or employees under the jurisdiction of the New
Jersey Local Finance Board shall comply with the following provisions:
(1) No Township officer and/or employee or member of his or her
immediate family shall have an interest in a business organization
or engage in any business, transaction, or professional activity,
which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his or
her duties in the public interest;
(2) Actions following termination of service.
(a) No independent Township authority shall, for a period of one
year next subsequent to the termination of office of a member
of that authority:
1. Award any contract which is not publicly bid to a former
member of that authority;
§ 45-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-18
1:153
2. Allow a former member of that authority to represent,
appear for or negotiate on behalf of any other party before
that authority; or
3. Employ for compensation, except pursuant to open
competitive examination in accordance with Title 11A of
the New Jersey Statutes and the rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto, any former member of that
authority.
(b) The restrictions contained in this subsection shall also apply to
any business organization in which the former authority
member holds an interest;
(3) No Township officer and/or employee shall use or attempt to use his
or her official position to secure unwarranted privileges or
advantages for himself, herself or others;
(4) No Township officer and/or employee shall act in his or her official
capacity in any matter where he, she, a member of his or her
immediate family, or a business organization in which he or she has
an interest, has a direct or indirect financial or personal
involvement that might reasonably be expected to impair his or her
objectivity or independence of judgment;
(5) No Township officer and/or employee shall undertake any
employment or service, whether compensated or not, which might
reasonably be expected to prejudice his or her independence of
judgment in the exercise of his or her official duties;
(6) No Township officer and/or employee, member of his or her
immediate family, or business organization in which he or she has
an interest, shall solicit or accept any gift, favor, loan, political
contribution, service, promise of future employment, or other thing
of value based upon an understanding that the gift, favor, loan,
contribution, service, promise, or other thing of value was given or
offered for the purpose of influencing him or her, directly or
indirectly, in the discharge of his or her official duties. This
provision shall not apply to the solicitation or acceptance of
contributions to the campaign of an announced candidate for
elective public office, if the Township officer has no knowledge or
reason to believe that the campaign contribution, if accepted, was
given with the intent to influence the Township officer in the
discharge of his or her official duties;
(7) No Township officer and/or employee shall use, or allow to be used,
his or her public office or employment, or any information, not
generally available to the members of the public, which he or she
receives or acquires in the course of and by reason of his or her
office or employment, for the purpose of securing financial gain for
himself, herself, any member of his or her immediate family, or any
business organization with which he or she is associated;
§ 45-18 HAMILTON CODE § 45-18
1:154
(8) No Township officer and/or employee or business organization in
which he or she has an interest shall represent any person or party
other than the local government in connection with any cause,
proceeding, application or other matter pending before any agency
in the Township in which he or she serves. This provision shall not
be deemed to prohibit one Township employee from representing
another Township employee where the Township agency is the
employer and the representation is within the context of the official
labor union or similar representational responsibilities;
(9) No Township officer shall be deemed in conflict with these
provisions if, by reason of his or her participation in the enactment
of any ordinance, resolution or other matter required to be voted
upon or which is subject to executive approval or veto, no material
or monetary gain accrues to him or her as a member of any
business, profession, occupation or group, to any greater extent
than any gain could reasonably be expected to accrue to any other
member of such business, profession, occupation or group;
(10)No elected Township officer shall be prohibited from making an
inquiry for information on behalf of a constituent, if no fee, reward
or other thing of value is promised to, given to or accepted by the
officer or a member of his or her immediate family, whether directly
or indirectly, in return therefor; and
(11) Nothing shall prohibit any Township officer or employee, or
members of his or her immediate family, from representing himself,
herself, or themselves, in negotiations or proceedings concerning
his, her, or their, own interest.
B. Township officers, employees and/or members of certain Township
boards or commissions subject to the provisions of the New Jersey Local
Government Ethics Law or any successor statute, elected, appointed, or
otherwise, shall receive and acknowledge receipt and understanding
thereof, in writing, on an annual basis, the Code of Ethics of the
Township. The Code of Ethics of the Township, which shall supplement
the provisions of Subsection A above, may be amended from time to
time; however, the Code of Ethics must always apply equally to any
individual subject thereof by virtue of this section.
C. Township officers, employees and/or members of certain Township
boards or commissions subject to the provisions of the New Jersey Local
Government Ethics Law or any successor statute, elected, appointed, or
otherwise, shall be required to attend ethics training which shall be
provided by Hamilton Township in the same manner as other personnelbased
training as required from time to time by the Mayor.
D. Township officers, employees and/or members of any Township board
or commission, elected, appointed, or otherwise, shall receive and
acknowledge receipt and understanding thereof in writing, on an
annual basis, the gifts and gratuities policy of the Township. The gifts
§ 45-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-18
1:155
§ 45-19. Defense and indemnification of public employees.
and gratuities policy of the Township may be amended from time to
time by the Mayor; however, the gifts and gratuities policy must always
apply equally to any individual subject thereof by virtue of this section.
A. Defense of action. The Township shall provide for the defense of any
action brought against a public employee on account of any act or
omission in the scope of his employment, and this obligation shall
extend to any cross-actions, counterclaims or cross-complaints against
such employee.
B. Exceptions. The provisions of Subsection A of this section shall not be
applicable when the Township Attorney determines that:
(1) The act or omission was not within the scope of employment.
(2) The act or failure to act was because of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice.
(3) The defense of the action or proceeding would create a conflict of
interest between the Township and the public employee.
(4) The defense of the action or proceeding is provided for by an
insurance policy, whether obtained by the Township or by any other
person.
(5) The public employee fails to deliver to the Township Attorney the
original or a copy of any summons, complaint, process, notice,
demand or pleading within 10 days of the time of service of the
summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading upon the
employee.
(6) The public employee has failed to cooperate fully with the defense.
C. Methods of providing defense. The Township may provide any defense
required of it under this section through an attorney from its own staff
or by employing other counsel.
D. Township control over litigation. Whenever the Township provides any
defense required of it under this section, the Township, through
counsel, may assume exclusive control over the representation of the
public employee, and such employee shall cooperate fully with the
defense.
E. Indemnification.
(1) In any case where the Township is required to provide a defense
under this section, the Township shall pay or shall reimburse the
public employee for:
(a) Any bona fide settlement agreements entered into by the
Township.
§ 45-18 HAMILTON CODE § 45-19
1:156
§ 45-20. Employment of relatives of elected officials. [Added
3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 04-013]
§ 45-21. Waiver of health care coverage; payment. [Added 3-4-2014
by Ord. No. 14-011]
(b) Any judgments entered against the employee.
(c) If the Township has failed to provide such required defense, all
costs of defending the action, including reasonable counsel
fees and expenses, together with costs of any appeal.
(2) In any case where the Township would be required to provide a
defense under this section except for the fact that such defense is
provided for by insurance, the Township shall provide
indemnification as provided in this subsection, but only to the
extent not covered by insurance.
(3) Nothing in this section shall authorize the Township to pay for
punitive or exemplary damages or damages resulting from the
commission of a crime.
A. No elected municipal official shall employ, or advocate employment for,
in any Township position the following:
(1) Any person who is a member of the elected municipal official's
immediate family; or
(2) Any person in exchange for or in consideration of the employment
of any member of the elected official's immediate family by any
other employee or official.
B. No elected municipal official shall use or permit the use of his/her
position to assist any member of the elected municipal official's
immediate family in securing employment or contracts with any
Township department exercising authority over said employment or
contracts.
C. The term "immediate family" shall include: spouse; child; parent;
brother, sister; grandparent; grandchild; nephew, niece; father-in-law,
mother-in-law; brother-in-law, sister-in-law; stepfather, stepmother;
stepson, stepdaughter; stepbrother, stepsister; half brother, half sister.
A. In any case where the Township provides group health care benefits to
its employees pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10-16 et seq., any employee who
is eligible for other health care coverage may waive coverage under the
Township's plan should they be eligible to receive such coverage.
B. If an employee elects to waive health care coverage under the
Township's plan, said employee must notify the Division of Personnel on
the proper form.
§ 45-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-21
1:157
Chapter 51
POLITICAL CAMPAIGN PRACTICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Contracting procedures — See Ch. 19.
C. In consideration for filing a waiver of health care coverage under the
Township's plan, pursuant to the calculation in N.J.S.A. 40A:10-17.1, the
Township shall pay the employee filing such waiver, annually, 25%, or
$5,000, whichever is less, of the amount saved by the Township because
of the employee's waiver of coverage. Employees will not receive
compensation if the waiver is based upon coverage provided to their
spouse, who is also a Hamilton Township employee, or Hamilton
Township retiree.
D. An employee who waives coverage shall be permitted to resume
coverage under the same terms and conditions as apply to initial
coverage if the employee ceases to be covered through the employee's
spouse for any reason. An employee who resumes coverage shall repay,
on a pro rata basis, any amount received which represents an advance
payment for a period of time during which coverage is resumed. If an
employee elects to resume coverage, said employee must notify the
Division of Personnel on the proper form.
E. Payments shall be made semi-annually on January 1t and July 1.
§ 45-21 HAMILTON CODE § 45-21
1:158
ARTICLE I
Disclosure Filings by Candidates and Political Committees
[Adopted 12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-049 (Ch. 44, Art. II, of the 1994
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 51-1. Statement of purpose.
Hamilton Township as a matter of public policy strongly supports full
disclosure of information concerning political contributions and related
activities affecting this municipality, accomplished on the state level by the
New Jersey Law Enforcement Commission. Local filing of New Jersey Law
Enforcement Commission reports assures Hamilton citizens will be able
to readily access such information at the local level, enhancing the full
disclosure.
§ 51-2. Definitions.
All words, terms and phrases utilized in this article shall have the same
meanings as set forth in the New Jersey Campaign Contributions and
Expenditures Reporting Act, N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq. and implementing
regulations of the New Jersey Election Law Enforcement Commission,
N.J.A.C. 19:25-1 et seq.
§ 51-3. Disclosure filings.
All local candidates, political committees, continuing political committees,
political party committees, candidate committees and joint candidates
committees shall file certificates of organization and designation of
campaign depository, disclosure statements and related reports filed with
the New Jersey Election Law Enforcement Commission simultaneously with
the Municipal Clerk of the Township.
§ 51-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be punished in
accordance with Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations; penalties,
of the Code of the Township of Hamilton.
§ 51-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-4
1:159

ARTICLE II
Use of Township Property or Equipment for Fund-Raising and
Campaigning
[Adopted 4-18-2000 by Ord. No. 00-012 (Ch. 44, Art. I, of the 1994
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 51-5. Short title.
An ordinance prohibiting political fund-raising on Township property or by
use of Township facilities.
§ 51-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANDIDATE — Any individual seeking election to a public office in the
federal, state, county, or municipal government, or school district or a
political organization.
CONTRIBUTION — Includes all loans and transfers of money or other thing
of value to or by any candidate, elected official or political organization and
all pledges or other commitments or assumptions of liability to make any
such transfer. Contributions shall be deemed to have been made upon the
date when such commitment is made or liability assumed.
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE AND APPOINTEE — Any person
holding elective municipal office or holding an appointed position in the
municipality, or in any agency, commission, board, or office thereof, whether
the position is full time or part time, compensated or uncompensated; and
any employee of the municipality in any agency, commission, board, or office
thereof, whether the position is full time or part time.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township and any officer, department, board,
commission, or agency thereof.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION — Any two or more persons acting jointly, or
any corporation, partnership or any other incorporated or unincorporated
association which is organized to, or does, aid or promote the nomination,
election or defeat of any candidate or candidates for federal, state, county,
municipal or school board office. "Political organization" includes, but is not
limited to, organizations otherwise defined as "political committee," "joint
candidates committee" and "legislative leadership committee."
PROPERTY OF THE MUNICIPALITY — Buildings, land, vehicles,
telephones, facsimile machines, computers or other office equipment or
supplies and other real or personal property owned, leased or controlled by
the Township, except for public roads and open parkland.
SOLICIT — To seek by oral or written communication a contribution as same
is defined herein.
§ 51-7. General regulations.
§ 51-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-7
1:161
§ 51-8. Reporting requirement.
It shall be the responsibility of any municipal employee, appointed or
elected official who observes any prohibited form of fund-raising as
identified in § 51-7B supra, to promptly report such conduct in writing to
the Municipal Prosecutor.
§ 51-9. Whistle-blower provision.
It shall be unlawful for any employee, elected official or appointee to be
dismissed, reprimanded, retaliated against or otherwise intimidated for
complying with the reporting requirements mandated by this article.
§ 51-10. Permitted campaign practices.
To the extent not prohibited above, nothing in the article is intended to
preclude municipal officials, employees, officers or elected officials of the
A. Prohibition against soliciting or accepting political contributions on
public property. No person, organization or other entity may solicit,
commit to pay, or receive payment of or a commitment to pay any
contribution for any candidate, elected official or political organization
while in or on the property of the Township or utilizing the property of
the Township. This prohibition shall not apply to property of the
Township that is available for lease to the public.43
B. Prohibited forms of fund-raising. Prohibited forms of fund-raising shall
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Soliciting or accepting contributions using municipal telephones,
facsimile machines or computers.
(2) Soliciting or accepting contributions using personal telephones
while on the property of the municipality.
(3) Soliciting or accepting contributions through the use of publicly
owned computers or privately owned personal computers while on
the property of the municipality.
(4) Using municipal letterhead to solicit or accept contributions.
(5) Sending correspondence from municipal buildings or by use of
municipal services, equipment or postage.
(6) Face-to-face soliciting of an individual or an owner or
representative of a business entity while on the property of the
municipality.
(7) Use of automobiles owned or leased by the municipality to accept
and to solicit contributions.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 51-7 HAMILTON CODE § 51-10
1:162
Township from participating in the political process, including fund-raising
on their own time and off property owned or leased by the Township.
§ 51-11. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable pursuant to Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations;
penalties, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton.
§ 51-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-11
1:163
Chapter 66
SPECIAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
§ 66-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CLASS 1 OFFICER — A special law enforcement officer authorized to
perform routine traffic detail, spectator control and similar duties.
CLASS 2 OFFICER — A special law enforcement officer authorized to
exercise full powers and duties similar to those of a regular police officer.
COMMISSION — The Police Training Commission established in the State
Department of Law and Public Safety.
NORMAL SPECIAL OFFICER — Any person appointed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.9 et seq.
REGULAR POLICE OFFICER — A permanent, regularly appointed, full-time
police officer of the Police Division of the Department of Public Safety of the
Township.
SPECIAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person appointed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10 et seq.
SPECIAL OFFICER — Includes both normal special officers and sworn
police officers.
SWORN POLICE OFFICER — A sworn member of the Police Division of the
Department of Public Safety of the Township.
§ 66-2. Permit required for hiring; fee.44 [Amended 3-16-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-006]
A. No person shall hire a regular police officer or a special law
enforcement officer unless he shall first obtain a permit from the Chief
of Police. The fee for the permit shall be based upon the number of
hours of special officer work, to be used at the following rates:
Type of Officer Fee per Man-Hour
Special law enforcement
officer
$3
Regular police officer $3
B. Where Township Division of Police vehicles are utilized in connection
with any special officer work, or off-duty work as described in § 5-66,
44.Editor's Note: See also § 5-66, Employment of off-duty police officers, of the Township
Code; and Ch. 215, Fees.
§ 51-11 HAMILTON CODE § 66-2
1:164
§ 66-3. Permit may be obtained annually.
Permits required by § 66-2 may be obtained on a yearly basis, calculating
the fee upon an estimate of man-hours to be used. Such permits shall expire
whenever the estimated man-hours coincides with actual used man-hours.
§ 66-4. Permit fee exemption.
Permit fees under § 66-2 may be waived by the Chief of Police for
governmental agencies.
§ 66-5. Limitation on number of officers.
§ 66-6. Powers and duties; use of firearms.
§ 66-7. Training course.
§ 66-8. Violations and penalties.
Employment of off-duty police officers, of the Code of the Township of
Hamilton, the fee shall be $10 per hour per vehicle.
A. Class 1 officers. The number of Class 1 officers shall not exceed 34
officers at any time.
B. Class 2 officers. The number of Class 2 officers shall not exceed 60
officers at any time.
A. Class 1 officers. Class 1 officers shall have the power to perform routine
traffic control, spectator control and similar duties. Officers shall have
the power to issue summonses for disorderly persons and petty
disorderly persons offenses, violations of municipal ordinances and
violations of N.J.S.A. Title 39. The use of firearms by officers of this class
is prohibited. Officers of this class shall not be assigned any duties
which may require the conveying or use of a firearm.
B. Class 2 officers. Class 2 officers shall exercise full powers and duties
similar to those of a regular police officer. The use of a firearm by an
officer of this class is authorized only after the officer has been fully
certified as successfully completing training as required by the
Commission.
A. No person may commence his duties as a special law enforcement
officer unless he has successfully completed a training course approved
by the Commission.
B. All special law enforcement officers appointed and in service on
October 1, 1986, may continue in service if they complete all training
and certification requirements of the Special Law Enforcement Officers
Act, N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq., by October 1, 1988.
§ 66-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-8
1:165
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 90
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 317.
§ 90-1. Intent of chapter.
It is hereby declared that air pollution is a menace to the health, welfare and
comfort of the residents of the Township and a cause of substantial damage
to property. For the purpose of preventing and reducing atmospheric
pollution, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the Township to minimize
air pollution as defined in this chapter and to establish standards governing
the installation, maintenance and operation of equipment and
appurtenances relating to combustion, which is a source or potential source
of air pollution.
§ 90-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AIR CONTAMINANT — Solid particles, liquid particles, vapors or gases
which are discharged into the outdoor atmosphere.
AIR POLLUTION — The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or
more air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are or tend to be
injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life or property, or
would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property.
ASBESTOS — Actinolite, amosite, anthophyllite, chrysotile, crocidolite or
tremolite.
DIRECT HEAT EXCHANGER — Equipment in which heat from the
combustion of fuel is transferred to a substance being heated so that the
latter is contacted by the products of combustion and may contribute to the
total effluent.
A. Any person who employs a special officer in violation of this chapter
shall be liable for a fine not to exceed $1,000.
B. Any special officer who accepts employment in violation of this chapter
shall be liable for a fine not to exceed $1,000 and shall be withdrawn
from the list of special officers available for employment.
§ 66-8 HAMILTON CODE § 90-2
1:166
DIRECTOR OF AIR POLLUTION CONTROL and DIRECTOR — The person
who is authorized by this chapter to exercise the powers prescribed by this
chapter.
ECONOMIC POISONS — Those chemicals used as insecticides,
rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, nematocides or defoliants.
FRIABLE MATERIAL — Any material which can be crumbled, pulverized or
reduced to powder by hand pressure.
FUEL — Solid, liquid or gaseous materials used to produce useful heat by
burning.
GARBAGE — Waste animal or vegetable matter from houses, kitchens,
restaurants, hotels, produce markets or any other source, or food of any
kind to be thrown away.
INCINERATOR — Any device, apparatus, equipment or structure used for
destroying, reducing or salvaging by fire any material or substance,
including but not limited to refuse, garbage, trade waste, debris and scrap;
or a facility for cremating human or animal remains.
INDIRECT HEAT EXCHANGER — Equipment in which heat from the
combustion of fuel is transferred by conduction through a heat-conducting
material to a substance being heated so that the latter is not contacted by
and adds nothing to the products of combustion.
INTERNAL CROSS SECTIONAL DIMENSION — Any maximum linear
perpendicular distance from an inside wall of a stack or chimney to the
inside of an opposite wall, such as the diameter of a circular cross section
or the length or width of a rectangular cross section.
LIQUID PARTICLES — Particles which have volume but are not of rigid
shape and which, upon collection, tend to coalesce and create uniform
homogenous films upon the surface of the collecting media.
MANUFACTURING PROCESS — Any action, operation or treatment
embracing chemical, industrial, manufacturing or processing factors,
methods or forms, including but not limited to furnaces, kettles, ovens,
converters, cupolas, kilns, crucibles, stills, dryers, roasters, crushers,
grinders, mixers, reactors, regenerators, separators, filters, reboilers,
columns, classifiers, screens, quenchers, cookers, digesters, towers,
washers, scrubbers, mills, condensers or absorbers.
MOTOR VEHICLES — Includes all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks.
ODOR — The property of a substance which affects the sense of smell.
OPACITY — The property of a substance which renders it partially or wholly
obstructive to the transmission of visible light, expressed as the percentage
to which the light is obstructed.
OPEN BURNING — Any fire wherein the products of combustion are
emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or
chimney of an incinerator.
§ 90-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-2
1:167
OPERATOR — Any person who has care, custody or control of a building
or premises or a portion thereof, whether with or without knowledge of the
owner thereof.
OUTDOOR ATMOSPHERE — Airspace outside buildings, stacks or exterior
ducts.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof, or shall have charge or control of any dwelling
or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as fiduciary, including
but not limited to executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, receiver
or guardian of the estate, or as a mortgagee in possession regardless of
how such possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting or
reassigning any part or all of any dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed
to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have a joint responsibility over
the portion of the premises sublet or assigned by the lessee.
PARTICLES — Any material, except uncombined water, which exists in
finely divided form as liquid particles or solid particles at standard
conditions.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint-stock companies, as well as individuals, and also
includes all political subdivisions of this state or any agencies or
instrumentalities thereof.
PLANT LIFE — Vegetation, including but not limited to trees, tree branches,
leaves, yard trimmings, shrubbery, grass, weeds and crops.
REFUSE — Rubbish, garbage, trade waste and plant life.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — Ringelmann's Scale for Grading the
Density of Smoke, as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, or
any chart, recorder, indicator or device which is approved by the State
Department of Environmental Protection as the equivalent of the
Ringelmann's scale for the measurement of smoke density.
RUBBISH — Waste solids not considered to be highly flammable or
explosive, including but not limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber,
carpets, wood, excelsior, papers, ashes, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery,
masonry and other similar materials.
SALVAGE OPERATION — Any operation or activity from which is salvaged
or reclaimed any product or material, including but not limited to metals,
chemicals or shipping containers.
SMOKE — Small gasborne or airborne particles, exclusive of water vapor,
arising from a process of combustion in sufficient number to be observable.
SOLID PARTICLES — Particles of rigid shape and definite volume.
SOURCE OPERATION — Any manufacturing process or any identifiable part
thereof emitting an air contaminant into the outdoor atmosphere through
one or more stacks or chimneys.
§ 90-2 HAMILTON CODE § 90-2
1:168
STACK AND CHIMNEY — A flue, conduit or opening designed and
constructed for the purpose of emitting air contaminants into the outdoor
air.
STANDARD CONDITIONS — Seventy degrees Fahrenheit and one
atmosphere pressure (14.7 pounds per square inch absolute or 760
millimeters mercury).
TRADE WASTE — All waste solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting
from construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business,
trade or industry, including but not limited to plastic products, cartons,
paints, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and
other forms of solid or liquid waste material.
VISIBLE SMOKE — Smoke which obscures light to a degree readily
discernible by visual observation.
§ 90-3. Air pollution prohibited.
No person or owner of property, or person having possession or control
thereof, shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the open air
substances in such quantities as shall result in air pollution. The provisions
of this section shall not apply to the use of economic poisons.
§ 90-4. Open burning.
§ 90-5. Smoke from combustion of fuel.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit a salvage operation by
open burning.
B. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the disposal of rubbish,
garbage or trade waste or buildings or structures by open burning.
C. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the disposal of any type of
plant life by open burning.
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Variances approved and issued by the State Department of
Environmental Protection in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:27-2.
(2) Open burning of refuse for training or research exercises when
conducted at a permanent facility or training center designed to be
used solely for such purposes on a continuing basis.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit visible smoke to be
emitted into the outdoor air from combustion of fuel in any stationary
indirect heat exchanger except as provided in this chapter.
B. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke the shade or
appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart, or greater than 20% opacity, exclusive of water vapor, to be
emitted into the outdoor air from the combustion of fuel in any
§ 90-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-5
1:169
§ 90-6. Emission of particles.
§ 90-7. Submission of information by persons using stacks or
chimneys.
stationary indirect heat exchanger having a rated hourly capacity of
200,000,000 Btu's or greater gross heat input and discharging through
a stack or chimney having all internal cross sectional dimensions of 60
inches or greater.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Smoke which is visible for a period of not longer than three minutes
in any consecutive thirty-minute period.
(2) Direct heat exchangers or manufacturing processes.
(3) Any motor vehicle while operating on the public highways.
D. Any person responsible for the construction, installation, alteration or
use of an indirect heat exchanger shall, when requested by the Director,
provide the facilities and necessary equipment for determining the
density or opacity of smoke being discharged into the open air.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit particles to be emitted
from any stack or chimney into the outdoor air the shade or appearance
of which is greater than 20% opacity, exclusive of water vapor.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Particles the shade or appearance of which is greater than 20%
opacity, exclusive of water vapor, for a period of not longer than
three minutes in any consecutive thirty-minute period.
(2) Source operations issued a variance by the State Department of
Environmental Protection in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:27-6.5.
(3) Indirect heat exchangers.
(4) Incinerators.
A. Except as provided in this section, persons burning solid or liquid fuel
whose products of combustion are discharged into the open air from a
stack or chimney shall submit to the Director information for each such
stack or chimney relating to place, type of fuel burned, heat content in
fuel burned, quantity of fuel burned per hour or year, description of
combustion equipment, usual period of operation, height and size of
outlet, description of air pollution control equipment and such other
and pertinent information as may be requested, on forms provided for
that purpose by the Director. The application forms shall also require
submission of the name, address and telephone number of the person
responsible for the day-to-day operation, and also of the person
responsible for maintenance of any such equipment. Any change in the
§ 90-5 HAMILTON CODE § 90-7
1:170
§ 90-8. Operation of incinerators.
name, address or telephone number of such persons shall be reported
within 10 days of the occurrence of such change to the Director.
B. Such information shall be submitted to the Director within 90 days after
either new installations are placed into service or existing installations
are altered. Nothing in this section shall be construed as relieving any
person from the requirements of the building code of the Township.
Additional reports concerning these items may be requested by the
Director.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to equipment designed or
used for a heat input rate of not more than 1,000,000 Btu's per hour
unless the equipment is designed for or actually using No. 4, No. 5 or
No. 6 fuel oil or coal.
A. No person shall operate or permit the operation of an incinerator in the
Township without a permit issued by the Director in accordance with
this chapter. The Director shall recommend issuance of a permit for the
operation of an incinerator after examining the application and
inspecting the facility and being satisfied that it may be operated in
accordance with this chapter. The permit may be conditioned on
improvements being made within a prescribed time or on certain
operating restrictions, if necessary, to comply with this chapter. All
permits shall be issued by the Director of Health, Recreation, Senior
and Veterans Services and shall expire on January 31 following their
issuance or at such time prior thereto as any conditions or restrictions
shall not be complied with. Each incinerator shall require a permit, the
annual fee for which shall be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the
Township Code, payable to the Township.45
B. Where the operation of an incinerator constitutes an immediate and
substantial menace to public health and safety or is a substantial source
of air pollution causing irritation and discomfort to persons in the
vicinity and the owner or operator fails upon written or oral notice to
take immediate corrective measures, the Director may take all
necessary measures to abate the condition, including but not limited to
ordering the cessation of use of the equipment and sealing the
equipment, pending a hearing in the Municipal Court.
C. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any
incinerator the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on
the Ringelmann Smoke Chart to be emitted into the open air; or
emissions of such opacity within a stack or chimney, or exclusive of
water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack or chimney to a degree
greater than the emission designated as No. 1 on the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart.
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 90-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-8
1:171
§ 90-9. Asbestos surface coatings.
§ 90-10. Administration and enforcement of chapter.
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to smoke emitted during
the building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which is not
greater than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a period of
three consecutive minutes; or emissions of such opacity within a stack
or chimney, or exclusive of water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack
or chimney to a degree greater than the emission designated as No. 2
on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a period no greater than three
consecutive minutes.
E. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of particles
of unburned waste or ash from any incinerator which are individually
large enough to be visible while suspended in the atmosphere.
F. No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used any
incinerator which will result in odors being detectable by sense of smell
in any area of human use or occupancy.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit surface coating by
spraying on any building, structure, facility or installation, or internal
or external portion thereof, of asbestos or friable material containing in
excess of 0.25% (by weight) asbestos.
B. Any person responsible for the manufacture, application or use of any
coating which the Director or any agent thereof has reason to believe
contains asbestos shall, when requested by the Director, conduct such
tests as are necessary in the opinion of the Director to determine the
presence and the amount or kinds of asbestos in the coating. Such tests
shall be conducted in a manner approved by the Director, and shall be
made at the expense of the person responsible.
C. The Director may waive the testing requirements of Subsection B of this
section upon receipt of a materials specification report from the
material manufacturer certifying that the asbestos content of the
surface coating for which testing is required complies with the
provisions of this section.
A. The Director of the Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and
Veterans Services of the Township shall, in addition to his other duties,
enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter and, in exercising
his powers and duties under this chapter, shall be known as the
Director of Air Pollution Control. The Director may appoint or designate
other employees or officers of the Township to perform duties
necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
B. The Director of the Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and
Veterans Services, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-90, may appoint any person
employed by the Township, or its successor, to administer and enforce
§ 90-8 HAMILTON CODE § 90-10
1:172
§ 90-11. Inspections and right of entry.
this chapter, in addition to the powers and appointments provided for
by Subsection A of this section.
A. Emergency inspections.
(1) Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the
Director has reason to believe that a condition exists which poses
an immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall
only take place where the time to apply for and secure the issuance
of a warrant would render ineffective the immediate action
necessary to abate the condition.
(2) Emergency inspections may also be authorized by the Governor in
times of air pollution emergencies in accordance with N.J.S.A.
26:2C-32.
(3) Where the Director or his agent is refused entry or access or is
otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant or
operator from conducting an inspection of the premises, such
person shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the
penalties provided in this chapter.
B. Search warrant or access warrant.
(1) The Director may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge of the
Municipal Court for a search warrant, setting forth factually the
actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable
basis for believing that a violation of this chapter may exist on the
premises, including one or more of the following:
(a) That the premises require inspection according to the cycle
established by the Township for periodic inspections of
premises of the type involved.
(b) That observation of external conditions (smoke, ash, soot,
odors) of the premises and its public areas has resulted in the
belief that violations of this chapter exist.
(c) Circumstances such as age and design of the fuel-burning
equipment or system, type of incinerator, particular use of
premises or other factors which render systematic inspections
of such buildings necessary in the interest of public health and
safety.
(2) If the Judge of the Municipal Court is satisfied as to the matter set
forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search
warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the
premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist.
C. Right of entry. All buildings and premises subject to this chapter are
subject to inspection from time to time by the Director of Air Pollution
§ 90-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-11
1:173
§ 90-12. Violations and penalties.
§ 90-13. Interpretation of chapter.
This chapter is to be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose described
in this chapter. Nothing in this chapter is to be construed as repealing or
abridging the emergency powers of any agency of government, except to
the extent expressly set forth in this chapter.
Chapter 94
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 228. Noise — See Ch. 311.
§ 94-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of intrusion, burglar, fire, smoke and other emergency alarm
devices, whether it is a dial alarm or a local alarm.
Control or his duly authorized representatives. All rooms and areas
in the building shall be available and accessible for such inspection,
which shall be made during usual business hours if the premises are
used for nonresidential purposes; provided, however, that inspections
may be made at other times if the premises is not available during
usual business hours for inspection, if there is reason to believe that
violations are occurring on the premises which can be determined and
proved by inspection only during other than the prescribed hours, or
if there is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which
is an immediate threat to health or safety requiring inspection and
abatement without delay.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or
who shall fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, shall be punished in accordance with Chapter 1, General
Provisions, § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code of the Township of
Hamilton.
B. The violation of any section or subsection of this chapter shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense independent of the violation
of any other section or subsection or of any order issued pursuant to
this chapter.
§ 90-11 HAMILTON CODE § 94-2
1:174
§ 94-2. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains or owns any dial alarm, local alarm or direct line hookup alarm
to any alarm company, answering service or police alarm board which is
designed to summon the police, fire department or other municipal agency
to any location in response to any type of alarm signal.
§ 94-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
DIAL ALARM — A type of device using telephone lines to transmit an alarm
directly through the police switchboard.
DIRECT LINE HOOKUP — Any alarm that goes directly to any answering
service.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm actuated by inadvertence, negligence,
unintentional act or accident by a resident or some other person authorized
to be in the house or building, or any alarm that is transmitted to the Police
Division which, when checked, shows no evidence in the house or other
alarmed building of any intruder having gained entry or having attempted
to gain entry, or no intruder inside the house or building. These alarms shall
be deemed to be a malfunction of the alarm device, and such malfunction is
also determined to be a false alarm.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm or device which, when activated, produces a
visual or noise signal and which is not connected by telephone line to the
police switchboard.
RADIO TRANSMITTED ALARM — A two-way radio network which connects
an alarm system to the central monitoring station without wires.
§ 94-4. Prohibited alarm devices.
Alarm devices which automatically use a pretaped or prerecorded verbal
message or other type of message which alerts the Police Division of the
Township that an emergency exists or that its services are needed through
the use of these systems, and which automatically dial any telephone
number to obtain such services, are hereby prohibited.
§ 94-5. Emergency precautions; alarm repair.
A. Persons having either a dial or local alarm device shall be required to
leave with the Police Division the name of a person or persons (with
regular and cell phone numbers) who can be reached in case of
malfunction of the equipment in order that the device can be
temporarily disconnected.
§ 94-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-5
1:175
§ 94-6. False alarms.
§ 94-7. Violations and penalties.
For false alarms, the Township prescribes the following penalties:
B. Persons having alarm devices which are being tested or repaired shall
notify the Police Division before tests or repairs commence and after
completion so as to avoid the possibility of activating a false alarm.
C. If access to the premises cannot otherwise be gained within a thirtyminute
period, then, at any time thereafter, any police officer may enter
any premises in order to deactivate any such alarm by forced entry, if no
other means are readily available, and in such event neither the Chief of
Police nor any police officer, nor the Police Division, nor the Township,
nor any of its representatives, shall be responsible to the property
owner or any other person in interest for any damage which may result
from the forced entry, provided that the means of said forced entry are
reasonable and consistent with the purpose of this provision.
D. All alarms must have an automatic reset device with a five-to-ten
automatic shutoff and reset feature.
A. Knowledge of false alarm; investigation. In any case of a false alarm,
any person having knowledge thereof shall immediately notify the
Police Division in the fastest possible manner. The Chief of Police shall
cause an investigation to be made of all false alarms and keep a record
of such alarms on file.
B. Exception to charge. If any alarm comes in and the officer on duty
deems it to be caused by any storm, hurricane or severe weather
condition, power failure or power restoration or any type of line
malfunction, between the home, alarm receiving company or Police
Division, or any other similar occurrence, the alarm shall be noted but
not charged against the homeowner or business as a false alarm.
A. For the first through fifth false alarm in any given calendar year, a
warning shall be issued.
B. For the sixth and seventh false alarm in the same calendar year, a fine of
$25 shall be paid to the Township.
C. For the eighth and any subsequent false alarms in the same calendar
year, a fine of $50 shall be paid to the Township.
D. After the eighth false alarm in any given calendar year, the Township
reserves the right to require the disconnection of the device for a
limited time or permanently.
§ 94-5 HAMILTON CODE § 94-8
1:176
§ 94-8. Exceptions to chapter.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the general alerting alarms
that may be used by fire companies, ambulance squads or civil defense
agencies to summon response of their members. The provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to alarm systems that are affixed to motor vehicles.
§ 94-9. Applicability of chapter to existing systems.
The provisions contained in this chapter shall apply equally to those alarm
systems that were placed in service prior to or subsequent to the effective
date of this chapter.
§ 94-10. Liability of Township limited.
The Township shall not be liable for any defects in operation of any
automatic dial alarms and alarm devices, or for any failure or neglect to
respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from such a source, or for
the failure or neglect of any person in connection with the installation and
operation of equipment, the transmission of alarm signals or prerecorded
alarm messages or the relaying of such signals and messages, and, in the
event that the Township finds it necessary to disconnect any alarm for any
reason, the Township shall incur no liability by such action.
Chapter 99
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dance and nightclub facilities — See Ch. 184. Fees — See Ch. 215.
§ 94-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-10
1:177

ARTICLE I
Public Consumption and Possession
[Adopted as Ch. 14, Art. I, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 99-1. Prohibition in public places.
No person shall consume or possess in any opened container any alcoholic
beverage in or upon any public or quasi-public place, including but not
limited to any public street, alley, sidewalk, mall, park, playground, school
building, schoolyard, public conveyance or parking facility, or in any public
building.
§ 99-2. Prohibition in vehicles.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in or upon any private
vehicle while the vehicle is in motion or parked upon any such public or
quasi-public place.
§ 99-3. Exceptions.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the possession or
consumption of alcoholic beverages within or upon premises duly licensed
for the consumption of alcoholic beverages, or the possession of beer in
pitchers or other unsealed containers as may be lawfully sold by licensed
premises while in transit to a lawful place for consumption, or to prohibit
the possession, distribution or consumption of alcoholic beverages in any
public park, recreation area or public building in connection with any
organized function or social affair for which express prior authorization
or required permits have been secured from the Council, the Alcoholic
Beverage Commission and the Superintendent of the Division of Recreation
and upon proper notice and subject to any terms and restrictions imposed
upon such authorizations or permits by the Council, Alcoholic Beverage
Commission and Superintendent of the Division of Recreation.
§ 99-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be punished in accordance with Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2,
Violations; penalties, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton.
§ 99-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-4
1:179

ARTICLE II
Licensing and Regulation
[Adopted as Ch. 14, Art. II, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 99-5. Purpose of article.
This article is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township in accordance with the New Jersey Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and in accordance with the
rules and regulations established by the Division of Alcoholic Beverage
Control.
§ 99-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, words and phrases shall have the same meanings
they have in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. and the rules and regulations established
by the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 99-7. License required; issuance of license.
§ 99-8. License fee; maximum number of licenses. [Amended
11-2-1994 by Ord. No. 94-050; 7-5-2007 by Ord. No. 07-718;
3-19-2008 by Ord. No. 08-011]
A. All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings
under this article shall be in accordance with all applicable laws of the
state and the United States.
B. All licenses required by this article shall be issued by the Council, which
shall also administer the provisions of this article.
C. No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the
Township without having obtained a license in accordance with the Act
referred to in § 99-5 and the provisions of this article.
A. The maximum number of licenses for the sale or distribution of
alcoholic beverages in the Township pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-12 shall
be as follows, and the annual license fees are set forth in Chapter 215,
Fees: [Amended 10-21-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06746]
(1) Plenary retail consumption license: 50.
(2) Plenary retail distribution license: five.
(3) Seasonal retail consumption license: zero.
(4) Club license: 14.
(5) Hotel/motel license: three.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 99-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-8
1:181
§ 99-9. Hours of sale; closing of premises. [Amended 12-7-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-056]
§ 99-10. Maintenance and lighting of premises.
Licensed premises shall at all times be kept in a safe, clean and sanitary
condition. All rooms, passageways, entrances, exits and stairways must be
well lighted.47
§ 99-11. Underaged persons on premises prohibited; exception.
Persons under the age of 21 years shall not be allowed to frequent, loiter
or remain in any room used or devoted to the sale, service or consumption
of alcoholic beverages upon a licensed premises, unless accompanied by
their parent, guardian or adult husband or wife; provided, however, that this
provision shall not apply to restaurants or to guest rooms and private and
public dining rooms in hotels, and further provided that this provision shall
not apply to establishments operating teen nights as permitted pursuant to
§ 99-12.
§ 99-12. Teen nights.
Licensed premises may be opened and operated in accordance with state
regulations for teen night activities, during which activities minors who
B. The provisions of this section with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued.
A. Hours of sale. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, consumed
or delivered to any consumer in or from any licensed premises on any
day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., except that on
Sunday no alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, consumed in or
delivered to a licensed premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
9:00 a.m. This subsection shall not apply to January 1, when there shall
be no restricted hours of sale.
B. Closing hours. No licensee shall suffer any person, patron or customer
to consume any alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises after
the hour set for closing and during the hours when the sale, delivery,
service or consumption of alcoholic beverages is forbidden. No licensee
shall suffer any person, other than employees, to remain upon the
licensed premises after the hour set for closing and during the hours
when the sale, delivery, service or consumption of alcoholic beverages
is forbidden; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to
restaurants and the public dining rooms of hotels.
47.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 14-37 of the 1994 Code of Ordinances, Display of fetal
alcoholic syndrome (FAS) warning signs, which previously followed this section, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 99-8 HAMILTON CODE § 99-12
1:182
shall have attained the age of 17 years shall be permitted to be present on
the licensed premises, subject to the following rules and regulations:
A. A permit for the operating of a teen night shall be issued by the
Township Council upon application made to the Township Clerk at least
10 working days prior to the event, stating, in addition to all other
pertinent information required, the time and place of the activity, the
nature of any and all entertainment or activities, the maximum number
of persons who are to be admitted, the availability of security
personnel, parking and other factors relating to security and public
safety.
B. All applications filed with the Clerk of the Township shall be referred to
the Chief of Police or a police officer designated by him, who shall
immediately institute an investigation of the application. This
investigation shall include a consultation with other appropriate code
enforcement officials to ensure that the activity is in compliance with all
applicable provisions of this Code.
C. After the completion of his investigation, the Chief of Police or his
designee shall report his findings to the Township Council. The findings
shall include a recommendation concerning adequate security for the
proper conduct of the activity. This recommendation shall be adopted
by the Township Council as a condition of any permit issued by the
Council.
D. The Township Council shall deny the permit whenever, by reason of
location, number of attendees, parking, traffic or other aspect of the
activity conducted under the permit, the public health, safety and
welfare will be affected to a material degree.
E. Compliance with all regulations relating to the conduct of teen nights
adopted by the state shall be a condition for the granting of a permit
under this section. If alcoholic beverages are found to be present on the
premises, other than the stock of the licensee fully concealed from view,
the licensee shall be presumed to be in violation of the teen night
regulations and shall be subject to license disciplinary charges and the
penalties attendant thereto under this article. In addition to any and all
disciplinary penalties, the licensee shall be disqualified from teen night
permit applications for a period of time to be determined by the
Township Council following a disciplinary hearing on any and all
charges or violations under this section.
F. No licensee shall be entitled to more than one teen night in any one
calendar week, commencing Sunday and ending Saturday.
G. The applicant shall pay a permit fee as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of
the Township Code, which shall be effective for all applications made
and permits issued during one calendar year. [Amended 7-18-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-029]
§ 99-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-13
1:183
§ 99-13. Location of licensed premises restricted. [Amended
2-3-1993 by Ord. No. 93-010; 12-8-1993 by Ord. No. 93-054;
1-22-2003 by Ord. No. 02-042; 7-5-2007 by Ord. No. 07-018]
§ 99-14. Holding of multiple licenses.
No more than one plenary retail consumption license or more than one
plenary retail distribution license shall be granted, issued or transferred to
any person in the Township, and all licenses shall cover only the licensed
premises; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not
A. No hotel/motel, plenary retail consumption license, plenary retail
distribution license or club license shall be issued or transferred to any
premises located within 300 feet of any premises for which a club
license shall have been previously issued and shall be in effect at the
time of adoption of this article. No hotel/motel, plenary retail
consumption license or plenary retail distribution license shall be
issued or transferred to any premises located within 1,500 feet of any
premises for which any such license shall have been previously issued
and shall be in effect at the time of the adoption of this article, nor shall
any club license be issued or transferred to any premises located within
300 feet of any premises for which a plenary retail distribution license
or a plenary retail consumption license shall have been previously
issued and shall be in effect at the time of the adoption of this article;
provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be taken or
construed to prevent the renewal for the same premises of any
aforesaid license which shall have been issued and shall be in effect at
the time of adoption of this article. Notwithstanding any distance
restrictions contained in this section, a reduction in the distance
between any licensed premises in the Hamilton Marketplace
commercial development on Route 130, as well as between any licensed
premises located at or adjacent to the Hilton Hotel on Route 130, may
be approved upon good cause having been demonstrated to the
satisfaction of Council. The demonstration of good cause by the
applicant seeking a reduction in the permitted distance between
licensed premises shall include, but not be limited to, a review of the
impact the proposed location may have on:
(1) Public safety;
(2) Traffic;
(3) Noise;
(4) Compatibility with neighboring business uses; and
(5) Residential uses in the area.
B. The applicant shall provide notice to any licensed premises within 1,500
feet of the proposed location of the applicant's request for a reduction
in the permitted distance.
§ 99-13 HAMILTON CODE § 99-14
1:184
apply in the case of the renewal of any such licenses outstanding on June 3,
1952.
§ 99-15. Entertainment by persons under 18 and 21 years of age.
No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to sing, dance,
perform, act, play in an orchestra or in any manner exhibit himself in any
performance or entertainment held, given, offered or conducted on licensed
premises. Persons between the ages of 18 and 21 may be engaged in such
activities, provided they are in the possession of an employment permit
properly issued under the rules and regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage
Commission.
§ 99-16. Revocation of license.
§ 99-17. Minimum bid for hotel/motel license. [Added 9-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-027]
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this article or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of
charges preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable
opportunity for hearing.
C. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this article.
A. A minimum bid not to exceed $25,000 plus $50 per sleeping room may
be required for the issuance of a license to a hotel or motel if the dining
facilities of the hotel or motel are regularly and principally used to
provide only meals for catered events and breakfast for guests of the
hotel or motel.
B. A minimum bid exceeding $25,000 may be required for the issuance of
a license to a hotel or motel where the hotel or motel does not meet the
criteria set forth in Subsection A of this section.
§ 99-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-17
1:185

ARTICLE III
Possession or Consumption by Minors on Private Property
[Adopted 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-055]
§ 99-18. Alcoholic beverage possession or consumption by underage
persons.
It is hereby unlawful for any person under the legal age ("underage person")
who, without legal authority, knowingly possesses or knowingly consumes
an alcoholic beverage on private property. No person shall be considered
to knowingly possess an alcoholic beverage merely because he or she is
present where alcoholic beverages are being consumed.
§ 99-19. Exemptions.
A person under the legal age shall not be prohibited from the following:
§ 99-20. Good Samaritan exemption.
Any person who affirmatively requests assistance from authorities, such
as via a 911 call, or from an off-site adult such as a parent, guardian or
neighboring resident, for the purpose of seeking aid for a person who is
suffering from the effects of alcohol or otherwise is in need of medical
assistance shall not be charged under this article with underage possession
or consumption of alcohol on private property, as long as assistance is
provided as a result of such request. In an instance where such an
affirmative request for assistance is made, and the person to whom
assistance is provided is under 21, that person also shall not be charged
under this article with underage possession or consumption of alcohol on
private property.
§ 99-21. Call for aid exemption.
Any person who is a resident of a dwelling on private property and
affirmatively requests assistance from authorities, such as via a 911 call, or
from an off-site adult such as a parent, guardian or neighboring resident,
for the purpose of controlling or removing nonresidents who are on that
property shall not be charged under this article with underage possession
or consumption of alcohol on private property, as long as assistance is
provided as a result of such request.
A. Possessing or consuming an alcoholic beverage in connection with a
religious observance, ceremony, or rite or possessing or consuming an
alcoholic beverage in the presence of or with the written permission of
such person's parent or guardian or relative who has attained the legal
age to purchase or consume alcoholic beverages.
B. The possession of an alcoholic beverage in the preparation of food while
enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management program at a county
vocational school or post secondary educational institution.
§ 99-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-22
1:187
§ 99-22. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underage
person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling, or
any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 99-23. Penalties for possession or consumption of alcohol by
minors.
A violation by an underage person of this article shall be punished by a fine
of $250 for a first offense, and $350 for any subsequent offense. In addition,
the court may, in its discretion, require the performance of communityrelated
service.
§ 99-24. Driving privilege suspension of minors for violations.
A. The court may, in addition to the penalty authorized for this offense,
suspend or postpone for six months the driving privileges of the
defendant underage person. Upon the conviction of any underage
person and the suspension or postponement of that person's driver's
license, the court shall forward a report to the Division of Motor
Vehicles ("Division") stating the first and last day of the suspension or
postponement period imposed by the court pursuant to this section. If a
person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is less than 17 years
of age, the period of license postponement, including a suspension or
postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall
commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period
of six months after the person reached the age of 17 years.
B. If an underage person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a
valid driver's license issued by this state, the court may immediately
collect the license and forward it to the Division along with the report. If
for any reason the license cannot be collected, the court shall include in
the report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex
of the person, as well as the first and last date of the license suspension
period imposed by the court.
C. The court shall inform the underage person orally and in writing that if
the person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period
of license suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
§ 99-22 HAMILTON CODE § 99-24
1:188
§ 99-25. Mandatory alcohol counseling for violations.
§ 99-26. Annual review.
The Chief of Police and the Health Officer will annually present to the
governing body a report on the effectiveness of this article.
D. If the underage person convicted under this article is not a New Jersey
resident, the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the
nonresident driving privilege of the person based on the age of the
person and submit to the Division the required report. The court shall
not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this article.
Upon receipt of a report by the court, the Division shall notify the
appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or
postponement.
A. Any person 18 years of age or younger who is convicted of a violation of
this article will be required to complete a court-approved alcohol
counseling program.
B. Any person 19 years of age or older who is convicted of a second or
subsequent violation of this article will be required to complete a courtapproved
alcohol counseling program.
§ 99-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-26
1:189
Chapter 104
AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND GAMES
§ 99-26 HAMILTON CODE § 99-26
1:190
ARTICLE I
Automatic Amusement Devices
[Adopted as Ch. 18, Art. II, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 104-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DISTRIBUTOR OF JUKEBOXES — Any person who leases or rents out or
places under any kind of arrangement one or more jukeboxes.
DISTRIBUTOR OF MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES — Any person
who leases or rents out or places under any kind of arrangement one or
more mechanical amusement devices.
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon
the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or
other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated
for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the
public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether
or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as marble machines,
pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, mechanical bowling
machines, photoelectric shooting or target machines, electronic video
games, air hockey tables, foosball games and all games, operations or
transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated.
This definition shall also include coin-operated pool or billiard tables
installed and maintained as an accessory amusement device in a premises
other than a licensed pool or billiard parlor, as otherwise regulated by
Township ordinance.
OPERATOR — Any person in whose place of business any jukebox or
mechanical amusement device is displayed for public patronage or is placed
or kept for operation by the public.
OWNER-OPERATOR — Any person who owns and operates any jukebox or
mechanical amusement device.
§ 104-2. Duties of operators; exemptions.48 [Amended 11-9-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-049]
A. Age limitation.
48.Editor's Note: Former §§ 104-2, License required. 104-3, Application for license, 104-4,
License fee, and 104-5, Expiration of license, were repealed 8-19-2014 by Ord. No. 14-048.
This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former §§ 104-6 and 104-7 as §§
104-3 and 104-4, respectively.
§ 104-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-2
1:191
§ 104-3. Seizure and destruction of machine used as gambling
device.
If the Chief of Police shall have reason to believe any mechanical
amusement device is used as a gambling device, such machine may be
seized by the police and impounded. If, upon trial of the operator for
allowing it to be used as a gambling device, the operator is found guilty,
(1) No operator shall permit persons under 14 years of age to play or
operate such mechanical amusement devices unless accompanied
by a parent, guardian or a relative 18 years of age or older.
(2) Persons under 14 years of age shall not be allowed to frequent,
loiter or remain in any room used for or devoted to the operation of
mechanical amusement devices unless accompanied by a parent,
guardian or a relative 18 years of age or older.
(3) Upon conviction of a violation of any provision of this subsection,
there shall be a penalty imposed of a fine of $500.
B. No operator shall permit the playing of jukeboxes between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day.
C. No operator shall permit the playing of jukeboxes or mechanical
amusement devices within 200 feet of any church, public or parochial
school or playground.
D. No distributor or operator of mechanical amusement devices shall offer
or permit to be offered any prize, free games or other reward to any
person playing any machine subject to the provisions of this article.
E. No person shall operate, conduct or carry on a business which may be
operated in whole or in part by the depositing of a coin or a token in a
slot or other aperture of or connected with a machine or device and
operated within a permanently constructed building unless the
proprietor or other person in charge of the premises where the
installation is located is on duty between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. This requirement shall not apply if the business is not open to
the public during the hours referred to in this subsection.
F. Coin-operated businesses which are required to pay a state license fee
are not included within the terms of this article.
G. Any person operating a coin-operated business within the meaning of
this article shall keep posted a copy of this article at each entrance
thereto and at two other conspicuous places upon the premises. Copies
of this article will be furnished, upon request, by the Clerk of the
Township.
H. Coin-operated businesses in apartment houses where there is a fulltime
attendant on the premises shall not be included within the terms of
this article.
§ 104-2 HAMILTON CODE § 104-3
1:192
such machine shall be destroyed by the police. Revocation and seizure are
in addition to all other penalties.49
49.Editor's Note: Former § 104-8, Display of license, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 8-19-2014 by Ord. No. 14-048.
§ 104-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-3
1:193

ARTICLE II
Bowling Alleys
[Adopted as Ch. 18, Art. III, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 104-4. Authority to prescribe regulations for conduct of
business.50
The Township Council may, by resolution, adopt rules and regulations
governing the conduct of bowling alleys. A copy of the rules and regulations
shall be provided bowling alley.
50.Editor's Note: Former §§ 104-9, License required, 104-10, License fee, and 104-11
Expiration of license, were repealed 8-19-2014 by Ord. No. 14-048. This ordinance also
provided for the redesignation of former § 104-12 as § 104-4.
§ 104-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-4
1:195

ARTICLE III
Pool and Billiard Parlors
[Adopted as Ch. 18, Art. IV, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 104-5. Unsafe premises.51
Any premises which shall be declared to be unsafe or a fire hazard by the
written report of the director of the Department of Community Planning
and Compliance shall be deemed to be ineligible to house a pool or billiard
parlor.
§ 104-6. Location.
No pool or billiard parlor shall be located within 500 feet of any school,
church or publicly owned building or within 1,000 feet of another pool or
billiard parlor. All distances shall be measured as the shortest distance
between the nearest building entrances, across the street if the entrances
are on opposite sides of a street, and along street frontages if both
entrances are on the same side of a street or within the same block.
§ 104-7. Conduct of business.52 [Amended 11-9-2000 by Ord. No.
00-049]
The following regulations shall apply to all pool and billiard parlors and
shall, in addition, apply to every room or premises where games similar to
pool or billiards but differing in the size of table, style, added or missing
elements or equipment from the standard game of pool or billiards are
conducted:
A. Hours of operation. The hours of operation of such pool or billiard
rooms shall be between 9:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. on weekdays and
Saturdays and 12:00 noon to 12:00 midnight on Sundays.
B. Minors. No person under the age of 14 shall be admitted to or permitted
to play pool or billiards in any premises subject to this article or to
frequent, lounge, congregate or gather in such room or place unless
accompanied by his parent, guardian or a relative 18 years of age or
older.
C. Card playing. In no event shall card playing be permitted on premises
subject to this article, even if such card playing is for social purposes.
D. Outside view of premises. All premises in which the games of pool and
billiards are played shall be on the street floor of any building and shall
51.Editor's Note: Former §§ 104-13, License required, 104-14, Exemptions from article,
104-15, Investigation of applicants for license, 104-16, Publication of notice of application
for license; hearing, and 104-17, Notice to abutting property owners of application for
license, were repealed 8-19-2014 by Ord. No. 14-048. This ordinance also provided for the
redesignation of §§ 104-18 and 104-19 as §§ 104-5 and 104-6, respectively.
52.Editor's Note: Former §§ 104-20, Issuance of license, 104-21, Expiration of license, and
104-23, License fee, were repealed 8-19-2014 by Ord. No. 14-048. This ordinance also
provided for the redesignation of § 104-22 as § 104-7.
§ 104-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-7
1:197
be so arranged and so lighted that a full view of the interior may be
had from the public thoroughfare or from adjacent rooms to which the
public is admitted at all hours.53
53.Editor's Note: Former § 104-23, License fee, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 8-19-2014 by Ord. No. 14-048.
§ 104-7 HAMILTON CODE § 104-7
1:198
Chapter 108
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 215. Noise from animals — See Ch. 311.
§ 104-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-7
1:199

ARTICLE I
Structures for Keeping Animals
[Adopted as Ch. 22, Art. I, § 22-1, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 108-1. Setback; sanitation.
No person shall erect, construct or maintain within the Township any shed,
coop, runway or pen, for horses, cattle, swine, sheep, goats, rabbits, poultry
or pigeons, which is nearer than 100 feet to any door or window of a
dwelling, nor shall any shed, coop, runway or pen be kept in an unclean or
otherwise unsanitary condition.
§ 108-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-1
1:201

ARTICLE II
Animal Waste
[Adopted as Ch. 22, Art. I, § 22-2, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 108-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CAT — Any cat, male or female, whether spayed or not.
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
OTHER ANIMALS — Any other domesticated animal or household pet,
including horses.
§ 108-3. Creation of nuisance on public property or property of
another.
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog, cat or other
animal shall cause, suffer or allow such dog, cat or other animal to soil,
defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any common thoroughfare,
sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area or park, or any other place where
people congregate or walk, or upon any public property whatsoever, or upon
any private property without the permission of the owner of the property.
§ 108-4. Removal of waste required.
§ 108-5. Exemption.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to blind persons who may use
dogs as guides.
A. Any person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog, cat or
other animal which soils, defiles, defecates on or commits any nuisance
on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area
or park, or any other place where people congregate or walk, or upon
any public property whatsoever, or upon any private property without
the permission of the owner of the property, shall immediately remove
all feces deposited by such dog, cat or other animal by any sanitary
method.
B. The feces removed from the area designated in this section shall be
disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of
any such dog, cat or other animal, in accordance with the provisions of
this section, in a sanitary manner.
§ 108-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-5
1:203

ARTICLE III
Quarantine
[Adopted as Ch. 22, Art. I, § 22-3, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 108-6. Authority to order quarantine of dogs and cats.
The Division of Health may by proclamation require all dogs and cats to be
quarantined during such period in each year as may seem advisable to the
Division of Health.
§ 108-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-6
1:205

ARTICLE IV
Dogs
[Adopted as Ch. 22, Art. II, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 108-7. Definitions. [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 04-047]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KEEPER — Any person exercising control over a dog or permitting a dog to
remain on premises under his control.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, includes every
person having a right of property in such dog and every person who has
such dog in his keeping.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog declared potentially
dangerous pursuant to the criteria set forth in N.J.S.A. 4:19-23, Finding to
declare dog potentially dangerous, as same may be amended.[Amended
9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-045]
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either under
the provisions of this article or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed.[Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog declared vicious pursuant to the criteria set forth
in N.J.S.A. 4:19-22, Finding to declare dog vicious; grounds, as same may be
amended.[Amended 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-045]
§ 108-8. License. [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 04-047]
A. Required. Licenses shall be required for the following dogs of licensing
age:
(1) Any dog owned or kept within the Township by a resident of the
Township on January 1 of any calendar year.
(2) Any dog acquired by any person during the course of any calendar
year and kept within the Township for more than 10 days after
acquisition.
§ 108-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-8
1:207
(3) Any dog attaining licensing age during the course of the calendar
year.
(4) Any unlicensed dog brought into the Township by any person and
kept within the Township for more than 10 days.
(5) Any dog licensed by another state which is brought into the
Township by any person and kept within the Township for more
than 90 days.
(6) Any potentially dangerous dog.
B. Application.
(1) Each application for a license under this article shall give the
following information:
(a) A general description of the dog sought to be licensed,
including breed, sex, age, color and markings and whether
such dog is of a long- or short-haired variety.
(b) The name, street and post office address of the owner of and
the person who shall keep or harbor such dog.
(2) Registration numbers shall be issued in the order in which
applications are received.
(3) Applications for licenses for dogs which are required to be licensed
by the provisions of Subsection A(1) of this section shall be made to
the Health Officer before February 1 of each calendar year. In all
other cases, the application for a license shall be made within 10
days of the day upon which the dog in question first becomes
subject to the provisions of this section. Each application for a
license shall be accompanied by evidence that the dog to be
licensed and registered has been inoculated against rabies in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.2a.
C. Record of licenses. The information on all applications under this article
and the registration number issued to each licensed dog shall be
preserved for a period of three years by the Health Officer. In addition,
he shall forward similar information to the State Department of Health
each month on forms furnished by the Department.
D. Fees. [Amended 8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03654]
(1) The person applying for a license shall pay a license fee and a
registration tag fee for each dog. The same fees shall be charged
for the annual renewal of each license and registration tag. The
fees are set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 108-8 HAMILTON CODE § 108-8
1:208
§ 108-9. Pet shops, kennels, shelters and pounds; pets from animal
care facilities and animal rescue organizations. [Amended
4-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-014]
(2) Any resident of the Township who shall have attained the age of 65
years of age applying for a license shall pay a reduced license fee
and registration tag fee for each dog. The same fees shall be
charged for the annual renewal of each license and registration
tag. The fees are set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township
Code.
(3) There shall be an additional fee payable annually, applicable to
Subsections D(1) and (2) above, for each dog which has not had its
reproductive system surgically altered. The additional fee is set
forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.
E. Expiration. Each dog license and registration tag shall expire on
January 31 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which it
was issued.
F. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dog
licensed under § 108-9. Dogs used as guides dogs or service dogs (as
defined in N.J.S.A. 10:5-5) shall be licensed and registered as other dogs
as hereinabove provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such
dog shall not be required to pay any fee therefor. A dog temporarily
placed in a foster home as part of a formalized training to be a guide
dog or service dog shall not be required to be licensed and registered
while the dog remains in the foster home for such training.55
G. Penalty. For each violation of this section there shall be a fine of $10,
plus $2 per month from the date a license is required.
H. Potentially dangerous dog license.
(1) In addition to the obligations set forth in this chapter, in the event
the Municipal Court has declared that a dog is a potentially
dangerous dog, the owner of said animal shall be responsible for
complying with all requirements and conditions imposed by the
Municipal Court, including those set forth in N.J.S.A. 4:19-24, Order
and schedule for compliance with potentially dangerous dog;
conditions, as same may be amended.
(2) The fee for a potentially dangerous dog license shall be set forth in
Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.56
A. License required; transfer of license. Any person who keeps or operates
or proposes to establish a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall apply
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 108-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-9
1:209
to the Health Officer for a license entitling him to keep or operate such
establishment. Any person holding such license shall not be required to
secure individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at
such establishments. Such licenses shall not be transferable to another
owner or different premises.
B. Application for license. The application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and permanent and local address of the applicant.
(2) The street address where the establishment is located or proposed
to be located, together with a general description of the premises.
(3) The purposes for which the establishment is to be maintained.
(4) The maximum number of dogs to be accommodated by such
establishment at any one time.
C. Approval by Division of Health. No license shall be issued until the
proposed licensee submits a written statement from the Health Officer
of the Division of Health that the establishment or proposed
establishment complies with local and state rules governing the
location of and sanitation at such establishment.
D. Contents of license; expiration of license. All licenses issued for a
kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state the purpose for which the
establishment is maintained, and all such licenses shall expire on June
30 of each year.
E. License fees. The annual license fees for kennel and pet shop licenses
shall be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code. There
shall be no fee for a shelter or pound.57
F. Revocation; compliance with applicable regulations.
(1) All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be
subject to revocation by the Township Council on recommendation
of the State Department of Health or the Division of Health for
failure to comply with the rules and regulations of the State
Department of Health or the Division of Health, after the owner has
been afforded a hearing by either the State Department of Health
or the Division of Health.
(2) Any person holding a license to establish, keep or operate a kennel,
pet shop, shelter or pound shall comply with all Township
ordinances and the rules and regulations promulgated by the State
Department of Health governing the sanitary conduct and
operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds, the
preservation of sanitation therein and the prevention of the spread
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 108-9 HAMILTON CODE § 108-9
1:210
of rabies and other diseases of dogs within and from such
establishments.
G. Reports to State Health Department. The Health Officer shall forward
to the State Department of Health a list of all kennels, pet shops,
shelters and pounds licensed within 30 days after the licenses therefor
are issued, which list shall include the name and address of the licensee
and the kind of license issued.
H. Control of dogs off premises. No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter
or pound shall be permitted off such premises except on leash or in a
crate or other safe control.
I. Certain sales prohibited. [Added 9-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-040]
(1) Definitions. When used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — An animal control center or animal
shelter, maintained by or under contract with any state, county, or
municipality, whose mission and practice is, in whole or significant
part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes or
animal rescue organizations.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — Any not-for-profit
organization which has been granted tax-exempt status under
Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code and
whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the
rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes.
CAT — A member of the species of domestic cat, felis catus.
DOG — A member of the species of domestic dog, canis familiaris.
OFFER FOR SALE — To sell, offer for sale or adoption, advertise
for the sale of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of a
dog or cat.
PET SHOP — A retail establishment where dogs and cats are
sold, exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the
general public at retail. Such definition shall not include an animal
care facility or animal rescue organization, as defined.
(2) Restrictions on the sale of animals.
(a) A pet shop may offer for sale only those dogs and cats that the
pet shop has obtained from or displays in cooperation with:
1. An animal care facility; or
2. An animal rescue organization.
(b) A pet shop shall not offer for sale a dog or cat that is younger
than eight weeks old.
§ 108-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-10
1:211
§ 108-10. Disposition of fees.
§ 108-11. Dog canvass.58
The Township Division of Health shall biennially, before September 1, cause
a canvass to be made of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the limits
of the Township and shall report to the State Department of Health the
results thereof, setting forth in separate columns the names and addresses
of persons owning, keeping or harboring dogs and the number of licensed
dogs owned, kept or harbored by each person, together with the
registration number of each dog; and the number of unlicensed dogs owned,
kept or harbored by each person, together with a complete description of
each unlicensed dog.
§ 108-12. Impounding or destruction of certain dogs. [Amended
4-22-1999 by Ord. No. 99-015]
A. License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provisions of this article, except the registration tag fees, shall be
forwarded to the Township Treasurer within 30 days after collection or
receipt and shall be placed in a special account separate from any of the
other accounts of the Township and shall be used for the following
purposes only: collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs liable to
seizure under this article; local prevention and control of rabies;
providing antirabies treatment under the direction of the local Division
of Health for any person known or suspected to have been exposed to
rabies; all other purposes prescribed by the statutes of the state
governing the subject; and administering the provisions of this article.
Any unexpended balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year following and may
be used for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of
the third fiscal year following and at the end of each fiscal year
thereafter, there shall be transferred from such special account to the
general funds of the Township any amount then in such account which
is in excess of the total amount paid into the special account during the
last two fiscal years next preceding.
B. The registration tag fee of $1 for each dog shall be forwarded within 30
days after collection by the Health Officer to the State Department of
Health.
A. Causes for impounding. The Animal Control Officer shall take into
custody and impound, or cause to be taken into custody and
impounded, any of the following dogs:
(1) Any dog running at large in violation of the provisions of this
article.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 108-10 HAMILTON CODE § 108-12
1:212
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring such dog, which the Animal Control Officer or his agent
has reason to believe is a stray dog.
(3) Any dog off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or
harboring such dog without a current registration tag on its collar.
(4) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner of or the
person keeping or harboring such dog.
(5) Any dog which has been determined to be a vicious dog, provided
that such dogs may also be seized by any police officer, and
provided further that, if such dogs cannot be seized with safety,
they may be killed.
B. Access to premises. Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to
perform any duty under this article is hereby authorized to go upon any
premises to seize for impounding any dog which he may lawfully seize
and impound when such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog,
except upon the premises of the owner of the dog if the owner is
present and forbids such entry.
C. Notice of seizure.
(1) If any dog so impounded or seized wears a registration tag, collar
or harness having inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name
and address of any person, or if the owner of or the person keeping
or harboring the dog is known, the Animal Control Officer shall
immediately serve on the person whose address is given on the
collar, or on the person owning, keeping or harboring the dog, a
notice in writing stating that the dog has been seized and will be
liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven
days after service of the notice.
(2) A notice under this subsection may be served either by delivering it
to the person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the
person's usual or last known place of abode or at the address given
on the collar, or by forwarding it by mail in a prepaid letter
addressed to that person at his usual or last known place of abode
or to the address given on the collar.
D. Disposition of unclaimed dogs. The Animal Control Officer is authorized
and empowered to cause the destruction of any unclaimed dog, in as
humane a manner as possible, under any of the following contingencies:
(1) When any dog so seized has not been claimed by the person
owning, keeping or harboring such dog within seven days after
notice or within seven days of the dog's detention when notice has
not been or cannot be given, as set forth in Subsection C of this
section.
§ 108-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-12
1:213
§ 108-13. Miscellaneous regulations. [Amended 4-22-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-015; 5-5-2004 by Ord. No. 04-020]
No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog in the Township except in
compliance with the provisions of this article and the following regulations:
(2) If the person owning and keeping or harboring any dog so seized
has not claimed the dog and has not paid all expenses incurred by
reason of its detention, including maintenance, not to exceed a
pickup charge, plus a daily maintenance charge. These fees are set
forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code. [Amended
7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
(3) If the seized dog is unlicensed at the time of its seizure and the
person owning, keeping or harboring such dog has not produced a
license and registration tag as provided in this article.59
E. Redemption fee. Any dog may be claimed by its owner during the sevenday
custodial period upon the payment to the Animal Control Officer of
a pickup fee and a daily maintenance fee for each day or fraction
thereof that the dog has been in custody. The fee or any portion thereof
may be waived by the Director of the Department of Health, Recreation,
Senior and Veterans Services, based upon a finding of genuine
hardship. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
A. Dogs to wear collar and tag; removal or unlawful use of registration tag.
(1) All dogs for which licenses are required by the provisions of this
article shall wear a collar or harness with the registration tag for
such dog securely fastened thereto.
(2) No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall
remove a registration tag from the collar of any dog without the
consent of the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag
to a dog for which it was not issued.
B. Interference with officials. No person shall hinder, molest or interfere
with anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this
article.60
C. Running at large. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog
shall suffer or permit it to run at large upon the public streets or in any
public park, public building or other public place within the Township.
D. Leashing. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer
or permit it to be upon the public streets or in any of the public places of
59.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E. Destruction at request of owner, as amended
7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
1-2-2019 by Ord. No. 18-073. This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection F,
Redemption Fee, as Subsection E.
60.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 22-37(3), Noisy dogs, which previously followed this
subsection, was deleted 7-18-2017 by Ord. No 17-09.
§ 108-12 HAMILTON CODE § 108-13
1:214
the Township unless such dog is accompanied by a person over the
age of 12 years of age and is securely confined and controlled by an
adequate leash not more than six feet long.
E. Property damage. No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall
permit or suffer it to do any injury or to do any damage to any lawn,
shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property.
F. Dogs trained to attack prohibited. No person, with the exception of duly
appointed public officials or employees acting in their official capacity,
shall keep, harbor or have custody or possession of any dog which has
been or shall be intentionally trained to attack, injure, maim or kill any
human being or domestic pet, either voluntarily or upon command.
G. Adoption from Township shelter. There will be an initial fee, as set forth
in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code, to be paid to the Township
for each dog adopted from the Township animal control shelter. The fee
or any portion thereof may be waived by the Director of the Department
of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services based upon a
finding of genuine hardship. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-029]
(1) The owner of any dog must have the dog spayed or neutered within
60 days of adoption, and verification must be presented to the
Animal Control Officer at the time. The 60 days begins for puppies
at the age of six months.
(2) When the dog owner or other party presents verification that the
dog has been spayed or neutered or the dog is returned within 60
days due to allergies, temperament or housing difficulties, the
owner or other party will be refunded $20 from the initial fee by the
Township. Proof of license must also be presented.
(3) Any dog may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the Health Officer,
upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that,
because of an infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of
therapy, the inoculation of such dog shall be inadvisable. The
requirements also do not apply to dogs held in a kennel or those
held by a state-licensed or federally licensed research facility or a
veterinary establishment where dogs are received or kept for
diagnostic, medical, surgical or other treatments, or licensed
animal shelters, pounds, kennels or pet shops.
H. Exemptions from adoption fee. The Township Division of Police and
other law enforcement agencies and organizations which obtain dogs
from the Township shelter for the purposes of training as Seeing Eye
dogs are exempt from the adoption fees provided in this section.
I. 61Animal trap fee. The fee for utilization of an animal trap provided by
the Hamilton Township Animal Shelter shall be a deposit in the amount
§ 108-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-13
1:215
§ 108-14. Exemption for veterinary treatment centers.
No provision of this article shall be construed to apply to any establishment
wherein or whereon dogs are received or kept for diagnostic, medical,
surgical or other treatments, owned by and operated under the immediate
supervision of a graduate veterinarian licensed in the state.
§ 108-15. Dog bites.
Where it has been determined by a physician that a person has been bitten
by a dog, such individual, or his parent or guardian if he is a minor, shall
immediately notify the police. When the owner or keeper of any dog shall
be notified by the police that the dog has bitten any individual, the owner or
keeper of the dog must comply with the following procedures:
set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code. [Amended
7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
A. Have the dog examined by a licensed veterinarian within 12 hours.
B. Have the dog kept in quarantine in the owner's home or at a kennel for
a period of 10 days.
C. At the end of 10 days have the dog reexamined by a veterinarian and a
written report of the dog's state of health sent to the Division of Health.
61.Editor's Note: Former Subsection I, regarding adoptions of vicious or potentially
dangerous dogs, added 5-3-2016 by Ord. No. 16-015, was repealed 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
18-045. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection J as
Subsection I.
§ 108-13 HAMILTON CODE § 108-15
1:216
ARTICLE V
Cats
[Adopted as Ch. 22, Art. III, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 108-16. Certain cats deemed public nuisance.
A cat shall be considered a public nuisance if it has no known owner or if it
has no known place of care or shelter or if it habitually trespasses upon or
damages either private or public property or annoys or harms lawful users
or occupants thereof.
§ 108-17. Responsibility of owner.
Any person who owns, keeps, feeds or harbors any cat at any place within
the Township or who permits any cat to enter the limits of the Township
shall exercise sufficient and proper care and control over such animal at all
times so as to prevent the cat from becoming a public nuisance.
§ 108-18. Seizure of nuisance animals; notice to owner.
§ 108-19. Fees for redemption or adoption from Township shelter.
[Amended 4-22-1999 by Ord. No. 99-015; 5-5-2004 by Ord. No.
04-02062]
A. The person designated by the Superintendent of the Division of Health
to enforce the provisions of this article shall, upon receipt of a
complaint that a cat is a public nuisance, seize the cat or trap it in a
humane-type trap for trapping cats alive and keep it in his care and
custody for a period of seven days from the date of apprehension.
[Amended 10-1-2013 by Ord. No. 13-037]
B. If any cat so apprehended bears any identification of ownership, the
enforcement officer shall, on the day of apprehension, notify the owner
that the animal has been apprehended and that it may be claimed at a
designated location subject to the provisions of this article.
A. Redemption. Any cat that has been seized pursuant to this article may
be claimed by its owner during the seven-day custodial period upon the
payment to the Animal Control Officer of a pickup fee and an additional
fee for each day or fraction thereof that the cat has been in custody. The
fees are set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code. The fee
or any portion thereof may be waived by the Director of the Department
of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services based upon a
finding of genuine hardship.
B. Adoption from Township shelter. There will be an initial fee as set forth
in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code to be paid to the Township
for each cat adopted from the Township animal control shelter. The fee
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 108-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-19
1:217
§ 108-20. Disposal of unclaimed impounded cats.
Any cat which has been seized pursuant to this article and which has not
been reclaimed during the custodial period may be disposed of in a humane
manner approved by the State Board of Health.
or any portion thereof may be waived by the Director of the Department
of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services based upon a
finding of genuine hardship.
(1) The owner of the cat must have the cat spayed or neutered within
60 days of adoption, and verification must be presented to the
Animal Control Officer at that time. The 60 days begins for kittens
at the age of six months.
(2) The owner of the cat over six months of age must have the cat
vaccinated against rabies within 10 days of adoption by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization published
by the National Veterinarians.
(3) When the cat owner or other party presents verification that the cat
has been spayed or neutered and has been inoculated against
rabies or the cat is returned within 60 days due to allergies,
temperament or housing difficulties, the owner or other party will
be refunded $20 from the initial adoption fee by the Township.
(4) Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the Health Officer,
upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that,
because of an infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of
therapy, the inoculation of such cat shall be inadvisable. The
requirements also do not apply to cats held in a cattery or those
held by a state-licensed or federally licensed research facility or a
veterinary establishment where cats are received or kept for
diagnostic, medical, surgical or other treatments, or licensed
animal shelters, pounds, kennels or pet shops.
C. Animal trap fee. The fee for utilization of an animal trap provided by the
Hamilton Township Animal Shelter shall be a deposit in the amount set
forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.
§ 108-19 HAMILTON CODE § 108-20
1:218
Chapter 119
AUTOMOBILE DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 215. Junk dealers — See Ch. 277.
§ 119-1. License required.
No person shall exercise, carry on or be engaged in the business of
secondhand automobile dealer or secondhand automobile parts dealer, or
store or expose for sale used or new motor vehicles, within the Township,
without first having obtained a license so to do in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 119-2. Definitions; applicability of chapter.
§ 119-3. Public notice of license application required.
A. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
SECONDHAND AUTOMOBILE DEALER — Any person engaged in or
who shall engage in the business of buying and selling secondhand or
used motor vehicles.
SECONDHAND AUTOMOBILE PARTS DEALER — Any person engaged
in or who shall engage in the business of buying and selling secondhand
or used parts for motor vehicles.
B. The fact that any person maintains and conducts or shall maintain and
conduct an agency or subagency for any automobile manufacturer shall
not exempt any such person from the provisions of this chapter if such
person is engaged in or shall engage in the business of buying and
selling secondhand or used motor vehicles, or secondhand or used parts
for motor vehicles, or both of these businesses.
A. Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall, at least seven
days prior to the making of an application to the Township Council,
cause notice of the application and of the time when and the place
where it will be made to the Council to be published at least once in a
newspaper circulating in the Township, and shall also, at least seven
days prior to the making of the application, cause notice thereof in
writing to be given either personally or by registered mail to each
owner of and to each tenant or person in possession of real property
situate within 500 feet of the land upon which the business is proposed
to be conducted. If the residence or address of any owner, tenant or
person in possession shall be unknown, the notice shall be sent by
§ 108-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-3
1:219
§ 119-4. Exemption from notice requirement.
In the event of an application for a license under this chapter by a person
maintaining and conducting a bona fide agency or subagency for any
automobile manufacturer, when the applicant has been an established
dealer or agent within the Township for a period of five or more years, the
Township Council may waive the notice provisions of § 119-3 if it determines
that no valid public purpose would be served by the notices required by that
section.
§ 119-5. License fee.63
Every person who shall apply for the granting or renewal of a license to
conduct the business of secondhand automobile dealer and secondhand
automobile parts dealer and to store or expose for sale any used or new
motor vehicles shall, if he maintains and conducts a bona fide agency or
subagency for any automobile manufacturer, pay to the Clerk the sum set
forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code; and every person who
shall apply for the granting or renewal of any license shall, if any such
person shall not maintain and conduct a bona fide agency or subagency for
any automobile manufacturer, pay to the Clerk the sum set forth in Chapter
215, Fees, of the Township Code.64
§ 119-6. Inspections.
Any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall, at all times
during the term of the license, allow the Chief of Police or any member of
the Police Division of the Township to enter the premises where the licensee
is carrying on his business, for the purpose of inspecting the premises and
inspecting the automobiles or automobile parts or license plates for the
purpose of locating goods suspected of being or alleged to have been stolen
or otherwise improperly disposed of.
registered mail addressed to the last known address of the person
appearing upon the tax records of the Township. The notice shall be
given or mailed, in the case of an infant or incompetent, to the guardian
of the person; and when the title to any real property shall be held in
trust, to the trustee; and when the title to any such real property shall
be held by joint tenants, tenants in common or tenants by the entireties,
to any one of the tenants.
B. Every applicant shall cause a copy of the notice, together with proof by
affidavit of the publication and of the delivery or mailing thereof, to be
filed with the Clerk at least two days prior to the making of the
application.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
64.Editor's Note: Former § 30-6, pertaining to bonds, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 12-5-2012 by Ord. No. 12-052.
§ 119-3 HAMILTON CODE § 119-7
1:220
§ 119-7. Hours of business.
No person licensed under the terms of this chapter shall keep his office or
place of business open for the transaction of business on any day of the
week before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m.
§ 119-8. Notice not to remove merchandise.
Whenever the Chief of Police of the Township shall notify any licensee
under this chapter not to sell or permit to be removed any automobile or
automobile part purchased, the automobile or automobile part shall not be
permitted to be removed, nor shall the automobile or automobile part be
sold, until such time as may be determined by the Township Police Division,
provided that such time shall in no case exceed the period of six months
from the date of such notification.
§ 119-9. Separate license required for each place of business.
Wherever two or more motor vehicles are stored on any such vacant lot or
land for sale, whether adjacent to a duly established garage, service station
or any other motor vehicle business or not, a license shall be required, and a
separate license shall be required for each separate lot or parcel of ground
upon which the business is conducted; provided, however, that, where
several lots are contiguous to each other and the business is conducted on
all of the lots, only one license shall be necessary.
§ 119-10. Purchase or sale of vehicles with altered manufacturer's
serial number or other identification.
No licensee under this chapter, or his agent, shall knowingly buy, sell,
receive, dispose or conceal or have in his possession any motor vehicle
from which the manufacturer's serial number or any other number or
identification mark has been removed, defaced, altered, covered or
destroyed for the purpose of concealing the identity of such vehicle.
§ 119-11. Use of streets and sidewalks for storage or display of
vehicles.
No motor vehicle shall be placed by a licensee under this chapter on the
sidewalk or any part thereof, nor shall the licensee use the street or any
part thereof for the storage, display or sale of motor vehicles.
§ 119-12. Consent of property owner to be endorsed on application
for license.
If the applicant for a license under this chapter is not the owner of the site
where the business is to be conducted, the owner's consent to the conduct
of the business shall be endorsed on the application.
§ 119-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-13
1:221
§ 119-13. Transactions with minors.
No licensee under this chapter shall purchase from or sell any automobile
or automobile parts to any minors.
Chapter 130
BOATS AND BOATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 340.
§ 130-1. Motor-powered boats.
No person shall operate any motor-powered boat on any of the lakes within
the Township, except for Gropp's Lake.
§ 130-2. Gropp's Lake boating regulations.
The operation of a boat powered by an electrical motor not greater than
five horsepower is permitted on Gropp's Lake. No person shall operate any
other type of motor-powered boat on Gropp's Lake.
Chapter 141
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 141-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUILDING — Includes all houses and dwellings, stores and business places
and other buildings which shall front upon any street of the Township.
§ 141-2. Assignment of numbers.
The Engineer shall plot upon the Tax Maps of the Township all of the
properties which now or shall hereafter front upon any street, and
designate and assign a number therefor.
§ 141-3. Display of numbers.
All buildings now or hereafter erected within the Township shall bear the
street number assigned to the building on the Tax Maps of the Township.
Such figures shall be at least three inches in height and shall be displayed
by the owner or occupant on the front of the building or in the front yard,
§ 119-13 HAMILTON CODE § 141-3
1:222
at or near the front entrance to the building, and so located as to be visible
to persons passing by the building or premises on the abutting street. The
color of such numbers shall contrast with the color of the background on
which they are placed.
§ 141-4. Notice to property owners.
The Engineer, upon completion of the plotting upon the Tax Maps of the
Township of the numbers assigned to all lots and buildings on any particular
street, shall file a copy with the Township Clerk. The Clerk shall, by certified
mail or by personal service, serve upon the owner or occupant of the
premises notification of the number assigned to his building or lot. The
owner shall be required to comply with the requirements of this chapter
within 30 days after receipt of the notification.
§ 141-5. New numbers.
Upon any subdivision or resubdivision of land in the Township resulting in
lots other than those delineated on the map, the Engineer shall assign a
number to each lot resulting from the subdivision or resubdivision, which
shall be in proper numerical sequence in relation to the number assigned
to the other lots fronting on the same street, and he shall record the new
numbers on the map within 10 days of the filing of the approval given for
such subdivision or resubdivision of land.
§ 141-6. Numbers to be assigned prior to subdivision approval.
No subdivision or resubdivision of land, major or minor, requiring approval
by the Planning Board shall be approved until a number has been assigned
by the Engineer to each lot for the building erected or to be erected on it.
§ 141-7. Numbers to be assigned prior to issuance of certificate of
occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building Inspector or
anyone in his department for the occupancy of any building erected or
enlarged until the provisions of this chapter have been complied with.
Chapter 146
BUILDINGS, UNFIT OR ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 167.
Housing standards — See Ch. 268.
Nuisances — See Ch. 317.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 362.
§ 141-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-7
1:223

ARTICLE I
Unfit Dwellings
§ 146-1. Enforcing authority.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Board of Public
Officers as established by Chapter 5, Part 5, Article XIX, Board of Public
Officers.
§ 146-2. Definitions. [Amended 10-17-2012 by Ord. No. 12-042]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUILDING — Any residential, commercial or other building or structure or
part thereof, whether used for human habitation or otherwise, and includes
any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto.
LIEN HOLDER or MORTGAGE HOLDER — Any person or entity holding a
note, mortgage or other interest secured by the building or any part thereof.
OWNER — The holder of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a building, and any who are in actual
possession.
PROPERTY — Any building or structure and the land appurtenant thereto.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any housing authority or any officer who is in
charge of any department or branch of the government of the Township
relating to health, fire or building regulations or to other activities
concerning buildings in the Township.
PUBLIC OFFICERS — The officials of the Township as defined in § 146-1.
QUALIFIED REHABILITATION ENTITY — An entity organized or authorized
to do business under the New Jersey statutes which shall have as one of its
purposes the construction or rehabilitation of residential or nonresidential
buildings, the provision of affordable housing, the restoration of abandoned
property, the revitalization and improvement of urban neighborhoods, or
similar purpose, and which shall be well qualified by virtue of its staff,
professional consultants, financial resources, and prior activities set forth
in P.L. 2003, c.210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al.) to carry out the rehabilitation of
vacant buildings in urban areas.
UTILITY — Any electric or natural gas public utility that is regulated under
the jurisdiction of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ 146-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-3
1:225
§ 146-3. Filing of complaint; notice of hearing.65
Whenever a petition is filed with the public officers by a public authority
or by at least five residents of the Township, charging that any building
is unfit for human habitation or occupancy, or whenever it appears to the
public officers on their own motion that any building is unfit for human
habitation, they shall, if their preliminary investigation discloses a basis for
such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in
interest in such building a complaint stating the charges in that respect and
containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officers at a
place therein fixed not less than seven days and not more than 30 days after
the serving of the complaint, that the owner and parties in interest shall be
given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or
otherwise and give testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint,
and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not
be controlling in hearings before the public officers.
§ 146-4. Report of findings; order.
§ 146-5. Action by Township on failure to comply with order.
[Amended 5-6-2009 by Ord. No. 09-011; 10-17-2012 by Ord. No.
12-042]
A. If after notice and hearing, as provided in § 146-3, the public officers
determine that the building under consideration is unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use, they shall state in writing their findings of
fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be
served upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an order
requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be
made by the owner within a reasonable time, which shall be set forth in
the order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or to have the
building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order.
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in the
order, then the owner shall remove or demolish the building within a
reasonable time as specified in the order of removal.
A. If the owner fails to comply with an order under this article to repair,
alter or improve, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the
building, the public officers may cause such building to be repaired,
altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed. The public officers
may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building so closed a
placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building is
prohibited and unlawful."
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 146-3 HAMILTON CODE § 146-5
1:226
B. Posting of notice. Any dwelling or multifamily dwelling declared as
"unfit for human habitation" shall be posted with a placard by the
Construction Official. The placard shall include the following:
(1) Name of Township;
(2) The name of the authorized department having jurisdiction;
(3) The chapter and section of the ordinance under which it is issued;
(4) An order that the dwelling or multifamily dwelling when vacated
shall remain vacant until the provisions of the order are complied
with and the order to vacate is withdrawn;
(5) The date that the placard is posted;
(6) A statement of the penalty for defacing or removal of the placard.
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or
multifamily dwelling which has been declared or placarded as unfit
for human habitation except by authority, in writing, from the
Construction Official.
C. Vacating of unfit building. Any dwelling or multifamily dwelling which
has been declared and placarded as unfit for human habitation by the
Construction Official shall be vacated within a reasonable time, as
required by the Construction Official. The owner or operator of such
dwelling shall not lease the dwelling or portion thereof to any person
for human habitation. No person shall occupy any dwelling or
multifamily dwelling which has been declared or placarded by the
Construction Official as unfit for human habitation after the date set
forth in the placard.
D. Reoccupancy of unfit building. No dwelling or multifamily dwelling
which has been declared or placarded as unfit for human habitation
shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is
secured from the Construction Official. The Construction Official shall
remove the placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
declaration and placard action were based have been eliminated and
the proper certificate of approval for occupancy has been obtained from
the Construction Official.
E. Vacant buildings. If for any reason a building remains vacant or
untended for a period of 90 days, the owner shall close and secure all
windows, doors and other openings so that access into the building is
prevented. The early detection and containment of fire being a valid
municipal concern, the boarding up of doors and windows shall not be
permitted except with the permission of the enforcement authority, as
constituted under § 146-16, in emergency situations. When doors and
windows are boarded up, they shall be covered with no less than 1/2
inch exterior plywood or equivalent which shall be the same color as the
building exterior. In no case shall the boarding up of doors and windows
be permitted in excess of 60 days without authorization from the
§ 146-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-5
1:227
§ 146-6. Recovery of costs by Township.
enforcing authority. The owner of any such dwelling shall not cause
or permit such dwelling to be used in whole or in part for living
purposes until the structure has been rehabilitated in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and a certificate of approval for
occupancy has been issued by the Department of Community Planning
and Compliance. Whenever a structure deemed unfit for human
habitation or dangerous to life and health remains vacant for a period of
at least six months, proceedings shall be instituted against the owner in
accordance with provisions of Article I, Unfit Dwellings, of this chapter.
F. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officers may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement and receipt of bids therefor.
A. The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this article determined in favor of the
Township, and the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or
vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of
the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any,
realized from the sale of materials derived from such building or from
any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien
against the real property upon which such cost was incurred.
B. If the building is removed or demolished by the public officers, they
shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited against
the cost of removal or demolition thereof the proceeds of any sale of
such materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or
demolition of the building. If there are no such credits or if the sum
total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed
statement of such costs and the amount so due shall be filed with the
Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of the records of tax liens,
and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by
certified mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the balance
remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the public
officers, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such
court and shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the
court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or
judgment of such court; provided, however, that nothing in this article
shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the
Township to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or
abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise.
C. Any owner or party in interest may, within 30 days from the date of the
filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the
Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the
accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.66
§ 146-5 HAMILTON CODE § 146-7
1:228
§ 146-7. Service of complaints or orders.67
Complaints or orders issued by the public officers pursuant to this article
shall be served upon persons either personally or by certified mail, but, if
the whereabouts of such person are unknown and the person's whereabouts
cannot be ascertained by the public officers in the exercise of reasonable
diligence, and the public officers shall make an affidavit to that effect, then
the serving of the complaint or order upon such person may be made by
publishing the complaint or order once in a newspaper having circulation
in the Township. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order, and a
copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record
with the county recording officer.
§ 146-8. Powers of public officers.
The public officers are hereby authorized and empowered to exercise such
powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the
purposes and provisions of this article, including the following in addition to
others granted in this article:
§ 146-9. Immediate dangers.69
If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened collapse
of any fire-damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the public officer
may, after taking such measures as may be necessary to make such building
temporarily safe, seek a judgment in summary proceedings for the
demolition thereof.
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the Township in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use.68
B. To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
they deem necessary to carry out the purpose of this article.
E. To delegate any of their functions and powers under this article to such
officers and agents as they may designate.
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
69.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 146-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-9
1:229

ARTICLE II
Abandoned Property
[Added 10-17-2012 by Ord. No. 12-042]
§ 146-10. Determination that property is abandoned.
§ 146-11. Determination of property as nuisance.
A. Any property that has not been legally occupied for a period of six
months and which meets any one of the following additional criteria
may be deemed to be abandoned property upon a determination by the
public officer that:
(1) The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment
of the public officer, and no rehabilitation has taken place during
that six-month period;
(2) Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued
prior to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy,
and no construction has taken place for at least six months as of the
dated of a determination by the public officer pursuant to this
section;
(3) At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and
delinquent on that property in accordance with Chapter 4 of Title
54 of the Revised Statutes as of the date of a determination by the
public officer pursuant to this section; or
(4) The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the public
officer in accordance with Section 5 of P.L. 2003, c.210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-82).
B. A property which contains both residential and nonresidential space
may be considered abandoned pursuant to P.L. 2003, c.210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et seq.) so long as two-thirds or more of the total net square
footage of the building was previously legally occupied as residential
space and none of the residential space has been legally occupied for at
least six months at the time of the determination of abandonment by the
public officer and the property meets the criteria of either Subsection
A(1) or A(4) of this section.
A. A property may be determined to be a nuisance if:
(1) The property has been found to be unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use pursuant to § 146-4A and Section 1 of P.L. 1942,
c.112 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3);
(2) The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases the
risk of fire to the property and adjacent properties;
(3) The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to potential
health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to take reasonable
§ 146-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-11
1:231
§ 146-12. Abandoned property list.
§ 146-13. Registration required; fee.
and necessary measures to secure the property; or the municipality
has secured the property in order to prevent such hazards after the
owner has failed to do so;
(4) The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut
vegetation or physical deterioration of the structure or grounds
have created potential health and safety hazards and the owner has
failed to take reasonable and necessary measures to remove the
hazards; or
(5) The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property
materially affects the welfare, including the economic welfare, of
the residents of the area in close proximity to the property, and the
owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary measures to
remedy the conditions.
B. A public officer who determines a property to be a nuisance pursuant to
Subsection A(2) through (5) of this section shall follow the notification
procedures set forth in P.L. 1942, c.112 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq.).
A. Establishment of list. The public officer is hereby directed to identify
abandoned properties within the municipality, place said properties on
an abandoned property list established as provided in Section 36 of P.L.
1996, c.62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55), as amended, by Section 28 of P.L. 2003,
c.210, and provide such notices and carry out such other tasks as are
required to effectuate an abandoned property list as provided by law.
B. Applicability. The abandoned property list shall apply to the Township of
Hamilton as a whole.
C. Public officer's responsibilities and powers. The public officer, for the
purpose of carrying out the responsibilities established by this section,
shall have all the responsibilities and powers provided by law and shall
exercise the authority granted the public officer of a municipality
pursuant to P.L. 1996, c.62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-20 et seq.).
D. Public officer to report to Mayor and governing body. The public officer
shall provide a report to the Mayor and governing body as required,
with respect to the number and location of properties on the abandoned
property list, the status of those properties and any actions taken by the
municipality or by any qualified rehabilitation entity designated
pursuant to the authority granted the public officer with respect to any
property on the list or any other abandoned property within the
Township of Hamilton.
A. Any person, company, corporation or beneficiary, whose property
becomes vacant or shows evidence of vacancy shall, within 90 days of
the property becoming vacant, or within 30 days of assuming ownership
§ 146-11 HAMILTON CODE § 146-13
1:232
§ 146-14. Securing of property.
of such property, or within 10 days of receiving notice of declaration of
vacancy, pursuant to the standards set forth in § 146-10, register said
property with the Director of Community Planning and Compliance or
his or her designee. [Amended 3-1-2016 by Ord. No. 16-007]
B. The registration shall be filed on forms approved by the Director of
Community Planning and Compliance or his or her designee and shall
identify the property by tax lot and block number as well as street
address and shall also contain the name of any owner, including any
beneficiary, the direct street address of the owner (no P.O. boxes), a
direct contact name and phone number, e-mail address, if available, and
in the case of a corporation or other business entity the name, address
and phone number for the local property manager and/or person
responsible for security, maintenance and marketing of the property, if
applicable.
C. The owner shall notify the Director of Community Planning and
Compliance within 30 days of any change in the registration
information by filing an amended registration statement on a form
provided by the Township for such purpose.
D. An initial registration fee as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the
Township Code shall accompany the registration form filing. The fees
for subsequent renewals shall be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of
the Township Code, and shall be due by the anniversary date of the
initial registration each year. The registration fee will not be prorated
or refunded. The yearly fee required to be paid by the initial registrant
and any subsequent registrant for the same property shall be based
upon the filing date of the initial registration. The owner shall be
required to renew the registration annually as long as the property
remains vacant. If a building is to be occupied within nine months a
change of occupancy inspection may be ordered in accordance with
§ 268-3A. [Amended 7-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-02870]
E. After registering a vacant property or renewing such registration, and
upon reasonable notice, the owner of any vacant property shall provide
access to Township officials to conduct an exterior and interior
inspection of the building to determine compliance with the Municipal
Code during the period covered by the initial registration or any
subsequent renewal.
A. It is the responsibility of the owner to secure the property registered
under this article. For purposes of this section, "secure" means, but is
not limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors (including
garage and out buildings), gutters and any other opening. In the case of
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 146-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-14
1:233
§ 146-15. Maintenance.
windows, such shall be secured by means of reglazing or boarding of
same.
B. If the property is owned by a corporation, business entity, or out of area
owner, they must supply the Hamilton Township Department of
Community Planning and Compliance with the contact information for
the person, or management company, or entity, responsible for the dayto-
day supervision and maintenance of the property. "Out-of-the-area"
shall mean any owner located at least 50 miles away from subject
property. The property, if vacant, shall be posted with a name and
twenty-four-hour contact number of the local property management
company or a twenty-four-hour number for the owner. The posting shall
be no less than three inches by five inches with words in a prominent
font and legible. The words "property managed by" and "to report
problems or concerns call, email address" shall appear on the posted
sign. The posting shall be on the inside of an interior window facing the
street or on at least one boarded window facing the street or secured on
the exterior of the building facing the street where such can be read
from the street.
C. The posting of such on a visible stake in front of the property is
acceptable.
A. Properties subject to this article shall be kept free of all weeds, dry
bushes, dead trees, vegetation, junk, debris, building material and
garbage. Furthermore, there shall not be permitted any accumulation
of flyers, notices, or discarded personal items of any sort that give the
appearance that the property is vacant or abandoned. The property
owner shall be responsible for the removal of any graffiti. Visible front
side yards and back yards shall be kept properly landscaped according
to existing housing standards and regulations.
B. Unoccupied or vacant buildings shall not be utilized for storage of any
materials, whether solid or liquid, including the yard portion of that
building.
C. When a vacant building is found to be infested with rats, termites,
roaches or any other insects or vermin, the owner or operator shall
provide for the extermination and prevention of such nuisance.
D. Every foundation, exterior wall or exterior roof of an unoccupied or
vacant building shall be weathertight, watertight and rodentproof and
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair and shall be safe to use
and capable of supporting a load which normal use may cause to be
placed thereon.
E. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling of an unoccupied or vacant
building shall be substantially rodentproof, shall be kept in sound
§ 146-14 HAMILTON CODE § 146-15
1:234
§ 146-16. Enforcement authority.
condition and good repair, and shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting a load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
F. Every window, exterior door and basement or cellar door and hatchway
of an unoccupied or vacant building shall be weathertight, watertight
and rodentproof and locked and shall be kept in sound working
condition and good repair.
G. Every inside and outside stair, porch and any appurtenance thereto of
an unoccupied or vacant building shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting a load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
H. Every yard of an unoccupied or vacant building shall be properly
graded so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.
I. There shall be a control method of disposing of water from roofs of an
unoccupied or vacant building by use of gutters and downspouts which
shall be installed and maintained in sound condition, free of leaks and
obstructions.
J. Every dwelling, cellar, basement and crawl space of an unoccupied or
vacant building shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness.
K. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure of an unoccupied
or vacant building shall be maintained free of broken windows, loose
shingles, crumbling stone or brick or excess peeling paint.
L. The exterior of the premises and the condition of accessory structures
of an unoccupied or vacant building shall be maintained so that the
appearance of the premises and all buildings thereof shall reflect the
level of maintenance in keeping with the standards of the neighborhood
in such that the appearance of the premises and structure shall not
constitute a blighting factor for adjoining property owners leading to
the progressive deterioration and downgrading of the neighborhood
with the accompanying diminution of property values.
M. All doors and/or lids on appliances, furniture utilized for storage or on
heating furnaces located on the premises of an unoccupied or vacant
building shall be locked in order to deny entry to any individuals where
the potential for physical harm or death may result should said door
close to prevent the individual's escape.
N. All pools, ponds and/or other bodies of standing water located on the
premises of an unoccupied or vacant building shall be drained or
properly cleaned and maintained so as to prevent the breeding or
existence of mosquito larvae or other nuisances.
A. Inspectors under the authority of the Director shall have the authority
to issue a summons for any violations found under any section in this
§ 146-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-16
1:235
§ 146-17. Violations and penalties.71
The penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations;
penalties, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton shall be imposed for each
violation of this article for which the culpable party is found responsible.
Such fines shall only be issued by the Municipal Court after entertainment
of the summons and proper due process provided. Each day a violation
exists may be considered a separate violation for penalty purposes.
§ 146-18. Township acquisition of abandoned property;
rehabilitation plan.
chapter. The Hamilton Township Police Division is also authorized
herein to issue appropriate summonses.
B. The Director of Community Planning and Compliance, or his or her
designee, shall have the authority to require the owner/beneficiary to
implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including
those listed in § 268-8, including requiring a specific type of material for
closure purposes, requiring additional lighting, the providing of
security guard protection if such a building is located in an industrial
area or isolated area as determined by the Director, or any other
reasonable measures designed to assist in securing the property or
securing it from further decline.
A. Filing of complaint. Pursuant to the requirements of N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et
seq., the Township may file an action in the Superior Court of New
Jersey to acquire ownership and title to abandoned property in need of
rehabilitation. The Township shall give the owner or party in interest
notice of its intention to take possession of the abandoned property at
least 30 days prior to filing the complaint.
B. Rehabilitation plan. The owner or party in interest may defend against
the complaint by submitting a plan, within 60 days of the filing of the
complaint, for the rehabilitation and reuse of the property and by
posting a bond equal to 125% of the amount determined by the public
officer to represent the project cost of rehabilitation. The plan requires
a financial feasibility analysis, a budget and timetable for rehabilitation
of the property and documentation and qualifications of those who will
perform the rehabilitation.
C. Rehabilitation plan approval. The court shall approve the plan if the
plan is realistic and likely to result in the expeditious rehabilitation and
reuse of the property. If the court approves of the owner's plan, it may
appoint the public officer to act as monitor of the owner's compliance. If
the owner or party in interest fails to carry out any step in the approved
plan, the public officer shall notify the court, which may order the bond
forfeited, grant the Township possession of the property, and authorize
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 146-16 HAMILTON CODE § 146-18
1:236
the Township to use the proceeds of the bond for rehabilitation of the
property.
D. Quarterly progress reports required. The owner or party in interest
shall provide quarterly reports to the Township on the owner's progress
toward rehabilitation and reuse of the property. These reports shall be
provided to the court as the court determines are necessary.
E. Alternate entities for implementation of rehabilitation plan. If an owner
or party in interest fails to successfully defend against a complaint, a
mortgage holder or lien holder may seek to be designated in possession
of the property by submitting a plan and posting a bond meeting the
same conditions described above. If no mortgage holder or lien holder
meets these conditions, the Township shall submit a plan which shall
designate an entity that shall implement the plan. This entity may be
the Township or a qualified rehabilitation entity, organized or
authorized to do business under New Jersey law, which shall have as
one of its purposes the construction or rehabilitation of residential or
nonresidential buildings, the provision of affordable housing and the
restoration of abandoned property, among others.
F. Possession of property by the Township. If the Township is granted
possession of the property under this section, the Township shall be
deemed to have an ownership interest in the property for the purpose of
filing plans with public agencies and any state program of grants or
loans. Where the Township borrows funds for the express purpose of
rehabilitating the property, the court may authorize the Township to
grant a lien or security interest with priority over all other liens or
mortgages other than Township liens.
G. Owner responsibilities while under Township possession. With the
granting of possession by the court to the Township of a property
determined to be abandoned, the owner shall continue to be
responsible for all taxes or other municipal liens and charges, or
mortgages or liens to any party, incurred on the property, whether those
taxes, charges or liens are incurred before or after the granting of
possession; nor shall the owner be relieved of any operating or
maintenance expense associated with the property. Similarly, although
the Township is required to maintain, safeguard, and maintain
insurance on the property, the owner shall not be relieved of any civil or
criminal liability or any duty imposed by reason of acts or omissions of
the owner relating to the property.
H. Township authorized to seek approval to assign rights to another entity.
The Township is authorized to seek court approval to assign its rights to
another entity, which may be granted under the circumstances
enumerated in this section.
I. Reinstatement of owner's rights. An owner may petition for
reinstatement of the owner's control and possession of the property.
§ 146-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-18
1:237
The petition's requirements and conditions shall be determined by the
court for reinstating the owner's rights.
J. Township sale of property. If the Township sells the property, this
section sets forth the order of distribution of the proceeds of such a
sale. This section authorizes the public officer, with the approval of the
court, to place a lien on the property to cover any costs the Township
incurred prior to the granting by the court of an order of possession,
which may include costs incurred to stabilize or secure the property.
K. Special tax sales. This section authorizes the Township to hold special
tax sales with respect to those properties eligible for tax sale under
N.J.S.A. 54:5-19, which are also on an abandoned property list and sets
forth procedures governing those special tax sales. In the case of any
eminent domain proceeding carried out under Section 37 of P.L. 1996,
c.62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-56), this section establishes the parameters for
establishing fair market value.
§ 146-18 HAMILTON CODE § 146-18
1:238
Chapter 167
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit or abandoned buildings — See Ch. 146.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 228.
Housing standards — See Ch. 268.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 362.
§ 167-1. Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency.
§ 167-2. Fees. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 93-033; 3-20-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-009; 2-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-011, 3-19-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-012; 11-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-071; 5-20-2009 by Ord. No.
09-018; 4-22-2010 by Ord. No. 10-013; 11-1-2011 by Ord. No.
11-038; 8-22-2012 by Ord. No. 12-040]
A. Establishment; membership. There is hereby established in the
Township a State Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency
consisting of a Construction Official, a building subcode official, a
plumbing subcode official, an electrical subcode official, a fire
protection subcode official and such other subcode officials for such
additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs of the state shall hereafter adopt as part of the State
Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency.
B. Qualifications of enforcing officers. Each official position created in
Subsection A of this section shall be filled by a person qualified for such
position pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.). More
than one such official position may be held by the same person,
provided that such person is qualified pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold
each such position.
C. Address. The public shall have the right to do business with the
enforcing agency at the office of the Superintendent of the Division of
Inspections located at the Hamilton Township Municipal Building, 2090
Greenwood Avenue, Trenton, New Jersey 08609, except for
emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances.72
A. Generally. Pursuant to the legislative intent of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et
seq. and guidelines promulgated by the State Department of
Community Affairs under the New Jersey Administrative Code, the
following fee schedule is hereby adopted.
72.Editor's Note: Former § 38-2, pertaining to the Construction Board of Appeals, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 8-22-2012 by Ord. No. 12-040.
§ 146-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-2
1:239
(1) Plan review for new construction and additions: 20% of the permit
fee, deducted from the total cost of the permit. To determine
estimated cost, the applicant shall submit cost data by the architect
or engineer of record or a recognized estimating company or by the
low-bid contractor. If such data is unavailable, the Division of
Inspections shall estimate cost using per-unit cost figures,
including labor, at recognized estimating costs.
(2) Annual permit requirements are as follows:
(a) The fee to be charged for an annual construction permit shall
be charged annually. This fee shall be a flat fee based upon the
number of maintenance workers who are employed by the
facility, and who are primarily engaged in work that is
governed by a subcode. Managers, engineers and clerical staff
shall not be considered maintenance workers for the purpose
of establishing the annual construction permit fee. Annual
permits may be issued for building/fire protection, electrical
and plumbing.
(b) Fees for annual permits shall be as follows:
1. One to 25 workers (including foremen): $850 per worker;
each additional worker over 25: $275 per worker.
2. Prior to the issuance of the annual permit, a training
registration fee of $175 per subcode and a list of not more
than three individuals to be trained per subcode shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Department of
Community Affairs, Bureau of Code Services, Training
Section, along with a copy of the construction permit
(Form F170). Checks shall be made payable to "Treasurer,
State of New Jersey." The Department shall register these
individuals and shall be responsible for notifying them of
the courses being offered.
(3) New construction:
(a) All construction: $0.038 per cubic foot. State fee: $0.00371 per
cubic foot, with a minimum fee of $150. [Amended 8-20-2019
by Ord. No. 19-036]
1. For the purpose of calculating the volume to determine the
fee for large open-volume, single-story spaces in buildings,
such as barns, silos, greenhouses, warehouses,
distribution centers, and other agricultural and storageuse
occupancies, the height shall be limited 20 feet,
notwithstanding the fact that the actual height of the
space may be greater than 20 feet.
§ 167-2 HAMILTON CODE § 167-2
1:240
(b) Modular homes: $0.038 per cubic foot for footings, foundations
and garages, etc. State fee: $0.00371 per cubic foot.
[Amended 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-061]
(c) Additions:
1. All residential use groups: Same as new construction.
2. Minimum fee: $75.
(d) Update plan review fee: $50 per hour; minimum one hour.
[Amended 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-061]
(e) Three-year commercial contractor license: $250. [Added
12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-061]
(4) Renovations, alterations:
(a) All use groups: $30 per $1,000 of value. State fee: $1.90 per
$1,000. [Amended 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-061]
(b) Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be
computed as the sum of the fees for the addition and
alterations computed separately, with a minimum fee of $75.
(c) Large open volume, single-story spaces in buildings, such as
barns, silos, greenhouses, warehouses, distribution centers
and other agricultural and storage use occupancies: $24 per
$1,000 of value. [Added 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-061]
(5) Demolition. The fee for permit of demolition of structure shall be as
follows: R-3 and R-5 buildings shall be $125; all other use groups
shall be $250 per structure. This fee includes all small accessory
structures. [Amended 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-061]
(6) Building relocation, all use groups: Same as new construction.
(7) Signs not complying with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.14(b)6: $2 per square
foot, one side only. Minimum fee: $50.
(8) Decks: $30 per $1,000 value, based on minimum estimated
construction cost of $24 per square foot. Minimum fee: $50.
(9) 73Pools.
(a) Aboveground swimming pool for Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5:
$75.
(b) In-ground swimming pool for Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5:
$250.
73.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(9), Storage tanks, was repealed 12-17-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-061. Said ordinance also renumbered former Subsection A(10) through (15) as
Subsection A(9) through (14).
§ 167-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-2
1:241
(c) All other use groups: $375.
(10) Sheds larger than 200 square feet: $30 per $1,000 value. Minimum
fee: $50. [Amended 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-061]
(11) Fences more than six feet in height: $30 per $1,000 value.
Minimum fee: $50.
(12) Tents. For tents in excess of 16,800 square feet or more than 140
feet in any dimension: $125.
(13) Lead abatement.
(a) Permit for lead hazard abatement work: $175.
(b) Lead abatement clearance certificate: $50.
(14) Asbestos. An administrative fee of $100 for each construction
permit issued for an asbestos hazard abatement project and an
administrative fee of $25 for each certificate of occupancy issued
following the successful completion of an asbestos hazard
abatement project.
(15) Retaining walls. [Added 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-061]
(a) Having a total height of four feet or greater, that is associated
with a Class 3 residential structure: $50.
(16) Variation fees.
(a) Residential (R-3, R-4): $35.
(b) All others: $250.74
(17) Certificates of occupancy:
(a) New construction:
1. Residential: 10% of permit; minimum $150.
2. All other use groups: $225.
3. Multicommercial: $225 for building; $125 per each unit.
(b) Change of use/continued certificate of occupancy: $150.
(c) Residential existing (renovations, additions, alterations): $50.
(d) Tenant fit-out/renovation, alteration: $150.
(e) Certificate of approval: no charge.
(f) Commercial yearly certificate of compliance (pools): no charge.
74.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 38-2A(17), which included a fee for the Construction Board of
Appeals, which previously followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 167-2 HAMILTON CODE § 167-2
1:242
(18) Temporary certificates of occupancy: [Amended 12-17-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-061]
(a) Residential (new): $30.
(b) Residential (renewal): $30.
(c) Commercial (new): $30.
(d) Commercial (renewal): $30.
(19) Plumbing fees shall be as follows: [Amended 12-17-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-061]
(a) Residential:
1. The fee shall be $30 per fixture, appliance or
appurtenance connected to the plumbing system. For
computation purposes the following shall be included but
not limited to water closets, urinals, lavatories, sinks, tubs,
showers, dishwashing machines, clothes washers, hose
bibs, drinking fountains, water coolers, floor drains, airadmittance
valves, stacks, pool piping, water treatment
equipment, sump pumps and replacement backflow
preventers.
2. The fee shall be $80 per special device. For computation
purposes the following shall be included but not limited to
sewage ejectors, backflow preventers (newly installed),
chimney liners, booster pumps, emergency generators and
fluid-based solar systems.
3. The fee shall be $50 for each sewer or water service.
4. The fee(s) for mechanical equipment and/or piping on a
plumbing technical shall be the same as listed in
Subsection A(19)(b) below.
5. Notwithstanding the individual fees set forth above, the
minimum fee shall be $65.
6. Update plan review fee: $50 per hour; minimum one hour.
(b) Mechanical (R-3 and R-5 structures only):
1. The fee shall be $80 for each warm-air furnace, air
handler, heat pump, boiler (Replacement backflow
preventers shall be $30.), water heater, chimney liner, gas
fireplace, emergency generator or LPG tank.
2. The fee shall be $30 for each air-conditioning unit,
refrigerant line or condensate or sump pump.
§ 167-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-2
1:243
3. The fee shall be $30 for gas or fuel oil piping to each
appliance (inclusive of future appliances).
4. The fee for hydronic piping shall be $80.
5. The fee for ductwork shall be $80.
6. The above is not an all-inclusive list.
7. Notwithstanding the individual fees set forth above, the
minimum fee shall be $65.
8. Update plan review fee: $50 per hour; minimum one hour.
(c) Commercial:
1. The fee shall be $35 per fixture, appliance or
appurtenance connected to the plumbing system. For
computation purposes the following shall be included but
not limited to water closets, urinals, lavatories, sinks, tubs,
showers, dishwashing machines, clothes washers, hose
bibs, drinking fountains, water coolers, floor drains, airadmittance
valves, backwater valves, shock arrestors,
stacks, pool piping and water treatment equipment.
2. The fee shall be $100 per special device. For computation
purposes the following shall be included but not limited to
sewage ejectors, backflow preventers, booster pumps, and
grease, oil or sand interceptors.
3. The fee shall be $100 per unit rate of 100 feet or fraction
thereof for each sewer or water service.
4. The fee shall be $100 for each warm air furnace (inclusive
of packaged RTUs), air conditioners, air handlers, heat
pumps, boilers, water heaters, water tanks and LPG tanks.
5. Notwithstanding the individual fees set forth above, the
minimum fee shall be $100.
6. Update plan review fee: $50 per hour; minimum one hour.
(d) The fee shall be $50 per each testable backflow for the annual
cross-connection control program.
(e) Update plan review fee: $50 per hour; minimum one hour.
(20) Electrical fees.
(a) Minimum fee for all use groups: $50.
1. Update plan review fee: $50 per hour; minimum one hour.
[Amended 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-061]
(b) Receptacles, fixtures or devices:
§ 167-2 HAMILTON CODE § 167-2
1:244
1. First block consisting of one to 25: $75.
2. Additional block consisting of up to 25: $35.
3. For the purpose of computing this fee, receptacles,
fixtures or devices shall include lighting fixtures, wall
switches, convenience receptacles, sensors, dimmers,
alarm devices, smoke and heat detectors, communications
outlets, light-standards eight feet or less in height
including luminaries, emergency lights, electric signs, exit
lights or similar electric fixtures and devices rated 20
amperes or less including motors or equipment rated less
than one horsepower (hp) or one kilowatt (kw).
4. Existing dwellings (R-3, R-4 and R-5 only):
a. First block consisting of one to 25: $50.
b. Each additional block of 25: $15.
5. Residential services.
a. Thirty to 200 amperes: $100.
b. Two hundred one to 400 amperes: $175.
6. Commercial services.
a. Zero to 200 amperes: $100.
b. Two hundred one to 400 amperes: $200.
c. Four hundred one amperes and up: $575.
(c) Motors or electrical devices.
1. For each motor or electrical device rated from one hp or
one kw to 10 hp or 10 kw: $35.
2. For each transformer or generator rated from one kw or
one kva to 10 kw or 10 kva: $35.
3. For each replacement of wiring involving one branch
circuit or part thereof: $15.
4. For each storable pool hydro massage bathtub; for each
underwater lighting fixture: $15.
5. For installation of electric cooking equipment rated up to
16 kw: $35.
6. For each fire, security or burglar alarm control unit: $15.
7. For each receptacle rated from 30 amperes to 50 amperes:
$35. [Amended 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-061]
§ 167-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-2
1:245
8. For each light-standard, including luminaries:
a. Under eight feet in height: $15.
b. Greater than eight feet in height; and for each
communications closet: $75.
9. For each motor or electrical device rated from greater
than 10 hp or 10 kw to 50 kw: $65.
10. HVAC, residential:
a. New: $75.
b. Replacement: $50.
11. Cooking unit: $35.
12. Utility load management: $75 each device.
13. Communication devices, data, telephone, cameras,
speakers, etc.:
a. One to 20 devices: $75.
b. Twenty-one to 100 devices: $150.
c. One hundred one to 200 devices: $250.
d. Each additional 100 devices: $100.
14. Communication points for multifamily:
a. Each building: $75 (micro-duct).
b. Each apartment: $75 (low-voltage wiring).
(d) Existing residential upgrades: [Amended 12-17-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-061]
1. For each transformer or generator rated from greater than
10 kw or 10 kva to 45 kw or 45 kva: $65.
2. For each electrical sign rated from greater than 20
amperes or greater, including associated disconnecting
means: $100.
3. For each receptacle rated greater than 50 amperes: $65.
4. For each motor or electrical device rated from greater
than 50 hp or 50 kw to 100 hp or 100 kw: $190.
5. For each service equipment, panel board, switch board,
switch gear, motor-control-center or disconnecting means
rated from greater than 225 amperes to 1,000 amperes:
$190.
§ 167-2 HAMILTON CODE § 167-2
1:246
(e) Existing residential upgrades: [Amended 12-17-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-061]
1. For each transformer or generator rated from greater than
45 kw or 45 kva to 112.5 kw or 112.5 kva: $190.
2. For each motor or electrical device rated greater than 100
hp or 100 kw: $575.
3. For each transformer or generator rated greater than
112.5 kw or 112.5 kva: $575.
4. For electrical work for each permanently installed private
swimming pool as defined in the building subcode, spa, hot
tub or fountain; which shall include any required bonding,
and associated equipment such as filter pumps, motors,
disconnecting means, switches required receptacles, and
heaters, etc., excepting panel boards and underwater
lighting fixtures: $100.
5. For public swimming pools, the fee shall be charged on the
basis of number of electrical fixtures and rating of
electrical devices involved in accordance with the
requirements of Subsection A(20)(e)4, above.
6. For the installation of single- and multiple-station smoke or
heat detectors and fire, burglar or security alarm systems
in any one- or two-family dwelling: $100 per dwelling unit.
7. For fire, burglar and security alarm systems and detectors
in buildings other than one- or two-family dwellings, the
fee shall be charged in accordance with the requirements
of Subsection A(20), Electrical fees, above.
a. First block of one to 20 fire, burglar, and security
alarm systems and detectors: $75.
b. Each additional 25: $15.
8. For installations consisting of multimeter stacks, the fee
shall be based on the ampere rating of the main bus and
not upon the number of meters or rating of disconnects on
the meter stack.
9. Individual load side panel boards shall be charged in
accordance with Subsection A(20), Electrical fees, above.
10. There shall be no additional fee charged for the concurrent
installation of individual feeder conductors.
11. For motors or similar devices requiring concurrent
installation of individual controls, relays and switches, the
§ 167-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-2
1:247
fee shall be based only upon the rating of the motor or
device.
12. There shall be no additional fee charged for the concurrent
installation of individual circuit components, for example,
controllers, starters, and disconnecting means.
13. For electrical work requiring replacement of service
entrance conductors or feeder conductors only, the fee
shall be in accordance with the requirements of
Subsection A(20), Electrical fees, above, based on the
designated ampere rating of the over-current device of the
service or feeder.
14. The fee charged for process equipment shall be based on
the ampere rating of the over-current device protecting
the conductor feeding the process equipment or the cutoff
device.
15. For the purpose of computing these fees, all electrical and
communications devices, utilization equipment and motors
which are part of premises wiring, except those which are
portable plug-in type, shall be counted.
16. Solar panels:
a. One kw to 10 kw: $125.
b. Each additional five kw: $125.
c. Each disconnect: $75.
d. Each inverter up to 50 kw: $75.
e. Over 50 kw inverter: $125.
f. Each microinverter: $10.
17. Annual pool inspections: $150.
(f) Single-family residential (R-4, R-5): $60; all others: $125.
(21) Fire protection fees. Minimum fee: $75.
(a) Fire suppression systems (sprinkler):
1. One to 20 heads: $125.
2. Twenty-one to 100 heads: $285.
3. One hundred one to 200 heads: $470.
4. Two hundred one to 400 heads: $1,150.
5. Four hundred one to 1,000 heads: $1,560.
§ 167-2 HAMILTON CODE § 167-2
1:248
6. One thousand one to 1,500 heads: $1,875.
7. For each additional 500 heads or portion thereof over
1,500: $500.
8. Standpipe system: $400.
9. Renovation of sprinkler system: same as installation of
sprinkler system.
(b) Dry chemical system: $160 per system.
(c) Foam extinguishing system: $160 per system.
(d) Carbon dioxide system: $160 per system.
(e) Halon alternative system: $280 per system.
(f) Wood, coal or solid-fuel-burning appliances: $125.
(g) Flammable and combustible liquid tank installation:
1. R-3 and R-4: $125.
2. All others: $280 per tank.
3. Storage tanks: [Added 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-061]
a. Removal/abandonment residential R-3, R-4 and R-5:
$75 per tank.
b. All other use groups: $125 per tank.
(h) Fire protection signaling system and/or automatic fire
detection system and carbon monoxide detections: [Amended
12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-061]
1. Single-family homes: $75.
2. All others:
a. One to 50 devices: $150.
b. Fifty-one to 100 devices: $280.
c. One hundred one to 200 devices: $470.
d. Two hundred one to 400 devices: $1,150.
e. Four hundred one to 1,000 devices: $1,650.
f. One thousand one to 1,500 devices: $1,900.
g. For every 25 devices or portion thereof over 1,500:
$160.
h. Carbon monoxide detections: $150.
§ 167-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-2
1:249
(i) Smoke control system: $400.
(j) Kitchen exhaust:
1. Commercial: $125.
2. Residential: $75.
(k) Sprays booths, spaces or rooms. Flat fee per room, space or
booth: $325.
(l) Gas or oil fired appliance: $75 each.
1. Commercial RTUs: $150 per unit. [Amended 12-17-2019
by Ord. No. 19-061]
(m) Wet chemical system: $160.
(n) Crematoriums: $500.
(o) Incinerators: $500.
(p) Underground water service for fire protection:
1. One foot to 500 feet of pipe: $400.
2. Each additional 100 feet of pipe: $100.
(q) Underground water storage tank for fire protection: $140.
(r) Yard hydrants: $35 each.
(s) Fire pumps:
1. Each fire pump: $440.
2. Each jockey pump: $250.
(t) Fire safety inspection for torch roof applications: $50 more
than 25%. [Amended 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-061]
(u) Flammable and combustible liquid piping: $30 per $1,000
worth of work with a minimum fee of $75.
(v) Dry pipe/alarm valves: $75 each.
(w) Pre-action valves: $175 each.
(x) Fireplace venting/metal chimney: $75 each.
(y) Fire alarm panel replacement: $125 each.
(z) Hose stations or racks: $50 each; minimum fee: $75.
(aa) Minimum fire protection fee: $75.
§ 167-2 HAMILTON CODE § 167-2
1:250
1. Update plan review fee: $50 per hour; minimum one hour.
[Amended 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-061]
(bb) Fire extinguishers:
1. One to 20: $65.
2. Twenty-one to 50: $75.
3. Fifty-one to 100: $150.
4. Every 10 extinguishers or portion thereof: $40.
(cc) Replacement of existing F.A.C.P. transmission means: $150.
[Added 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-061]
(dd) Air sampling smoke detection systems: $400 per system
control. [Added 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-061]
B. Report and recommendations by Construction Officials. The
Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Council biannually a report recommending a
fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the agency and any
other expenses of the Township fairly attributable to the enforcement of
the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
C. Surcharge fee for new construction.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. (the State Uniform
Construction Code Act) and N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq. (Regulations for
the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code Act), in order to
provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the State Uniform Construction Code Act
and the Regulations for the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code, the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fees
specified in Subsection A of this section, a surcharge of $0.0016 per
cubic foot of volume of new construction.
(2) The surcharge fee shall be remitted to the State Bureau of Housing
Inspection, Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis
for the fiscal quarters ending September 30, December 31, March
31 and June 30 and not later than one month next succeeding the
end of the quarter for which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the
regulations first become effective, the fee shall be collected and
remitted for the third and fourth quarters only.
(3) The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal
year to the State Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than
July 31, the total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal
year. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first become
effective, the report shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
The term "fiscal year," for the purposes of this section, shall be the
fiscal year as observed by the state government.75
§ 167-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-2
1:251
Chapter 172
CRANE REGULATIONS
§ 172-1. Purpose.
The Township of Hamilton finds and declares that a need exists to create a
standard by which to govern the operation of cranes within the Township
in order to help ensure the public safety and prevent damage to personal
property and real estate located in the Township.
§ 172-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Crane Operators License Advisory Board established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-3.
CERTIFICATION — Certification from the National Commission for the
Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by the
Board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program meeting
the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASME
B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the National Commission for
Certifying Agencies.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Labor.
CRANE — A power-operated hoisting machine used in construction,
demolition or excavation work that has a power-operated winch, load line
and boom moving laterally by the rotation of the machine on a carrier and
has a manufacturer-rated lifting capacity of 10 tons or more. It shall not
include a forklift, digger derrick truck, aircraft, bucket truck, knuckle boom,
trolley boom or any vehicle or machine not having a power-operated winch
and load line.
CRANE OPERATOR — An individual engaged in the operation of a crane.
CRANE-RELATED EXPERIENCE — Operating, inspecting, training and
maintenance experience acceptable to the Board.
PRACTICAL EXAMINATION — An examination demonstrating the
applicant's ability to safely operate a particular category or type of crane.
Practical examinations shall be conducted for the following crane
categories: the lattice boom crawler cranes (LBC), lattice boom truck
cranes (LBT), telescopic boom cranes (TLL, swing cab and TSS, fixed cab),
tower cranes, and overhead cranes.
§ 172-3. Permit requirements.
75.Editor's Note: Original § 38-3, Waiver of permit fees for construction or alterations, as
amended, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 4-1-2014 by Ord. No.
14-018.
§ 167-2 HAMILTON CODE § 172-3
1:252
A. Five days before any crane operator, contractor or other person or
company initiates the use of, or begins to erect, a crane within the
Township a permit shall be obtained from the Township's Department of
Community Planning and Compliance. In emergent situations the
Township Engineer may waive the five-day advanced notice
requirement in his or her own discretion if the operator meets the
balance of the requirements of this chapter.
B. The crane operator is required to maintain a copy of the Township
permit at the work site, available for inspection as long as the crane is
on site.
C. The following documents must be provided to the Township in order to
be granted a permit:
(1) Copy of crane operator certificate from one of the following
organizations:
(a) National Commission for the Certification of Crane Operators
(NCCCO).
(b) Operating Engineers Certification Program (OECP).
(c) Crane Institute of American Certification.
(2) New Jersey crane license.
(3) Current Medical Examiner's card.
(4) A copy of the most recent and current proof of inspection (crane
owner).
(5) A copy of the crane OSHA/ASME certification test inspection
checklist.
(6) Material safety data sheet.
(7) Insurance required as follows:
(a) Bodily injury:
1. For any one person in the amount of $500,000.
2. For any occurrence in the amount of $1,000,000.
(b) Property damage:
1. For any one accident in the amount of $500,000.
2. For any aggregate of occurrences in the amount of
$2,000,000.
(8) Proof that the crane operator submits to a random drug testing
program.
§ 172-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-3
1:253
§ 172-4. Crane operator requirements.
§ 172-5. Fee schedule.
The permit fee for each crane shall be $100. Each permit is valid for 60 days
and may be extended and/or renewed, provided that compliance with the
requirements of this chapter continues to be met. The fee for an extended
or renewal permit is $50.
§ 172-6. Notification of accident or safety issue required.
The crane owner and crane operator shall immediately notify the Township
and the owner of the building of every accident causing personal injury or
(9) Proof of completion of signal person qualification or certification
course.
(10) Upon receipt of a properly completed application and compliance
with the requirements of this section, the Department of
Community Planning and Compliance shall issue or deny the
requested permit within five business days. If the application is
denied, the reasons for the denial are furnished to the applicant in
writing.
A. No person shall engage in the operation of a crane, offer himself or
herself for employment as a crane operator or otherwise act, present or
represent himself or herself as a crane operator unless licensed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-1 et seq. and under the provisions of this
chapter.
B. A crane operator's permit shall be valid only in conjunction with a
current New Jersey crane license, certification and only in the specialty
or specialties for which the crane operator is certified. The specialties
are lattice boom crawler crane (LBC), lattice boom truck crane (LBT),
telescopic boom cranes (TLL, swing cab and TSS, fixed cab), tower
cranes, and overhead cranes.
C. To be eligible for a permit as a crane operator in the Township, an
applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
(1) Be at least 18 years of age;
(2) Receive certification from the National Commission for the
Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization that
offers equivalent testing and certification programs that satisfy the
requirements of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers
ASME B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the National
Commission for Certifying Agencies;
(3) Have at least 1,000 hours of crane-related experience; and
(4) Maintain a current medical examiner's certification card.
§ 172-3 HAMILTON CODE § 172-6
1:254
damage to property involving a construction crane covered by this chapter
and shall afford the Township official every facility for investigating such
accident. When an accident involves the failure, breakage, damage or
destruction of any part of the apparatus, it shall be unlawful to use such
device until after an examination by the Township is made and approval
of the equipment for continued use is granted. It shall be the duty of the
Township to make a prompt examination into the cause of the accident and
to enter a full and complete report thereof in the records of the Township.
Such records shall be open for public inspection during regular business
hours.
§ 172-7. Safety requirements.
§ 172-8. Administration; enforcement.
A. All crane equipment shall be kept in safe working condition at all times
by the owner and licensee.
B. If any safety or operational aid used or required to be used in
connection with the operation of a crane is not working properly, the
person operating such crane shall immediately shut down the crane
until such time that the required safety or operational aid is repaired or
replaced and the crane is restored to proper working order.
C. Any and all safety requirements promulgated by the Board,
Commissioner, or Township must be adhered to at all times.
D. Every crane shall be thoroughly inspected by a competent designated
employee or authorized agent of the owner or lessee of such mobile
crane, tower crane or derrick at intervals not exceeding one month.
Such inspection shall include but not be limited to all blocks, shackles,
sheaves, wire rope, connectors, and various devices on the master
boom, controls and breaking mechanisms.
E. A written, dated and signed record of each such inspection shall be
completed by the competent designated employee or authorized agent
who made the inspection. The most recent record of such inspection
shall be posted inside the cab of such crane and shall be filed with the
Township. Attached to such record of inspection shall be a written
designation naming the competent employee or authorized agent. Such
attached designation shall be signed by the owner or lessee of such.
F. Every crane shall be inspected before being erected or operated for the
first time on any job.
G. Adjustments and repairs to cranes shall be made only by competent
designated persons.
A. The Township may issue rules and regulations for the administration of
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 172-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-8
1:255
§ 172-9. Unsafe cranes.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Department of
Community Planning and Compliance.
A. Any crane which is or hereafter becomes unsafe or otherwise
dangerous to human life or public safety, or which involves inadequate
maintenance, shall be deemed in unsafe condition by the Director of the
Department of Community Planning and Compliance or his or her
designee. All unsafe cranes shall be taken down or removed or made
safe, as the Director of the Department of Community Planning and
Compliance or his or her designee deems necessary and as provided for
in this section.
B. The Director of the Department of Community Planning and
Compliance or his or her designee shall cause a report to be filed on an
unsafe crane. The report shall state the nature of the unsafe condition.
C. If an unsafe condition is found, the Director of the Department of
Community Planning and Compliance or his or her designee shall serve
on the owner, agent or person in control of the crane a written notice
that describes the condition being unsafe and specifies the required
repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition.
Such notice shall require the person thus notified to declare
immediately to the Director of the Department of Community Planning
and Compliance or his or her designee exceptions or rejection of the
terms of the order.
D. Such order shall be deemed properly served if a copy is delivered to the
owner personally, or sent by certified or registered mail addressed to
the owner at the last known address with the return receipt requested.
Furthermore, service may be effectuated by posting the notice in a
conspicuous place in or on the structure affected by such notice.
Moreover, service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the
owner's agent or upon the person responsible for the crane shall
constitute service of notice upon the owner.
E. The equipment determined to be unsafe by the Director of the
Department of Community Planning and Compliance or his or her
designee may be restored to a safe condition. To the extent that repairs,
alterations or additions are made during restoration of such equipment,
such repairs, alterations or additions shall comply with all applicable
codes.
F. Any person who refuses or neglects to comply with the requirements of
an order to abate an unsafe condition shall be subject to a fine or
imprisonment in accordance with § 172-10.
§ 172-8 HAMILTON CODE § 172-10
1:256
§ 172-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or
any order promulgated under this chapter shall be punished in accordance
with § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton.
Chapter 178
CRIME WATCH PROGRAM
§ 172-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-10
1:257

ARTICLE I
Crime Watch Identification Cards
[Adopted as Ch. 86, § 86-4, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 178-1. Unlawful use of Crime Watch identification cards.
Crime Watch identification cards are to be used for the sole purpose of the
Crime Watch program, and it shall be unlawful to use any identification
card in the following manner, and such use will result in its invalidation and
subsequent demand for return to the Township Division of Police:
A. The misuse of the identification card for favors, impersonating a police
officer, threats, or impersonating a Neighborhood Crime Watch
volunteer.
B. The unlawful use and possession of a lost or stolen identification card.
C. The use of a Crime Watch identification card for other official
identification purposes.
D. The altering or forging of any Crime Watch identification card.
§ 178-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-1
1:259
Chapter 184
DANCE AND NIGHTCLUB FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 99.
Fees — See Ch. 215.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 285.
§ 184-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DANCE OR NIGHTCLUB FACILITY — Any facility or premises operated
by an individual, partnership, corporation, association or any other entity
where live or electronically reproduced music is presented or dancing of
any type is permitted which is open to the public at large with or without
payment of an admission fee. Excluded from this definition are facilities
or premises at which the dispensing of alcoholic beverages is permitted
pursuant to the legal use of an alcoholic beverage license or facilities or
premises accessible only to members of an organization with a fixed and
limited membership controlling such facility or premises and not open to
the public at large.
§ 184-2. Applicability of chapter.
§ 184-3. License required; transfer of license.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all dance and nightclub
facilities, whether operations were established prior to or following the
effective date of this chapter. Dance or nightclub facilities exempted
from the licensing requirements under this chapter shall comply with
all other regulations and requirements set forth in this chapter.
B. This chapter shall not be applicable to dances, concerts or other events
conducted by the Township school district or parochial schools within
the Township.
A. No individual, partnership, corporation, association or other entity shall
maintain or operate any dance or nightclub facility, whether for profit or
otherwise, without first having obtained a license from the Municipal
Clerk in accordance with the requirement contained in this section.
Licenses issued under this chapter may not be transferred to other
persons or other premises.
B. Licenses shall be required for all events within the definition of the term
"dance or nightclub facility" or not otherwise excluded from coverage of
§ 178-1 HAMILTON CODE § 184-3
1:260
§ 184-4. License fee.76
The fee for a license issued under this chapter shall be as set forth in
Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.
§ 184-5. Application for license.
§ 184-6. Investigation of license application.
§ 184-7. Public notice of license application.
this chapter which are conducted on a recurring monthly or more
frequent basis.
A. Application for a dance and nightclub facility license shall be made
through the application form provided by the Municipal Clerk.
Applications shall include the full name and current address of the
owner of the premises, the full name and current address of the
operator or local managing agent of the dance or nightclub facility, and
the name and current address of the licensee. In the case of a
partnership or corporate owner, operator, managing agent or licensee,
the application shall include the name of each shareholder or partner
holding a 10% or more ownership interest, the principal officers and a
brief description of the nature and purposes of the organization.
B. All applications shall have affixed thereto an affidavit by the applicant
confirming that all information contained therein is true and correct.
C. The provisions of Chapter 285, Licenses and Permits, pertaining to
licensing procedures, shall apply to the license required in this chapter.
A. The Municipal Clerk shall transmit copies of all applications for dance
and nightclub facility licenses to the Chief of the Division of Police, the
Building Inspector, the Township Planner, the Zoning Officer and the
Fire Marshal of the appropriate fire district, who shall investigate the
aspects of the premises and individuals or entities to be licensed in
accordance with their respective jurisdictions, and report back to the
Municipal Clerk, in writing, their findings of fact and recommendations
on whether the license shall issue. The Municipal Clerk shall complete
whatever additional investigation is required by the terms of this
section within a reasonable period of time and, at the completion
thereof, shall either issue the license or reject the application. If the
application is denied, the applicant may appeal to the Township
Council.
B. The Municipal Clerk shall issue a statement of reasons in connection
with any license application rejection.
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 184-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-7
1:261
§ 184-8. Expiration and renewal of license.
§ 184-9. Existing facilities.
§ 184-10. Location.
No license shall be issued for the operation of any dance or nightclub facility
which is located within 500 feet of any school, church or publicly owned
building or within 1,000 feet of another dance or nightclub facility. All
distances shall be measured between the nearest lot lines of the respective
premises.
§ 184-11. Unsafe premises.
Any premises which shall be declared unsafe by the written report of the
Building Inspector or Fire Marshal shall be ineligible for a license.
A. All license applicants under this chapter shall provide notice of the
application to all owners and occupants of premises within 200 feet of
the premises in question, at least five days prior to filing the application
with the Municipal Clerk. Notice shall be given by personal service or
by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice
shall state that comments or objections regarding the application are to
be filed with the Municipal Clerk within 15 days of service of the notice.
B. The applicant shall list all individuals or entities receiving such notice
and the means by which notice was provided in the application. Failure
to provide notice or to confirm such notice in the application is grounds
for rejection of the application.
C. Notice of the license application to the abutting owner or occupants is
not required for premises operated as dance or nightclub facilities prior
to adoption of this chapter, or in the case of application for renewal of
any license issued under this chapter.
A. A dance and nightclub facility license shall be effective for the duration
of the calendar year, expiring 12:00 midnight on December 31 each
year.
B. License renewal applications are to be submitted to the Municipal Clerk
no later than November 1 of each year and shall be approved or
rejected by December 21 of each year.
A. Existing dance and nightclub facilities must submit a license
application conforming to the requirements of this chapter no later than
October 1, 1991.
B. Existing dance and nightclub facilities shall immediately conform
operations to the regulations of this chapter.
§ 184-7 HAMILTON CODE § 184-12
1:262
§ 184-12. Hours of operation.
Dance or nightclub facilities shall be operated only between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight.
§ 184-13. Security.
Dance and nightclub facilities shall engage one security officer for every
100 of maximum load capacity set for the premises in question.
§ 184-14. Parking facilities.
At least one parking space shall be provided for every three persons
authorized by the maximum load capacity set for the premises of a dance
and nightclub facility. If there is not sufficient parking for the established
maximum load capacity, the maximum load capacity shall be adjusted,
based on the available parking spaces, to comply with the requirements in
this section; e.g., number of available parking spaces times three equals
adjusted maximum load capacity.
§ 184-15. Consumption of alcohol.
The consumption of alcohol on the premises of any dance or nightclub
facility licensed under this chapter is strictly prohibited.
§ 184-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations;
penalties, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton.
§ 184-17. Suspension or revocation of license.
Chapter 196
DRUG-FREE ZONES
A. Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or for any reason listed
in § 285-10.
B. The Township shall institute proceedings for any license suspension or
revocation by service of an appropriate notice at least five days prior to
the effective date of the license suspension or revocation, and a
reasonable opportunity for hearing before the Mayor or his designee
shall be afforded to the licensee prior to the effective date. If the license
is denied the applicant may appeal to the Township Council.
§ 184-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-17
1:263

ARTICLE I
Drug-Free School Zones
[Adopted as Ch. 86, § 86-8, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 196-1. Adoption of maps.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, the
Drug-Free School Zone Maps produced on or about August 29, 1988, by
John D. Reymann, P.E., Township Engineer, are hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within the
Township of property which is used for school purposes and which is owned
by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, and of
the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 196-2. Maps to constitute official record of boundaries.
The Drug-Free School Zone Maps approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 196-1 of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and
record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet
of property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school
or school board which is used for school purposes until such time, if any,
that this article shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with
respect to the location and boundaries of school property and drug-free
school zones.
§ 196-3. Changes in boundaries.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Township Engineer and the Municipal
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 196-4. Filing of maps; copies of maps.
The Clerk of the Township is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file
the original of the maps approved and adopted pursuant to § 196-1 of this
article and to provide at a reasonable cost true copies thereof to any person,
agency or court which may from time to time request such copies, along
with a certification that such copies are true copies of the maps approved
and adopted in this article and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that
true copies of such maps and of this article shall be provided without cost
to the County Clerk and to the office of the County Prosecutor.
§ 196-5. Use of maps; conformance with state law.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
§ 196-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-5
1:265
A. It is understood that the maps approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 196-1 of this article were prepared and are intended to be used as
evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state,
and that, pursuant to state law, such maps shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
Township;
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. Pursuant to the provisions of state statute, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7, including use of maps or diagrams other than the ones
approved and adopted pursuant to § 196-1 of this article. The failure of
the maps approved in this article to depict the location and boundaries
of any property which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school
board, whether the absence of such depiction is the result of
inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in the location and
boundaries of such property which have not yet been incorporated into
a revised approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding
and record that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or
school board, or that such property is not used for school purposes.
C. All of the requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of Drug-Free School Zone Maps
have been complied with.
§ 196-5 HAMILTON CODE § 196-5
1:266
Chapter 206
ENVIRONMENTAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 260.
§ 206-1. Intent; interpretation of chapter.
§ 206-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ENVIRONMENTAL EVENT — An incident, occurrence or condition existing
on any property in connection with which the owner or person having
control of such property has an affirmative obligation arising under federal
or state law to take remedial action or report such incident, occurrence
or condition to the State Department of Environmental Protection or the
United States Environmental Protection Agency or any other governmental
agency or entity having jurisdiction.
§ 206-3. Notification of police required.
An environmental event must be reported to the Township Division of Police
within 30 minutes of occurrence by the property owner or other person
otherwise having control of the property.
§ 206-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be punished in
accordance with Chapter1, General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations; penalties,
of the Code of the Township of Hamilton.
A. The Township has a preeminent obligation to ensure the well-being of
all of its citizens, and it is hereby declared that prompt notification of
environmental events within the Township will facilitate ready
evaluation of any potential risk to the public and further appropriate
emergency response activity and dissemination of information to the
public, furthering fulfillment of important governmental objectives.
B. The provisions in this chapter are to be liberally construed to effectuate
the purposes of this chapter.
§ 196-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-4
1:267
Chapter 215
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Code fees — See Ch.
167.
Land development fees — See Ch. 550.
§ 215-1. Municipal Clerk.
A. Unofficial searches for municipal liens or for municipal improvements
authorized but not assessed: $10 per search. (§ 5-198)
B. Alcoholic beverage license fees, per year. (§ 99-8)
(1) Plenary retail consumption license: $1,500.
(2) Plenary retail distribution license: $2,500.
(3) Club license: $150.
(4) Hotel/motel license: $2,500.
C. Teen nights. Application for a permit, by the operator of a licensed
premises, which permit shall be in effect for one calendar year: $200.
(§ 99-12)
D. Secondhand automobile dealer and secondhand automobile parts
dealer:
(1) If the dealer maintains and conducts a bona fide agency or
subagency for any automobile manufacturer: $100 per year.
(§ 119-5)
(2) If the dealer does not maintain and conduct a bona fide agency or
subagency for any automobile manufacturer: $100 per year.
(§ 119-5)
E. Dance or nightclub facility: $100 per year. (§ 184-4)
F. Jewelry, precious metals, gems and secondhand goods dealers.
(§ 273-6) [Amended 10-15-2019 by Ord. No. 19-049]
(1) Initial application for a license: $200.
(2) Annual license renewal: $25.
(3) If, on the effective date of Chapter 273, a person has been in
business pursuant to § 273-1 for a period not less than five years,
the fee for initial application shall be $25.
G. Junk dealers and junkyard operators.
§ 206-4 HAMILTON CODE § 215-1
1:268
(1) Annual license to engage in the business of a junk dealer or to
operate a junkyard: $200 per location. (§ 277-2)
(2) Junk collector: $50 per vehicle or cart. (§ 277-2)
(3) Motor vehicle junkyard license: $1, in addition to fulfilling the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 39:11-1 et seq., the Motor Vehicle Junk
Law. (§ 277-4)
H. Massage and/or somatic establishments. Application for a license to
maintain, operate or conduct a massage, bodywork and somatic therapy
establishment: $200. This application fee shall be nonrefundable,
unless the applicant voluntarily withdraws the application within five
days of filing and can demonstrate that it has not operated the business
for which the application is pending during said five-day period, in
which event $50 shall not be refundable. (§ 296-20)
I. Peddlers, solicitors, canvassers and transient merchants. [Amended
9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-035]
(1) Application for license: $100 (nonrefundable). (§ 349-3)
(2) Permit to distribute commercial advertising matter: $25 per day,
per person. (§ 349-19)
(3) Additional fees: (§ 349-3)
(a) Transient merchants: $50 per day up to a maximum of $1,000
per year; provided, however, that any transient merchant
securing a license after July 1 shall pay $500 for the remainder
of the year or $50 per day.
(b) Solicitors: $25 per year.
(c) Peddler, Class 1: $25 per year, traveling by automobile or foot.
(d) Peddler, Class 2: minimum bid: $500.
J. Solicitors and canvassers: annual license fee is $25. (§ 349-16)
K. Sales: annual license fee is $1,000. (§ 373-4)
L. Taxicabs.
(1) Taxicab owner license: (§ 454-11)
(a) Annual license fee: $250 per vehicle per year, up to a maximum
of 15 vehicles; thereafter the fee shall be $50 per vehicle to
cover to cost of the medallion.
(b) Transfer of taxicab license from one vehicle to another: $25.
(c) Taxicab owner's license annual inspection fee: $75.
(2) Taxicab operator license: (§ 454-11)
§ 215-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-1
1:269
(a) Annual license fee: $50.
(b) Nonrefundable portion of taxicab operator's license
application fee: $50.
(c) Badge for each licensed operator: $10; lost badge
replacement: $10.
(3) Replacement for any lost or destroyed license: $30. (§ 454-11)
(4) Amount of application fee retained if the application is denied or
withdrawn: $50. (§ 454-11)
(5) Failure to renew an expired owner's license: $25. (§ 454-11)
(6) Rates and charges. The maximum charges that may be made or
requested by owners and operators of taxicabs who are subject to
licensing under Chapter 454, Article I, Taxicabs, of the Township
Code, for transportation of passengers and other services
incidental thereto either entirely within the municipality or
originating or terminating entirely within the participating
municipal areas, are hereby fixed as follows: (§ 454-19)
(a) Length of trip within the participating municipal area. All fares
herein listed shall be computed from point of entry by
passenger(s).
Distance Fare
Minimum charge $4.00
Each 1/10th mile $0.30
(b) Other and additional charges shall be as follows:
Type of Charge Fee
For each additional passenger $2.00
For each stop in route $3.00
Charges for taxicab service to
and from the Mercer County
Airport and the West Trenton
Railroad Station
$10 one way with a $2 charge
for each additional passenger
Charges for taxicab service to
and from the Mercer County
Airport and the Hamilton
Railroad Station
$30 one way with a $5 charge
for each additional passenger
Charges for taxicab service to
and from the West Trenton
Railroad Station and the
Hamilton Railroad Station
$30 one way with a $5 charge
for each additional passenger
(c) Waiting time per minute shall be $0.50.
§ 215-1 HAMILTON CODE § 215-1
1:270
M. Limousines.
(1) Limousine owner's license. (§ 454-28)
(a) Annual license fee: $50 for the first vehicle and $10 for each
subsequent vehicle thereafter.
(b) Transfer of a license issued for a particular vehicle to a
different vehicle: $25.
(c) Limousine owner's licensing administrative fee: $100 per year.
(2) Limousine operator's license. (§ 454-28)
(a) Annual license fee: $50.
(b) Badge for each licensed operator: $10.
(c) Nonrefundable portion of limousine operator's license
application fee: $25 (cash or money order).
(3) Replacement for any lost or destroyed license: $30. (§ 454-28)
(4) Amount of application fee retained if the application is denied or
withdrawn: $25. (§ 454-28)
(5) Late fee: $25. (§ 454-28)
(6) Lost badge, book or document replacement fee: $10. (§ 454-28)
N. Theaters.
(1) License fees for theaters with individual seating: (§ 460-7)
Number of Seats First Year Renewal
300 or less $37.50 $75
301 to 500 $50 $100
501 to 750 $75 $150
751 to 1,000 $100 $200
1,001 to 1,250 $125 $250
1,251 to 1,500 $150 $300
1,501 to 1,750 $175 $350
1,751 to 2,000 $200 $400
2,001 to 2,250 $225 $450
2,251 to 2,500 $250 $500
2,501 to 2,750 $275 $550
2,751 and over $300 $600
(2) Outdoor drive-in theaters: $500 per year. (§ 460-7)
§ 215-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-1
1:271
O. Towing.
(1) Application for authorized Township tower license: $750. If the
application is approved, $500 of the license application fee will be
applied to the license fee. (§ 468-4)
(2) License fees. (§ 468-10)
(a) License fee for each light/medium duty operation only: $1,750
per year.
(b) License fee for a heavy duty operation only: $100 per year.
(c) License fee for a combination light/medium duty and heavy
duty operation: $1,850 per year.
(d) Duplicate license: $1 each.
(3) Service rates. Charges for the transportation, hauling or service of
disabled vehicles by a tower under the license provided for in
Chapter 468, Towing, shall not exceed the following rates:
(§ 468-17)
(a) For any work done on disabled vehicles up to 3/4 ton GVW and
conveying the vehicle from any point in the Township to any
other point in the Township, if the vehicle was located within
the public right-of-way, the fee shall be $100.
1. For conveying a vehicle up to 3/4 ton GVW (light duty) to a
point other than the tower's facility, i.e., the owner's home
or another garage, an additional fee of $3 per loaded mile
shall be charged for all distances of greater than five
miles.
2. Where basic towing services are rendered as a result of an
accident or theft recovery, the fees set forth on the
schedule for towing rates are the maximum charges that
shall apply to a private passenger automobile. There shall
be no additional charges other than those provided in this
section, including but not limited to flatbedding, waiting
time, winching, cleanup cost and additional labor, when
only basic towing services, as defined in Chapter 468,
Towing, are provided.
(b) For any work done on a disabled vehicle weighing over 3/4 ton
up to 18,000 pounds GVW (medium duty) and conveying the
vehicle from any point in the Township to any other point in the
Township, if the vehicle was located within the public right-ofway,
the fee shall be $175.
1. For conveying a vehicle weighting over 3/4 ton up to
18,000 pounds GVW to a point other than the tower's
facility, i.e., the owner's home or another garage, an
§ 215-1 HAMILTON CODE § 215-1
1:272
additional fee of $4 per loaded mile shall be charged for all
distances of greater than five miles.
(c) For any work done on a disabled vehicle weighting 18,001
pounds and above GVW (heavy duty) and conveying the vehicle
from any point in the Township to any other point in the
Township, if the vehicle was located within the public right-ofway,
the fee shall be $300.
1. For any heavy duty vehicle that is rolled over or severely
damaged, the extra charge shall be negotiated between
the owner or driver of the vehicle and the tower. This fee is
in addition to the prescribed rates for the actual towing of
the vehicle.
(d) For conveying vehicles from a point within the Township to a
point outside the Township, or vice versa, the rate is to be
predetermined by mutual agreement.
(e) Vehicle storage.
1. For dead storage of vehicles weighing up to 3/4 ton GVW
(light duty), the fee shall be $35 per day.
2. For dead storage of vehicles weighing over 3/4 ton GVW up
to 18,000 pounds GVW (medium duty), the fee shall be $50
per day.
3. For dead storage of vehicles weighing over 18,001 pounds
GVW, the fee shall be $125 per day.
(f) Waiting time.
1. For a light/medium duty wrecker (which includes a flatbed
truck), the fee shall be $20 per hour.
2. For a heavy duty wrecker, the fee shall be $30 per hour.
(g) Charges for the clean up and removal of vehicle debris in the
area surrounding the vehicle shall be charged at the rate of
$15 per one-quarter hour and must be listed on the notice of
charge form. In no event shall the charge exceed $60.
(h) Other fees.
1. A yard fee (light, medium and heavy duty tow): $20. This
includes the cost of moving a vehicle from the tower's yard
to the public street for towing by a secondary tower and/or
services such as physical inspection, telephone or fax calls,
removal of personal items and any additional necessary
paperwork.
2. Winching (light duty tow): $75 first hour, prorated onequarter-
hour intervals (minimum one hour).
§ 215-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-1
1:273
§ 215-2. Department of Finance.
3. Winching (medium duty tow): $125 first hour, prorated
one-quarter-hour intervals (minimum one hour).
4. Winching (heavy duty tow): $325 first hour, prorated onequarter-
hour intervals (minimum one hour).
(4) Abandoned vehicles. All vehicles found by the Police Division to be
abandoned shall be towed to the licensee's storage facility. These
vehicles will be towed at the rate of $100. (§ 468-24)
(5) Limitation of fees for storage of removed vehicles. (§ 468-28)
(a) A limit of $3 per day for the first 30 days of storage of a
removed vehicle, whether said vehicle is owned by the
Township of Hamilton or found abandoned by the police and
towed at their direction and stored at a tower's facility, may be
charged to the Township for the storage of the vehicle.
(b) A limit of $2 per day for the 31st day of storage and any day
thereafter of a removed vehicle, whether said vehicle is owned
by the Township of Hamilton or found abandoned by the police
and towed at their direction and stored at a tower's facility,
may be charged to the Township for the storage of the vehicle.
(c) A maximum limit of $400 per removed vehicle, whether said
vehicle is owned by the Township of Hamilton or found
abandoned by the police and towed at their direction and
stored at a tower's facility, may be charged to the Township for
the storage of the vehicle regardless of the duration of the
storage.
P. Code subscription or supplement service:
(1) Land Use Code subscription: $50 per year.
(2) Code supplement service: $75 per year.
Q. Notice of an appeal to the governing body from any final decision of the
Board of Adjustment approving an application for a use variance: $50.
(§ 550-197)
A. Division of Revenue Collection.
(1) Administrative fee for duplicate copies of tax bills:
(a) For each duplicate copy of tax bills for homeowners: $1.
(b) For the first duplicate copy of a tax bill for persons other than
homeowners: $5.
(c) For each subsequent duplicate copy of tax bills for persons
other than homeowners: $25.
§ 215-1 HAMILTON CODE § 215-2
1:274
§ 215-3. Department of Law.
§ 215-4. Municipal Court.
§ 215-5. Boards and commissions.
§ 215-6. Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans
Services.
(2) Administrative fee for duplicate copies of tax sale notices pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 54:5-52.1: $100 each.
(3) Fee for check or other written instrument returned for insufficient
funds: $20 per check or other written instrument.
(4) Official searches for municipal liens (tax searches) or for municipal
improvements authorized but not assessed or for a certificate as to
approval of a subdivision, and continuation searches shall be
subject to the charges specified at N.J.S.A. 54:5-14 and 54:5-15,
N.J.S.A. 54:18.4 and N.J.S.A. 40:55 and 40:56. (§ 5-198)
(5) For duplicate tax, water and sewer bills: $1 each. (§ 5-198)
A. Public Defender. Application for representation by the Public Defender:
$200, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:24-17. (§ 5-56)
A. Searches of records in the office of the Municipal Court: $5. (§ 5-125)
A. Rent Leveling Commission.
(1) Application fee: $10 per unit under application for the first 100
units and $5 for each additional unit. (§ 5-163)
(2) The maximum application fee is $2,000. (§ 5-163)
A. Division of Health.
(1) Retail food establishments and food and beverage vending
machines.
(a) License fees: (§ 235-6)
1. Risk Type 1: $175 per year.
2. Risk Type 2: $200 per year.
3. Risk Type 3: $300 per year.
4. Risk Type 4 additional: $75 per year.
5. Temporary retail food establishment: $75 per event.
6. Vending machine: $30 per machine per year. (See also
§ 496-13.)
§ 215-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-6
1:275
7. Mobile food units: $125 per year.
(b) Refer to § 235-6C for applicants exempt from license fees.
(§ 235-6)
(c) Late fee: $100 for each 30 days the license renewal is late.
(§ 235-6)
(d) Reinspections. The reinspection fees for retail food
establishments that receive a conditional satisfactory or
unsatisfactory rating, as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24-8.11, are:
(§ 235-8)
1. First occurrence: $0.
2. Second occurrence (within two years of first occurrence)
fine: $250.
3. Third occurrence (within two years of first occurrence)
fine: $350.
4. Fourth occurrence (within two years of first occurrence)
fine: $500 and closure of the establishment for a minimum
of 72 hours. All violations shall be abated prior to
reopening.
(2) Incinerator permit: $25 per year. (§ 90-8)
(3) Dog license. (§ 108-8)
(a) The person applying for a dog license shall pay a fee of $7 for
each dog. He shall also pay $1 for the registration tag for each
dog. The same fees shall be charged for the annual renewal of
each license and registration tag.
(b) Any resident of the Township who shall have attained the age
of 65 years of age applying for a dog license shall pay a fee of
$1 for each dog. He shall also pay $1 for the registration tag for
each dog. The same fees shall be charged for the annual
renewal of each license and registration tag.
(c) There shall be an additional fee of $3 payable annually,
applicable to Subsection A(3)(a) and (b) above, for each dog
which has not had its reproductive system surgically altered.
(d) Potentially dangerous dog license: $700 per year (N.J.S.A.
4:19-31).
(4) Kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds. (§ 108-9)
(a) Kennel: $25 per year.
(b) Pet shop: $25 per year.
(c) Shelter or pound: no fee.
§ 215-6 HAMILTON CODE § 215-6
1:276
(5) Public recreational bathing facilities (swimming pools and spas).
(a) Plan review fees for pools and spas: (§ 442-5)
1. For the first pool/spa: $500.
2. For each additional pool/spa: $250.
(b) The fees for operating a public recreational bathing facility
(i.e., swimming pool) are as follows: (§ 442-6)
1. Yearly pools: $250.
2. Yearly spas: $100.
3. Seasonal pools: $150.
4. Seasonal wading pools: $150.
(6) Plan review for individual sewage disposal system:
(a) Installation of new system: $500.
(b) Alteration/repair of existing system: $250.
(c) Minor repair of existing system: $150.
(7) Plan review for retail food establishments:
(a) Full service restaurants, hospitals and supermarkets: $500.
(b) Take-out only restaurants: $250.
(c) Pre-packaged establishments: $150.
(d) Renovation of establishment: $150.
(8) Review of individual sewage disposal system and/or well water test
certification for resale of home: $50.
(9) Certified copies of death, birth and marriage certificates: $15.
(10) Available services.
(a) Exposure control plan: Tailored to fit particular specifications,
job descriptions, etc.
1. BBP Plan: $300.
2. TB Plan: $300.
3. Both plans: $500.
(b) Bloodborne pathogen/TB training.
1. Includes all topics mandated by PEOSHA regulations.
§ 215-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-6
1:277
2. Presented by a public health nurse and HIV counselor/
health educator.
a. Initial training session: $500 for up to 30 employees;
$10 per each additional employee over 30.
b. Initial TB training only: $250 for up to 30 employees;
$10 per each additional employee over 30.
c. Yearly retraining: $300 for up to 30 employees; $10
per each additional employee over 30.
(c) Hepatitis B vaccine.
1. Administered with a physician's standing orders by a
public health nurse.
2. Includes Hepatitis B vaccine, following CDC guidelines.
a. Hepatitis B vaccine: $70 per vaccination.
b. Twinrix (Hepatitis A and Hepatitis B): $100 per
vaccination.
(d) Mantoux tuberculin testing (PPD).
1. Administered with a physician's standing orders by a
public health nurse.
2. Interpreted in 48 to 72 hours by a public health nurse.
a. PPD administration: $25 per employee.
(e) Sexually transmitted disease (STD) clinic services.
1. Services are available on Tuesdays, 9:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon, at the Hamilton Township Division of Health.
2. Services are conducted by a public health nurse and STD/
HIV counselor(s).
a. Contracted STD clinic visit: $50 per patient as per
contract.
(f) Pneumonia/flu.
1. Non-Township residents, private sector and businesses:
$200.
(g) Blood lead investigations.
1. Investigation and follow-up: $60 per hour.
(h) Child health conferences.
§ 215-6 HAMILTON CODE § 215-6
1:278
1. Assessment, counseling, examination and immunizations:
$75 per patient as per contract.
(i) Health education services.
1. Assessment, planning and implementation: $200 per hour.
B. Division of Recreation.
(1) Permit for group use in parks: $10. (§ 340-4)
(2) Park, recreation and park facilities fees. The following fees shall be
charged by the Township for the use of parks, recreational and park
facilities and services:
(a) Activity fees. [Amended 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 19-005]
Activity Fee
Winter batting instruction, resident $25
Winter batting instruction, Saturday class,
resident
$7.50
Winter batting instruction, nonresident $35
Winter batting instruction, Saturday class,
nonresident
$15
Summer baseball instruction, resident $45
Summer baseball instruction, nonresident $60
Pickleball identification card, resident $20
Pickleball identification card, nonresident $40
Pickleball light rental, per 1 1/2 hours $25
Pickleball guest fee $10
Pickleball tournament registration fee $300
Pickleball tournament court/day rental $25
Pickleball tournament light rental, per 1 1/
2 hours
$20
Tennis identification card, resident $20
Tennis identification card, nonresident $40
Tennis light rental, per 1 1/2 hours $25
Tennis guest fee $10
Tennis tournament registration fee $300
Tennis tournament court/day rental $25
Tennis tournament light rental, per 1 1/2
hours
$20
Athletic fields, resident, per day $75
§ 215-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-6
1:279
Activity Fee
Athletic field light rental, resident, per
game
$50
Summer volleyball team $75
(b) Golf center.
1. Driving range (putting green included with all range
buckets): [Amended 4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 18-014]
a. Small bucket: $8 each.
b. Large bucket: $10 each.
c. X-large bucket: $12 each.
d. Miniature golf, children: $4 each.
e. Miniature golf, adults: $6 each.
f. Use of putting green/chipping area alone: $5.
2. Golf instruction program.
a. Private lesson rates:
i. One one-half-hour lesson: $60.
ii. Three one-half-hour lessons: $170.
iii. Three-fourths hour lesson with written
evaluation: $75.
iv. Hour lesson with written evaluation: $90.
v. Three one-hour lessons: $250.
vi. Series of six one-half-hour lessons: $330.
b. Junior lesson rates (age 15 and under):
i. One one-half-hour lesson: $50.
c. Group clinic rates: $120 per person. A group may
include juniors, men, women or seniors. There must
be a minimum of three people and a maximum of six
people per group. The group clinic consists of a onehour
session per week for the duration of a four-week
period.
d. Township receives 25% of fees for all lessons.
3. The Director of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans
Services shall be authorized to establish promotions,
§ 215-6 HAMILTON CODE § 215-6
1:280
including but not limited to coupons and group rates, to
encourage the use of the golf center.
(c) Parks and park facilities.
1. Veterans Park.
a. Resident: $50 rental.
b. Nonresident: $100 rental.
c. The aforementioned fees are for a four-hour use.
2. Kuser Park.
a. Resident: $50 rental.
b. Nonresident: $100 rental.
c. The aforementioned fees are for a four-hour use.
d. Gazebo:
i. Resident: $50 rental.
ii. Nonresident: $75 rental.
iii. The gazebo shall be rented out for marriage
ceremonies and photographs only.
3. Trails.
a. 5K races/walks:
i. Resident: $250 rental.
ii. Nonresident: $300 rental.
4. Security deposit. Pursuant to Chapter 340, Parks and
Playgrounds, Article I, Rules and Regulations, a deposit of
$250 shall be made at the time a permit is issued to assure
that the park grounds and facilities will be left in a clean,
safe and sanitary condition. The Department of Health,
Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services will examine the
grounds following use by such group and, upon
determining that all of the rules have been complied with,
the deposit will be returned to the permittee. If the rules
have not been complied with, the deposit will be forfeited.
(§ 340-4)
(3) Athletic field advertising fees. [Added 5-1-2018 by Ord. No.
18-018]
§ 215-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-6
1:281
§ 215-7. Department of Public Works.
(a) Advertising on athletic field signage shall be awarded pursuant
to the requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law and
applicable bid specifications.
(b) The minimum bids for advertising on athletic field signage
shall be as follows:
1. For one year, $500.
2. For two years, $850.
3. For three years, $1,200.
4. For four years, $1,550.
5. For five years, $1,800.
(c) The fee required pursuant to this subsection shall only apply to
advertising on athletic field signage at Veterans Park and
Warwick Park.
C. Division of Animal Control.
(1) Impounded dogs. The fee for redemption of impounded dogs is $10
for picking up a dog, plus $4 per day for each day or fraction
thereof that the dog has been in custody to cover maintenance
(N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16). (§ 108-12)
(2) 77Impounded cats. The fee for redemption of impounded cats is $10
for picking up a cat, plus $4 per day for each day or fraction thereof
that the cat has been in custody to cover maintenance. (§ 108-19)
(3) Initial adoption fee for dogs: $25. (§ 108-13)
(4) Initial adoption fee for cats: $25. (§ 108-19)
(5) Animal trap fee: deposit of $35. (§§ 108-13 and 108-19)
A. Hamilton Township ecological facility. The following fees shall be
charged by the Township for ecological facility materials and services:
Material/Service Fee
Mulch/compost self-loaded (Hamilton residents
only)
No charge
Mulch/compost by HTPW loader (Hamilton
residents only)
$10 per cubic yard
77.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(2), regarding destruction of impounded dogs, was
repealed 1-2-2019 by Ord. No. 18-074. This ordinance also redesignated former
Subsection C(3) through (6) as Subsection C(2) through (5).
§ 215-6 HAMILTON CODE § 215-7
1:282
§ 215-8. Department of Public Safety.
Material/Service Fee
Surplus compost by HTPW loader (commercial
entities)78
$12 per cubic yard
Surplus compost over 10,000 cubic yards in a
single order by HTPW loader (commercial
entities)79
$10 per cubic yard
Leaf disposal (Hamilton residents only) No charge
Leaf disposal - commercial $10 per cubic yard
Brush disposal (Hamilton residents only) No charge
Brush disposal - commercial $10 per cubic yard
Tire disposal (off rims) - noncommercial
(Hamilton residents only)
No charge
Single stream recycling disposal (Hamilton
residents only)
No charge
Oil disposal (Hamilton residents only) No charge
Electronics disposal (Hamilton residents only) No charge
Cardboard disposal (Hamilton residents only) No charge
Scrap metal/white goods disposal (Hamilton
residents only)
No charge
Auto batteries disposal (wet cell) (Hamilton
residents only)
No charge
Concrete disposal - noncommercial (Hamilton
residents only)
No charge
A. Division of Police.
(1) Permit to purchase pistol or revolver and firearms purchaser
identification cards: $2 each. (§ 5-198)
(2) Police photography services. (§ 5-198)
(a) Black and white: $15 per print.
(b) Color: $20 per print.
78.Editor's Note: This entry was adopted 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-028, contemporaneously
with the enactment of this chapter through the Code adoption legislation 7-18-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-029. It was the Township's intent that this fee be enacted as part of the
Township fee schedule, and it is included here for that purpose.
79.Editor's Note: This entry was adopted 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-028, contemporaneously
with the enactment of this chapter through the Code adoption legislation 7-18-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-029. It was the Township's intent that this fee be enacted as part of the
Township fee schedule, and it is included here for that purpose.
§ 215-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-8
1:283
§ 215-9. Department of Community Planning and Compliance.
(3) Background investigations in connection with Township licensing
procedures: $25. (§ 5-198)
(4) Employment of off-duty police officers. (§ 5-66)
(a) Rates of compensation; administrative fees; payment for
services. Rates of compensation for contracting the services of
off-duty Township police officers shall be as follows:
[Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 17-030; 3-20-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-005]
1. For all nontraffic assignments, the rate shall be $50 per
hour, of which $10 per each hour shall be an
administrative fee retained by the Township.
2. For all traffic assignments, the rate shall be $55 per hour,
of which $10 per each hour shall be an administrative fee
retained by the Township.
3. For all construction project traffic assignments, the rate
shall be $92.50 per hour, of which $10 per each hour shall
be an administrative fee retained by the Township.
4. Cancellation with less than 24 hours' notice will result in a
payment of two hours at the appropriate rate.
5. Cancellation or early completion on the day scheduled for
a construction project traffic assignment shall result in
payment for the full time scheduled, except for
cancellation after the start as a result of inclement
weather, machinery and/or manpower issues, or improper
construction plans, which will then result in a payment of
four hours at the appropriate rate.
6. Payment for all assignments shall be in accordance with
the requirements set forth in § 5-66.
(b) Use of marked police vehicles. In the event that a party or
employer employs any off-duty Township police officer
pursuant to this section, in addition to any compensation to be
paid to the Township pursuant to the requirements herein,
there shall also be a fee of $12 per hour per vehicle for the use
of marked police vehicles.
A. Department of Community Planning and Compliance.
(1) Registration of abandoned property: (§ 146-13)
(a) Initial registration: $500.
(b) Subsequent renewals of registration:
§ 215-8 HAMILTON CODE § 215-9
1:284
1. Second year: $1,000.
2. Third year: $2,000.
3. Fourth and each subsequent year: $3,000.
(2) License for operation of hotels, rooming houses and similar
accommodations. (§ 268-16)
(a) For one to three roomers or boarders: $5.
(b) For four or more roomers or boarders: $5 each.
(3) Street excavations.
(a) A permit for opening a road of any class shall be granted upon
payment of a fee of $225 plus $2.50 per square foot. (§ 435-8)
(4) Curb and sidewalk construction and repair.
(a) Contractors doing commercial work must obtain a license; the
license fee is $50. (§ 435-20)
(b) Curb and sidewalk permit for new work or repairs: $30.
(§ 435-20)
(5) Flood damage prevention.
(a) As part of an application for a development permit, the
applicant shall be supplied with a list of property owners
within 200 feet of the subject property: $10 for the list.
(§ 536-11)
(b) The fee charged for any site plan or subdivision review located
in a floodplain area shall conform to those fees as stipulated in
Chapter 550, Land Development, of the Code of the Township
of Hamilton. If the fees charged in Chapter 550, Land
Development, are less than those required by Chapter 536,
Flood Damage Prevention, the fees required by Chapter 536
shall apply. Any application not covered by the abovementioned
fees will be charged a fee in accordance with the
following schedule, which constitute the fees required by
Chapter 536: (§ 536-28)
1. Single lot, residential: $25.
2. Subdivision: $50.
3. Industrial-commercial improvements: $100.
(6) Soil removal. (§ 572-7)
(a) License: $2,500 per year.
(b) Permit fee (the permit fee is in addition to the license fee).
§ 215-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-9
1:285
1. Removal of 500 cubic yards or less of soil: no fee.
2. Removal of more than 500 cubic yards: $0.10 per cubic
yard of material removed.
(7) Deed plotting: $25.
(8) Floodplain delineation letter: $20.
(9) Maps:
(a) Paper copies.
1. Topographical.
a. Topographical: $5 per sheet (except 1993 plans).
b. 1993 Topographical with or without contours (one
inch equals 100 feet scale): $35 per sheet.
2. Township or any other reproducible map on file not in this
section: $5 per sheet for black and white; $10 per sheet for
color.
3. Telecommunication survey map: $5.
4. Aerial photography.
a. Aerial photography (200 scale and 400 scale): $5 per
sheet.
b. Aerial photography 1993 (100 scale): $35 per sheet.
5. Customized computer plots (200 scale or larger) on 24
inches by 36 inches paper:
a. Topographic with or without contours: $500 per sheet.
b. Tax: $100 per sheet.
c. House number: $100 per sheet.
(b) Digital copies (to disk).
1. Topographical with or without contours: $300.
2. Township maps available in digital format: $50.
(10) Monument ground control data: $10.
(11) Reset ground control monuments.
(a) If for any reason a Township ground control monument is
disturbed or must be relocated: $1,000 per monument.
(12) Lot consolidation: $10.
§ 215-9 HAMILTON CODE § 215-9
1:286
(13) Site plans and architectural drawings: $5 per page.
(14) Fire lane inspection, annual: $50.
(15) Journeyman plumbing license, renewal: $15.
B. Division of Inspections.
(1) Housing standards.
(a) Inspection fees. (§ 268-4)
1. For each initial inspection and one reinspection for all unit
types, except Township registered rental units, the fee
shall be $200.
2. For each additional reinspection beyond the first
reinspection in all unit types, except Township registered
rental units, the fee shall be $100.
3. For Township registered rental units, the fee for the initial
inspections shall be $75.
4. For each additional reinspection of Township registered
rental units, the fee shall be $100.
5. For each smoke detector, sewer or multifamily certification
inspection, the fee shall be $50.
6. Should an inspector arrive for a scheduled inspection and
no adult is present to grant access, the full amount of the
inspection fee shall be charged and the landlord/owner
will be required to reschedule the inspection at a fee of
$75.
(b) Rental unit inspections. At the time of initial registration of a
landlord, expiration of every five-year period as required under
§ 268-18B, or upon any change of occupancy of a rental unit,
the landlord or agent thereof must pay a fee in accordance with
the following schedule for the purpose of having the rental unit
inspected by the Township: (§ 268-18) [Amended 12-4-2018
by Ord. No. 18-062]
1. Initial inspection fee: $50 per unit, collected in equal
annual installments over a five-year period.
2. Upon initial registration of a landlord and when adding a
rental unit or units to the registration a fee of $50 per
rental unit shall be assessed, which includes an inspection
and one subsequent reinspection (to be completed within
30 days of a failed initial inspection). Multiunit facilities
containing four or more units shall be assessed a fee of
$50 per unit collected in equal installments over a fiveyear
period. Prepayment of this fee shall not be penalized.
§ 215-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-9
1:287
3. Following the expiration of every five-year period a fee of
$50 shall be assessed, which includes an inspection and
one subsequent reinspection (to be completed within 30
days of a failed initial inspection). Multiunit facilities
containing four or more units shall be assessed a fee of
$50 per unit collected in equal installments over a fiveyear
period. Prepayment of this fee shall not be penalized.
4. Any change of occupancy, except those changes of
occupancies upon each subsequent five-year inspection,
shall be assessed a fee of $75, which includes one
inspection.
5. Any subsequent reinspection conducted in excess of those
specified in Subsection B(1)(b)2, 3 and 4 above shall be
assessed a fee of $100 (to be completed within 30 days of
most recent reinspection).
6. Fee to reschedule an inspection if no adult is present to
grant access to the rental unit: $75, plus the full amount of
the inspection fee.
7. Late fee: $30 per month.
(c) Landlord registration. The landlord registration fee must be
renewed every five years. (§ 268-18) [Amended 12-4-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-062]
1. Landlord registration fee: $200.
2. Landlord registration fee for owner-occupied rental units
containing four units or less: $75.
3. Reinstatement of landlord registration: $300 in addition to
all other applicable landlord registration fees.
(2) Septic tank cleaners. The annual license fee for the issuance or
renewal for a license to engage in the business of emptying or
cleaning septic tanks, cesspools, privies or any place used for the
reception or storage of human excrement is $20 per vehicle and
conveyance. (§ 385-16)
C. Fire districts. [Amended 12-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-044]
(1) Fees shall be in accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code
Fee Permit Schedule.
(2) Certificate of fire code status: $44. (§ 228-12)
(3) Copies of fire reports: maximum of $25. (§ 228-12)
(4) Returned check fee: $45. (§ 228-12)
§ 215-9 HAMILTON CODE § 215-9
1:288
§ 215-10. Department of Water Pollution Control.
§ 215-11. Oktoberfest vendors and crafters.
(5) Fire watch coverage: $52 per hour per person of which $7 per each
hour shall be an administrative fee retained by the Fire District.
(§ 228-12)
A. Sewer connection permit. (§ 385-13)
(1) Single-family residential dwelling: $2,500.
(2) Nonresidential source: $2,500 per unit. Consult § 385-13 for the
schedule to be used in computing the fee for nonresidential uses, to
determine what constitutes a "unit."
B. Nondomestic (industrial) waste discharge (IWD) permit. Annual permit
fees shall be as follows: (§ 385-30)
(1) Class I user: $1,250.
(2) Class II user: $500.
(3) Class III user: $200.
C. Sanitary sewer rental rates and charges. (§ 385-52)
(1) Residential.
(a) Single-family, per year: $312.
(b) Multifamily (apartments, duplexes, mobile home parks and
motels), per unit, per year: $312.
(2) Commercial. Each separate office, store or similar place of
business with separate rest rooms to be considered a separate
commercial unit: $156 per year per unit plus $5.24 per 1,000
gallons of metered water used, based upon metered water
consumption, with a minimum annual fee of $312 per unit.
(3) All others uses: same as the rates for commercial uses in
Subsection C(2) above.
A. Profit food vendor:
(1) Electrical: $600.
(a) Additional stand: $300.
(2) Nonelectrical: $500.
(a) Additional stand: $250.
(3) Snack food: $400.
§ 215-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-11
1:289
§ 215-12. Marriage ceremonies.
§ 215-13. Township property lease and rental fees; policies.
(a) Additional stand: $200.
B. Nonprofit food vendor: $75.
C. Crafter: $60.
D. Demonstrator n/a: $100.
E. Nonprofit display booth: $50.
F. Activity (i.e., all inflatables): $250.
A. The purpose of this section is to establish policies and procedures for
the collection and distribution of fees associated with the performance
of marriage ceremonies by the Mayor or the Mayor's lawful designee.
B. Amount of fees.
(1) A resident of the Township of Hamilton seeking to be married by
the Mayor of the Township of Hamilton shall pay to the Township of
Hamilton a fee of $100.
(2) A person who is not a resident of the Township of Hamilton, seeking
to be married by the Mayor of the Township of Hamilton, shall pay
to the Township of Hamilton a fee of $150.
C. Payment of fees; deposit. The Township fee shall be paid, pursuant to
Subsection B above, for all weddings, by cash or check payable to the
Township of Hamilton, prior to completion of any such wedding. At the
time a marriage ceremony is scheduled, a deposit of $50 shall be made,
which shall be credited towards the fee listed in Subsection B above.
The deposit shall be nonrefundable if a marriage ceremony is cancelled
by the resident within 48 hours of the scheduled ceremony. Fees
collected shall be deposited into the Township's current fund.
D. The Township shall disburse to the Mayor's Recreation Trust Fund the
full amount collected under Subsection B above through the
appropriate budget line item and with appropriate authorization, on a
monthly basis.
A. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CIVIC ORGANIZATION OR GROUP — Any organization or group not
organized for profit but operated exclusively for the promotion of the
social welfare.
§ 215-11 HAMILTON CODE § 215-13
1:290
LEASE — The use of Township property, for a public purpose as
specified under N.J.S.A. 40A:12-15, by any organization on a permanent
daily basis.
NONCIVIC ORGANIZATION OR GROUP — Any organization or group
not organized exclusively for the promotion of the social welfare.
PERMANENT DAILY BASIS — The permanent presence of an
organization on Township property by virtue of a lease agreement,
including the use of Township property as office space and for the
storage of an organization's files.
RECREATIONAL ORGANIZATION OR GROUP — Any organization or
group not organized for profit and operated exclusively for the
promotion of the social welfare in a recreational manner, including but
not limited to sporting teams, referee organizations, etc.
SEASONAL BASIS — The seasonal presence of a recreational
organization on Township property that would otherwise require a lease
under this section.
TEMPORARY BASIS — The nonpermanent or low-impact presence of
a person or organization on Township property that would otherwise
require a lease under this section. More than one usage per week
or usage for more than four consecutive hours per week by an
organization or group, with the exception of senior citizen groups, shall
not be construed as temporary basis and will require the organization
or group to execute a lease with the Township pursuant to Subsection
B and satisfy all requirements thereof.
B. Permanent daily leases.
(1) Lease agreement. Notwithstanding any other requirement to the
contrary, organizations wishing to lease any property owned by the
Township of Hamilton, including, but not limited to, buildings and
grounds, on a permanent daily basis shall be required to enter into
a lease agreement with the Township, subject to approval of
Council.
(2) Lease fees. The monthly lease fee shall be calculated on a lease-bylease
basis based upon the actual usage and costs to the Township
to operate same.
(3) Eligible organizations. Only organizations having a Section
501(c)(3) designation under the Internal Revenue Code and
designated as a nonprofit under New Jersey law shall be eligible to
lease Township property on a permanent daily basis.
(4) Exempt organizations. Organizations leasing Township property at
Veterans Park, Kuser Park and the Isaac Pearson Property on a
permanent daily basis and are open to the public on a regular
schedule are exempt from the lease fees established under this
section. [Amended 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-039]
§ 215-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-13
1:291
(5) Lease terms. Any lease entered into pursuant to this section shall
be subject, but not limited to, the following rules and regulations:
(a) No organization or member thereof subject to a lease under
this section shall enter or occupy the leased property earlier
than 7:00 a.m. or later than 10:00 p.m. unless prior written
approval is received from the Department of Health,
Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services.
(b) No alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in or on the
premises of the leased property, except for the distribution and
consumption of alcoholic beverages pursuant to a lawfully
issued Township permit allowing alcoholic beverages.
(c) Leased property shall not be used for the personal use of any
person or member of an organization, including, but not
limited to, parties of any kind.
(d) No smoking shall be permitted in any leased property.
(e) Use of space in or on a leased property shall be restricted only
to that space designated in the lease. Use of outside areas of
leased property shall be prohibited where such use adversely
impacts other persons or organizations using the leased
property or impedes other areas of the leased property,
including, but not limited to, the driveway, parking lot, or
playground. Any use of additional space, other than the
designated space outlined in the lease for any purpose, must
be approved in advance by the Department of Health,
Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services.
(f) The fee for a lost key or key card shall be $100. Only
authorized officials of the Township of Hamilton shall have the
authority to make duplicate keys or key cards.
(g) Leases cannot be subleased, transferred or assigned.
(h) Any abuse of the terms of the lease shall be grounds to
terminate the lease and evict the organization in violation
thereof.
C. Temporary or seasonal rental.
(1) Certain property owned by the Township of Hamilton shall be
available for rent on a temporary or seasonal basis.
(2) Any civic or noncivic organization or group shall be permitted to
rent certain designated Township property on a temporary basis.
Any recreational organization or group shall be permitted to rent
certain designated Township property on a seasonal basis. Such
aforesaid organizations and groups need not have a Section
501(c)(3) designation under the Internal Revenue Code or
designated as a nonprofit under New Jersey law.
§ 215-13 HAMILTON CODE § 215-13
1:292
(3) The following policies shall apply when a rental agreement is
entered into for certain designated Township property on a
temporary or seasonal basis:
(a) An organization or group seeking to rent Township property
under this section shall file an application, at least 14 days in
advance, when practical, with the Department of Health,
Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services, stating:
1. The name and address of the applicant. Applicant must be
present at the site for the entire length of the event.
2. The name and address of the organization or group
sponsoring the activity, if any.
3. The date(s) and hour for which the rental is desired.
4. The Township property or portion thereof for which such
rental is desired.
5. An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
6. The type of activity to be conducted.
7. Whether the applicant is a resident or nonresident of the
Township.
8. Any other information which the Department of Health,
Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services shall find
reasonably necessary to attain a fair determination as to
whether a rental should be approved under this section.
9. Rentals cannot be transferred or assigned.
(b) Standards for issuance. Standards for approval of Township
property rental by the Department of Health, Recreation,
Senior and Veterans Services shall include the following
findings:
1. That the rental of the Township property will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general
public enjoyment of the property.
2. That the rental of the Township property will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion
of public health, welfare, safety and recreation.
3. That the rental of the Township property will not include
violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
4. That the rental of the Township property will not entail
extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation
by the Township.
§ 215-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-13
1:293
5. That the Township property desired has not been reserved
for other use at the date and hour requested in the
application.
6. Priority of applicants.
a. The affairs of the Township shall take precedence over
all other users of the Township property.
b. Resident civic and recreational applicants will be
given priority over other users for the use of the
Township property, based upon availability.
c. Resident noncivic applicants will be given priority
over nonresident applicants for the use of the
Township property, based upon availability.
d. Nonresident civic and recreational applicants will be
given priority over nonresident noncivic applicants for
the use of the Township property, based upon
availability.
e. Nonresident noncivic applicants will be given the
lowest priority for the use of the Township property,
based upon availability.
f. In the event of a conflict between requesting
applicants, the request received earlier will be
honored first.
(c) Appeal. Whenever in the opinion of the Director of Health,
Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services the approval of a
rental will violate any of the standards listed in Subsection
C(3)(b) above, he or she shall refuse to approve the rental.
Whenever the Director of Health, Recreation, Senior and
Veterans Services has refused to approve a rental, the
applicant may appeal from such determination in accordance
with Chapter 285, Licenses and Permits.
(d) Rental of Township property or portion thereof shall be
restricted to the property, areas, dates, and times expressly
requested on the rental application. The organization or group
renting the property must be present on site, with
identification, at all times during the use of the rental.
(e) The organization or group renting the Township property shall
be bound by all rules and regulations and all applicable
ordinances fully as though the rules, regulations and
ordinances were inserted in the rental agreements.
(f) The organization or group to whom rental is approved shall be
liable for all loss, damage or injury sustained by any person
whatever by reason of the negligence of the organization or
§ 215-13 HAMILTON CODE § 215-13
1:294
group to whom such rental shall have been approved. The
Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans
Services shall have the right to require any renter to submit
evidence of liability insurance covering injuries to members
of the general public arising out of such permitted activities,
in such amounts as may be from time to time determined by
the Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans
Services, prior to the commencement of any activity for which
any rental is approved and shall also have the right to require
that the certificate of insurance name the Township of
Hamilton as an additional insured.
(g) The fee for Township property rental shall be as set forth in this
section.
(h) There shall be a security deposit paid to the Township in the
amount of $100 to assure that the property will be left in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition and also to assure that the
terms of the rental agreement are complied with. The
Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans
Services will examine the property following use by such
renter and, upon determining that all of the rules, regulations
and ordinances have been complied with, the deposit will be
returned to the renter. If the rules have not been complied
with, the deposit will be forfeited. If a renter is present in or on
the property outside of the times approved in the rental
agreement, the deposit will be forfeited.
(i) If a rental is cancelled by a renter prior to 10 days before the
scheduled rental date the security deposit shall be refunded. If
a rental is cancelled by a renter within and including 10 days
before the scheduled rental date the security deposit will be
forfeited.
(j) No alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in or on the
premises of the Township property, except for the distribution
and consumption of alcoholic beverages pursuant to a lawfully
issued Township permit allowing alcoholic beverages.
(k) When required by the Department of Health, Recreation,
Senior and Veterans Services due to the number of persons in
attendance during a rental, the services of a law enforcement
officer or officers shall be obtained to maintain order. The
services of such officers shall be obtained pursuant to § 5-66,
Employment of off-duty police officers, of the Township Code.
(l) The Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans
Services shall have the authority to revoke a rental upon a
finding of violation of any rule, regulation or ordinance or upon
good cause shown, including, but not limited to, the
§ 215-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-13
1:295
falsification of any information required on the rental
application.
(4) Rental terms. Any rental agreement entered into pursuant to this
section shall be subject to, but not limited to, the following rules
and regulations:
(a) No organization or group subject to a rental agreement under
this section shall in any way enter or occupy property owned by
the Township of Hamilton between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., unless prior written approval is received from the
Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans
Services.
(b) Rented property shall not be used for the personal use of any
person or member of an organization or group, including, but
not limited to, parties of any kind.
(c) No smoking shall be permitted in any rented property.
(d) Use of space in or on a rented property shall be restricted only
to that space designated in the rental agreement. Use of
outside areas of rented property shall be prohibited where
such use adversely impacts other persons or organizations
using the rented property or impedes other areas of the rented
property, including, but not limited to, the driveway, parking
lot, or playground.
(e) There shall be no fee for a temporary rental of Township
property pursuant to this section by civic groups and
organizations. However, temporary rental of a designated
Township property on Saturday, Sunday or a Township
designated holiday shall be subject to the payment of an
amount based upon the actual usage and costs to the Township
to operate same during the temporary rental.
(f) Noncivic groups and organizations renting Township property
on a temporary basis shall pay the following applicable fee:
1. Noncivic groups, Hamilton Township residents:
a. One to 50 people:
i. Monday through Friday: $50.
ii. Saturday, Sunday and holidays: $150.
b. Fifty-one or more people:
i. Monday through Friday: $100.
ii. Saturday, Sunday and holidays: $250.
2. Noncivic groups, non-Hamilton Township residents:
§ 215-13 HAMILTON CODE § 215-13
1:296
a. One to 50 people:
i. Monday through Friday: $75.
ii. Saturday, Sunday and holidays: $250.
b. Fifty-one or more people:
i. Monday through Friday: $150.
ii. Saturday, Sunday and holidays: $350.
3. Security guard:
a. Thirty-one dollars per hour.
b. Sunday and holidays: $41 per hour.
4. Police officer: As per § 5-66, Employment of off-duty police
officers, of the Township Code.
(g) Recreational groups and organizations renting Township
property on a seasonal basis shall pay the following applicable
fee:
1. Recreational groups and organizations, Hamilton
Township residents: $150.
2. Recreational groups and organizations, non-Hamilton
Township residents: $250.
3. Security guard:
a. Thirty-one dollars per hour.
b. Sunday and holidays: $41 per hour.
4. Police officer: As per § 5-66, Employment of off-duty police
officers, of the Township Code.
(h) Organizations or groups renting Township property on a
temporary or seasonal basis may, with prior written approval
from the Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and
Veterans Services, maintain a low-impact permanent presence
on the property. For purposes of this section, "low impact"
means permanent use or location of a closet, cabinet,
refrigerator, etc., during the term of the rental.
(i) Any abuse of the terms of the rental agreement shall be
grounds to terminate the rental agreement.
D. Sayen House and Gardens and Grafton House rentals.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the following
policies shall apply when a rental agreement is entered into for
Sayen House and Gardens and Grafton House.
§ 215-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-13
1:297
(a) A person or organization seeking to rent Sayen House and
Gardens and Grafton House shall file an application, at least 14
days in advance, when practical, with the Department of
Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services, stating:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The name and address of the person sponsoring the
activity, if any. Applicant must be present at the site for the
entire length of the event.
3. The day and hours for which the rental is desired.
4. The facility or portion thereof for which such rental is
desired.
5. An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
6. The type of activity to be conducted.
7. Whether the applicant is a resident or nonresident of the
Township.
8. Any other information which the Department of Health,
Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services shall find
reasonably necessary to attain a fair determination as to
whether a rental should be approved under this section.
9. Rentals cannot be transferred or assigned.
(b) Standards for issuance. Standards for approval of a facility
rental by the Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and
Veterans Services shall include the following findings:
1. That the rental of the facility will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public
enjoyment of the facility.
2. That the rental of the facility will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the promotion of public
health, welfare, safety and recreation.
3. That the rental of the facility will not include violence,
crime or disorderly conduct.
4. That the rental of the facility will not entail extraordinary
or burdensome expense or police operation by the
Township.
5. That the facility desired has not been reserved for other
use at the date and hour requested in the application.
6. Priority of applicants.
§ 215-13 HAMILTON CODE § 215-13
1:298
a. The affairs of the Township shall take precedence over
all other users of the facility.
b. Resident applicants will be given priority over other
users for the use of the facility, based upon availability.
c. Nonresident applicants will be given priority over
commercial applicants for the use of the facility, based
upon availability.
d. Commercial applicants will be given the lowest
priority for the use of the facility, based upon
availability.
e. In the event of a conflict between requesting
applicants, the request received earlier will be
honored first.
(c) Appeal. Whenever in the opinion of the Director of Health,
Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services the approval of a
rental will violate any of the standards listed in Subsection
D(1)(b) above, he or she shall refuse to approve the rental.
Whenever the Director of Health, Recreation, Senior and
Veterans Services has refused to approve a rental, the
applicant may appeal from such determination in accordance
with Chapter 285, Licenses and Permits.
(d) Rental of a facility or portion thereof shall be restricted to the
facility, areas, dates, and times expressly requested on the
rental application. The person renting the facility must be
present on site, with identification, at all times during the use
of the rental.
(e) The person renting the facility shall be bound by all rules and
regulations and all applicable ordinances fully as though the
rules, regulations and ordinances were inserted in the rental
agreements, and person renting the facility shall be present at
all times during rental period.
(f) The person or organization to whom rental is approved shall be
liable for all loss, damage or injury sustained by any person
whatever by reason of the negligence of the person or
organization to whom such rental shall have been approved.
The Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans
Services shall have the right to require any renter to submit
evidence of liability insurance covering injuries to members of
the general public arising out of such permitted activities, in
such amounts as may be from time to time determined by the
Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans
Services, prior to the commencement of any activity for which
any rental is approved and shall also have the right to require
§ 215-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-13
1:299
that the certificate of insurance name the Township of
Hamilton as an additional insured.
(g) The fee for a rental of Sayen House and Gardens and Grafton
House shall be as set forth in this section.
(h) There shall be a security deposit paid to the Township in the
amount of $100 to assure that the property will be left in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition and also to assure that the
terms of the rental agreement are complied with. The
Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans
Services will examine the property following use by such
renter and, upon determining that all of the rules, regulations
and ordinances have been complied with, the deposit will be
returned to the renter. If the rules have not been complied
with, the deposit will be forfeited. If a renter is present in or on
the property outside of the times approved in the rental
agreement, the deposit will be forfeited.
(i) If a rental is cancelled by a renter prior to 10 days before the
scheduled rental date the security deposit shall be refunded. If
a rental is cancelled by a renter within and including 10 days
before the scheduled rental date the security deposit will be
forfeited.
(j) No alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in or on the
premises of the facility, except for the distribution and
consumption of alcoholic beverages pursuant to a lawfully
issued Township permit allowing alcoholic beverages.
(k) When required by the Department of Health, Recreation,
Senior and Veterans Services due to the number of persons in
attendance during a rental, the services of a law enforcement
officer or officers shall be obtained to maintain order. The
services of such officers shall be obtained pursuant to § 5-66,
Employment of off-duty police officers, of the Township Code.
(l) The Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans
Services shall have the authority to revoke a rental upon a
finding of violation of any rule, regulation or ordinance or upon
good cause shown, including, but not limited to, the
falsification of any information required on the rental
application.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section the following
fees shall apply when a rental agreement is entered into for the
Sayen House and Gardens and Grafton House.
(a) Grafton House.
1. Grafton House rental fees:
§ 215-13 HAMILTON CODE § 215-13
1:300
a. Hamilton Township residents:
i. Monday through Friday (day or evening): $250.
ii. Saturday and Sunday (day or evening): $300.
b. Non-Hamilton Township residents:
i. Monday through Friday (day or evening): $300.
ii. Saturday and Sunday (day or evening): $400.
c. Hamilton Township businesses:
i. Monday through Friday (day or evening): $300.
ii. Saturday and Sunday (day or evening): $350.
d. Non-Hamilton Township businesses:
i. Monday through Friday (day or evening): $350.
ii. Saturday and Sunday (day or evening): $400.
2. General provisions.
a. Proof of residency shall be required to receive
Hamilton Township resident rate.
b. Grafton House rental fees are for a four-hour rental.
c. Payment is required in full at the time of booking in
order to reserve Grafton House for any event.
(b) Sayen House and Gardens. Sayen House and Gardens rental
fees:
1. Sayen House rental fees:
a. Hamilton Township residents. Wedding: $495.
b. Non-Hamilton Township residents. Wedding: $800.
c. Hamilton Township residents and nonresidents.
Shower: $350.
d. Hamilton Township residents. Other event: $400.
e. Non-Hamilton Township residents. Other event: $450.
2. Sayen House and Gardens ceremony and photography
fees:
a. Hamilton Township residents. Wedding ceremony/
photos: $100.
§ 215-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-13
1:301
§ 215-14. Electronic/online payments.
§ 215-15. Fee waiver.
b. Non-Hamilton Township residents. Wedding
ceremony/photos: $150.
c. Hamilton Township residents. Wedding photos only:
$75.
d. Non-Hamilton Township residents. Wedding photos
only: $100.
3. General provisions.
a. Proof of residency shall be required to receive
Hamilton Township resident rate.
b. Sayen House rental fees are for a four-hour rental.
c. Payment is required in full at the time of booking in
order to reserve Sayen House for any event.
d. The rental fee for Sayen House includes the use of
tables, chairs and white linens.
e. Sayen House and Gardens ceremony and photography
fees are for one-hour use.
f. Wedding ceremonies can take place in either the white
gazebo or the pond gazebo.
g. Temple Gardens is reserved for those renting Sayen
House for an event. In the event Sayen House is not
being rented, arrangements can be made to use that
area.
A. Any department in the Township that offers electronic/online payment
options for any fee or payment of any kind to Hamilton Township may
assess an administrative fee to the payment. The payor must be
provided with the following prior to payment:
(1) The fee will be automatically added to the payment.
(2) The amount of the fee will be calculated and added to the payment
and disclosed to payor.
(3) Payor has the option of not paying electronically/online and will
avoid paying the administrative fee by so doing.
B. The administrative fee shall be no more than is necessary to cover the
cost to Hamilton Township for the service.
§ 215-13 HAMILTON CODE § 215-15
1:302
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of any ordinance to the contrary, any
resident of the Township who shall have attained the age of 65 years, or
who is totally and permanently disabled as certified by the Social
Security Administration or a physician, or who is a disabled veteran
whose wartime service-connected disability is 100% total and
permanent as declared by the United States Veterans Administration or
its successor, shall not be required to pay any municipal fee established
by the Code of the Township of Hamilton. [Amended 1-2-2019 by
Ord. No. 18-075]
B. All department directors and other municipal officials with
responsibility for administration of fees shall establish procedures to
implement this section.
C. The waiver of fees provided in this section is subject to the following
general restrictions and conditions:
(1) Residential property permits.
(a) Fees will be waived for the following residential property
permits only:
1. New roof.
2. New siding.
3. Water heaters and/or furnaces.
4. New electrical services up to 400 amps.
(b) The resident must own and occupy the property at the time of
application.
(2) Fees for group activities are waived for groups which include only
residents who are subject of this section.
(3) No fee imposed in connection with a penalty enforcement or
judicial proceedings shall be waived.
(4) This section shall not apply to any bond or surety required to
ensure the faithful performance of a public obligation or repair to a
public facility.
(5) This section shall not apply to any commercial or business activity.
(6) This section shall not apply to any land use or development fee
imposed in conjunction with a Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment application, except with regards to the alteration of any
existing residence within the Township owned and occupied by a
resident covered by this section.
(7) Fees for inspections shall not be waived unless the resident owns
and occupies the property being inspected at the time of the
request.
§ 215-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-15
1:303
Chapter 223
FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS
§ 223-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
COMMISSIONER — The State Commissioner of Insurance.
LIEN — Any lawful lien, including liens for taxes, special assessments,
municipal charges, demolition and clearance costs and interest thereon
arising by operation of law against real property in favor of the Township.
REAL PROPERTY — Improved property upon which there is erected any
residential, commercial or industrial building or other structure.
§ 223-2. Municipal liens to constitute lien against proceeds.
No insurer shall pay to or on behalf of any insured or other claimant any
claim in excess of $2,500 for fire damage to or upon any real property
located within the Township pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued
or renewed after the effective date of this chapter until such time as all
taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or charges levied and
assessed and due and payable shall have been paid either by the owner of
such real property or by the insurer concerned. Except as otherwise set
forth in this chapter, the claim of the Township shall constitute a special
lien against the proceeds of any such fire insurance policy and shall, as to
such proceeds, be prior to all other liens and claims except the claim of any
mortgages of record named in such policy, to the extent provided by law.
§ 223-3. Reconciliation of other municipal liens.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or be construed to alter,
impair or affect the right of the Township to acquire or enforce any other
municipal lien against property which may otherwise be provided by law,
but shall be in addition to any other such provision.
§ 223-4. Satisfaction of lien by insurer.
Any insurer issuing fire insurance policies in the Township is authorized
and required, prior to the payment of any such claim for fire damage in
excess of $2,500 to any claimant for loss to real property therein, to pay to
D. All individuals covered by this section shall be entitled to obtain a
Hamilton Township identification card which shall be presented at the
time of payment to validate the entitlement to the fee waiver. The
identification card shall remain the property of the Township and shall
be subject to forfeiture in the event it is used or attempted to be used
for any purpose in violation of this section.
§ 215-15 HAMILTON CODE § 223-4
1:304
the municipality the amount of the liens for taxes, assessments or charges
appearing on an official certificate of search pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12 as
may be certified to the insurer and the insured owner of the real property;
provided, however, that, if an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien
or charge, other than an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21, the insurer shall withhold 75% of the full
amount of the lien or charge being contested pending termination of all
proceedings, at which time such moneys, together with interest accruing
thereon at prevailing lawful rates for savings accounts, shall be disbursed
in accordance with the final order or judgment of the court.
§ 223-5. Payment of municipal liens in installments.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Council of the
Township may at any time enter into an agreement with the owner of any
fire-damaged property to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments or
other municipal liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or for the
redemption of the tax sale lien by installment payments pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:5-65 et seq., if the Council is satisfied that the claim for fire damages
is to be used to restore or improve the fire-damaged property. An insurer
receiving a certified copy of a resolution of agreement from the Council is
authorized to make full payment on the claim to the insured person.
§ 223-6. Filing of regulations with State Commissioner of
Insurance.
The Municipal Clerk of the Township is hereby authorized and directed
to file a certified copy of this chapter with the State Commissioner of
Insurance immediately upon its final adoption in accordance with law, by
certified mail with return receipt obtained.
§ 223-7. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect after final adoption and publication in
accordance with law and upon filing thereof with the State Commissioner
of Insurance, as shown on the certified mail return receipt therefor, which
shall be deemed the effective date of this chapter.
Chapter 228
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 94.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 167.
Fire insurance proceeds — See Ch. 223.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 260.
Housing standards — See Ch. 268.
§ 223-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-7
1:305

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards; Fire Protection
[Adopted as Ch. 54, Art. I, §§ 54-1 through 54-7, of the 1994 Code of
Ordinances]
§ 228-1. Adoption of standards; copies on file. [Amended 4-18-2012
by Ord. No. 12-015]
§ 228-2. Definitions. [Amended 4-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-015]
Whenever used in this chapter or in the codes adopted in this chapter, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this section:
CHIEF OF FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU — The Fire Marshal/Fire Official
designated by the Board of Fire Commissioners of the respective fire
district, who shall perform all functions assigned in the code to the chief of
the fire prevention bureau, except those assigned to the fire subcode official
by state law or regulation or by other Township ordinance.81
CODE or FIRE PREVENTION CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAMILTON
— The Uniform Fire Code promulgated pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety
Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383) and any permitted amendments thereto.
CORPORATION COUNSEL — The Township Attorney.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township.
§ 228-3. Fire lanes.
A. The Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383)80 and the Uniform Fire
Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et seq.) promulgated pursuant to the Act is hereby
acknowledged as the Fire Prevention Code of the Township of
Hamilton, subject to any supplements or modifications as may be
permitted by law and which may be adopted by the Township of
Hamilton.
B. The Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et seq.), as amended, deleted
and supplemented, is hereby incorporated in this section and made a
part hereof.
C. The required Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et seq.) has been
placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk and in the offices of the
Board of Fire Commissioners and shall remain on file in each of the
offices for the use and examination of the public so long as this section
shall remain in effect.
A. Designation of fire lanes in shopping centers.
80.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 228-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-3
1:307
(1) For purposes of this section, a shopping center is defined as set
forth in § 550-7, as interpreted and determined by the Fire Marshal
of the Township.
(2) Authority is hereby vested in the Fire Marshal of the Township, in
conjunction with the Police Division of the Township, to establish
and designate fire emergency access zones in shopping centers,
and to designate, determine and provide for a lane of up to 35 feet
in width running entirely across the frontages or faces of the
buildings of such shopping centers utilized for public ingress and
egress.
(3) The Fire Marshal may, in addition, after consulting with the various
Chiefs and Boards of Fire Commissioners of the various fire
districts, designate other fire lane areas and areas designated
solely for the purpose of providing ingress and egress for fire,
police and other emergency apparatus.
(4) The fire emergency access lanes so designated shall be in those
locations and of sufficient design as may be reasonable and
required by the public safety and welfare, and the purpose of these
lanes shall be a guaranteed unimpaired ingress and egress to the
shopping center buildings as well as the public parking areas in
and around such shopping center buildings for fire, police and
other emergency vehicles. The lanes shall be installed by the
property owner utilizing regulation signs and paint on the
pavement areas, which signs and paint shall be installed and
maintained by the property owner under the direction and
supervision of the Police Division and in accordance with the
specifications of the Traffic Bureau of the Township Police Division
in conjunction with the recommendations of the Fire Chiefs of the
respective fire districts.
(5) No person or any agent or employee shall park, leave standing or
cause to be parked any vehicle in any of the lanes mentioned in this
section, or cause any other obstruction in the areas so designated
as fire lanes.
(6) The Police Division of the Township shall have concurrent
jurisdiction with the Fire Marshal of the Township in enforcing this
section.
(7) Any person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be liable
to the penalties contained in N.J.S.A. 39:4-203 and court costs
involved.
(8) If any person seeks a variance from this section, the Fire Marshal
shall chair a meeting with the representatives of such person and
the Fire Commissioners and Chief of the district involved. The Fire
Commissioners and Chief shall then make a decision upon such
request.
§ 228-3 HAMILTON CODE § 228-3
1:308
§ 228-4. Removal of spills of hazardous or flammable substances.
B. Traffic on fire lanes. There shall not be allowed any vehicular traffic of
any kind save for emergency vehicles on any properly dedicated and
designated fire lane throughout the Township, whether the lanes are so
designated by order of an official public agency or by the owner of the
private property.82
A. Whenever a Fire Chief of any fire district within the Township shall
determine that a fire safety hazard exists as a result of a spill of a
flammable or hazardous substance and shall have given the owner or
possessor of the premises on which the spill occurred a reasonable time
in which to remove the spill and he shall not have complied, the Fire
Chief shall inform the Director of Public Works.
B. The Director of Public Works shall immediately cause the spill to be
removed.
C. After the work has been completed, the Director of Public Works shall
certify the cost of such removal to the Director of Finance. The amount
so certified shall become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to
and become a part of the taxes next assessed and levied upon such
lands, and such amount shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes.
82.Editor's Note: Former § 54-4, pertaining to storage of flammable liquids, § 54-5, pertaining
to storage of explosives and blasting agents, and § 54-6, pertaining to bulk storage of
liquid petroleum gases, which immediately followed this section, were repealed 4-18-2012
by Ord. No. 12-015.
§ 228-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-4
1:309

ARTICLE II
Enforcement of Uniform Fire Code
[Adopted as Ch. 54, Art. II, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 228-5. Local enforcement generally.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,83 the State Uniform
Fire Code shall be enforced locally within the established limits of Fire
District Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9.
§ 228-6. Designation of enforcing agencies. [Amended 2-16-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-006; 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 16-004; 12-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-072; 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 19-004]
The local enforcing agency for the State Uniform Fire Code shall be the
Board of Fire Commissioners of Fire District No. 7, each within the limits
established by ordinance. The local enforcing agency for Fire District Nos.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8 and 9 shall be the Board of Fire Commissioners of Fire
District No. 7.
§ 228-7. Duties of enforcing agencies. [Amended 12-18-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-072]
The local enforcement agencies established by § 228-6 shall enforce the
Uniform Fire Safety Act and the codes and regulations adopted under it in
all buildings, structures and premises within the established boundaries of
the respective local enforcement agencies, other than owner-occupied oneand
two-family dwellings, and shall faithfully comply with the requirements
of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 228-8. Inspection of life hazard uses.
Each local enforcing agency established by § 228-6 shall carry out the
periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code
on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 228-9. Organization and funding of enforcing agencies.
Each local enforcing agency established by § 228-6 shall be a part of the
fire district and shall be under the supervision of the Board of Fire
Commissioners or such other officer as it may designate. Such funds as may
be necessary to support the operations of the agency shall be raised by the
district in the manner provided by law.
§ 228-10. Fire Official; inspectors and other employees. [Amended
4-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-016]
A. Fire Official.
83.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
§ 228-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-10
1:311
§ 228-11. Appeals.84
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,85 any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall have the right
to appeal to the Mercer County Construction Board of Appeals.
§ 228-12. Fees. [Added 4-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-01686]
(1) Appointment. Each local enforcing agency shall be under the direct
supervision of a Fire Official, who shall be appointed by each Board
of Fire Commissioners for each district in compliance with
regulations set forth by the New Jersey Title 11A, Civil Service Act.
(2) Removal from office. Fire Officials of the enforcing agency shall be
subject to removal by the respective Board of Fire Commissioners
for inefficiency or misconduct. Each Fire Official shall be afforded
an opportunity to be heard by the appointing authority or a
designated hearing officer.
B. Inspectors and employees.
(1) Appointment. Each fire district shall appoint such inspectors as
may be necessary to carry out all required inspection activity in the
fire district. Such inspectors shall be under the supervision and
control of the Fire Official.
(2) Removal from office. Inspectors and other employees of the
enforcing agency shall be subject to removal by the respective
Board of Fire Commissioners for inefficiency or misconduct. Each
inspector or employee shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard
by the appointing authority or a designated hearing officer.
C. Any fire official or inspector employed by the local enforcing agency
shall be required to obtain the required certifications to enforce the
Uniform Fire Code from the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs.
A. The permit fees established by the Uniform Fire Code shall be amended
to be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.
B. Certificate of fire code status as per N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.2(e)1 of the Uniform
Fire Code. Any request for a certificate of fire code status shall be set
forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.
C. Copies of fire reports shall be a maximum fee as set forth in Chapter
215, Fees, of the Township Code.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
85.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 228-10 HAMILTON CODE § 228-12
1:312
D. Returned checks. In the event a fire district receives a returned check
from a bank for insufficient funds, a fee as set forth in Chapter 215,
Fees, of the Township Code will be assessed.
E. Fire watch coverage.
(1) When requested or required by the Fire Department to provide fire
watch coverage by Fire Department personnel due to an
emergency condition or requirement of a permit function, the cost
of such service shall be set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the
Township Code, per hour/per man, paid directly from the building
owner or responsible party to the fire district.
(2) Failure of a property owner or designated property representative
to establish or properly document a fire watch when requested by
the Fire Department will result in an assessed penalty not to
exceed $250 per day for every day the condition exists.
§ 228-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-12
1:313

ARTICLE III
Key Lock Boxes
[Adopted 3-20-2002 by Ord. No. 02-010 (Ch. 54, Art. I, § 54-8, of the
1994 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 228-13. Where required.
In all buildings regardless of use or occupancy, which are protected by an
automatic alarm system and/or a fire sprinkler system, the owners and/
or management agents shall install a key box, of a type and in a location
approved by the proper official of the local fire district. The following are
exempt from this requirement:
§ 228-14. Requirements for voluntary installation.
For all buildings where installation is not required under the provisions
of § 228-13, such installation shall be permissible but not required. If the
owner or management agent of a property which is not required to install a
key box elects to do so, said owner or management agent shall be obligated
to meet all criteria specified for buildings where key box installation is
required.
§ 228-15. Requirements for key box installation.
Upon examination of the physical condition and characteristics of any
property subject to this article, and upon written notice to the owner and/
or principal occupant thereof, the proper official of the local fire district
may require a key box to be installed in a specific location whenever
access to or within a structure or an area is unduly difficult because of
secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or
firefighting purposes.
§ 228-16. Requirements for premises with hazardous materials.
Cabinet-style vaults shall be required when deemed necessary by the proper
official of the local fire district at premises containing hazardous materials
and MSDS data sheets, site plans and floor plans.
A. All properties protected by an on-site, 24 hours per day/seven days per
week guard service;
B. All properties having employees on duty and/or on site 24 hours per
day/seven days per week;
C. Multiple-family dwellings containing six or fewer individual
occupancies; and
D. Single-family homes.
§ 228-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-17
1:315
§ 228-17. Emergency override controls for mechanical parking
gates.
Owners and operators of controlled vehicle parking areas which use
mechanical parking gates to control motor vehicle ingress and egress shall
install and maintain an emergency override control on each gate. Said
emergency override control devices shall contain a master key-operated
type switch approved by the proper official of the local fire district.
§ 228-18. Requirements for keys.
Key boxes shall include two separate sets of keys. Each set shall contain the
following individually labeled keys:
§ 228-19. Required contents of key box.
In addition, the key box shall contain the following:
§ 228-20. Specifications for key boxes.
The lock or key box to be installed in the structure shall meet the following
specifications:
A. Keys to the locked point of egress whether on the interior or exterior of
such buildings;
B. Keys to locked mechanical rooms;
C. Keys to locked electrical rooms;
D. Keys to fire alarm panels;
E. Keys to elevator controls, if elevators are present and equipped with a
fire department bypass switch;
F. Keys to other areas in the building as directed by the proper official of
the local fire district.
A. A current list of personnel and telephone numbers for call back
purposes in the event of an emergency;
B. All right to know records and MSDS pertinent to the subject premises;
C. In the alternative, a written direction card shall be located in the key
box, indicating the location of those records for facilities having more
MSDS sheets than the key box is capable of holding.
A. UL 437—Standard for safety keylock;
B. UL 1610—Standard for central station alarm units for use with UL
listed alarm systems;
C. UL 1037—Standard for anti-theft alarms and devices.
§ 228-17 HAMILTON CODE § 228-21
1:316
§ 228-21. Adoption of procedures to protect master keys systems.
Each local fire district shall adopt procedures for protecting the integrity
and security of the master keys system which allow access to key boxes
within the local district. Procedures shall include, but not be limited to,
a definition of authorized uses and users of the system; specific means of
access to the system; protection against unauthorized or uncontrolled use of
master keys or master key systems; secure storage systems for master keys;
a system for release and control of master keys from a central dispatch
location; the recording of individuals having access to the master key,
including date, time and location of access; and protections and safeguards
against unauthorized duplication of master keys or access systems.
§ 228-22. Change of locks; fine for failure to notify fire district.
In the event that locks on the subject building are changed after the
installation of the key box, the proper official of the local fire district shall
be notified of such change in writing, and a key(s) to the new lock(s) shall be
provided immediately. Failure to provide this written notification and new
key(s) may result in the imposition of a fine of not less than $250.
§ 228-23. Applicability to new construction and renovations.
The requirements of this article shall apply to all new construction in the
Township and all buildings undergoing renovations in the Township, where
the total cost of the renovations exceeds $10,000.
§ 228-24. Time limit for compliance.
All existing buildings as described in § 228-13 shall be required to comply
with the installation of the key box system within two years of the effective
date of this article.
§ 228-25. Violations and penalties.
Any building owner who knowingly and intentionally violates this article,
after receiving written notice from the proper official of the local fire
district, may be subject to a fine of not less than $250 per violation.
§ 228-26. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this article shall be performed by the local Fire Marshal or
Fire Chief pursuant to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.2 et seq.
§ 228-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-26
1:317
Chapter 235
FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 215.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 285.
Vending machines — See Ch. 496.
§ 228-26 HAMILTON CODE § 228-26
1:318
ARTICLE I
Packaging and Labeling of Meat
[Adopted as Ch. 58, Art. II, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 235-1. Findings.
It is found by the Township Council that prepackaged fresh-cut meats
offered for sale by food dealers and retail food establishments in the
Township are often contained within partially transparent sealed wrapping
or are shingled or layered when packaged, making the condition and
contents thereof not fully and wholly visible to the consumer because of the
shingling or layering of meats and the insertion of a cardboard or opaque
substance on one or more sides of such transparent packaging.
§ 235-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
FOOD DEALER — Every person and his agents or employees engaged in
the business of selling, offering or exposing for sale food at retail for human
consumption either on or off the premises where sold.
§ 235-3. Transparent packaging required; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any food dealer in the Township to sell or offer or
expose for sale at retail any sealed, prepackaged, unprocessed or untreated
fresh-cut meat, cut or packaged on the premises, unless the packaging
is colorless and transparent on both sides, exclusive of labeling, which
labeling shall not occupy more than 10% of one side of the package, or
which fresh-cut meat is layered or shingled making the contents of the
package not wholly visible. This article shall not apply to frozen meat or
meat commonly designated or known as chopped meat, ground meat, fowl,
sausage or frankfurters.
§ 235-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-3
1:319

ARTICLE II
Retail Food Establishments and Vending Machines
[Adopted 3-22-2012 by Ord. No. 12-009 (Ch. 58, Art. III, of the 1994
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 235-4. License required; expiration of license; posting of license
and inspection report. [Amended 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 15-025]
No person shall operate a retail food establishment as defined in Title 8,
Chapter 24, of the State Sanitary Code, entitled "Sanitation in Retail Food
Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending Machines," without first
having obtained a license from the Township and paid the required license
fee. The term of the license shall be for a period of one year, with all licenses
to expire on December 31. Each license shall apply only to the person to
whom it was issued, and no license shall be transferable to another person.
Every license and inspection report shall be posted in a prominent, readily
visible location near the licensed establishment's main entrance. A license
shall be surrendered upon closure of the business for which it was issued.
§ 235-5. Investigation of applicant.
In addition to the requirements contained in § 235-4, each application for
a license under this article shall be investigated by the Health Officer, who
shall report his findings in writing to the Director of Health, Recreation,
Senior and Veterans Services within a reasonable time. No license shall be
issued unless the Health Officer reports that the applicant conforms to all
provisions of Chapter 24 of the State Sanitary Code.
§ 235-6. License classes; fee.
A. License classes. (Based on risk type classifications per N.J.A.C. 8:24.)
(1) There shall exist six classes of license under this article according
to the following schedule:
(a) Risk Type 1.
1. Serves or sells only prepackaged, nonpotentially
hazardous foods;
2. Prepares only nonpotentially hazardous foods; or
3. Heats only commercially processed potentially hazardous
foods for hot holding and do not cool potentially hazardous
foods.
4. Such retail food establishments may include, but not be
limited to, convenience store operations, hot dog carts,
and coffee shops.
(b) Risk Type 2.
§ 235-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-6
1:321
1. Prepares, cooks, and serves most products immediately;
2. Exercises hot and cold holding of potentially hazardous
foods after preparation or cooking; or
3. Limits the complex preparation of potentially hazardous
foods, including the cooking, cooling, and reheating for hot
holding, to two or fewer items.
4. Such retail food establishments may include, but not be
limited to, retail food store operations, schools that do not
serve a highly susceptible population, and quick service
operations, depending on the menu and preparation
procedures.
(c) Risk Type 3.
1. Has an extensive menu which requires the handling of raw
ingredients, and is involved in the complex preparation of
menu items that includes the cooking, cooling, and
reheating of at least three or more potentially hazardous
foods; or
2. Prepares and serves potentially hazardous foods, including
the extensive handling of raw ingredients, and whose
primary service population is a highly susceptible
population.
3. Such establishments may include, but not be limited to,
full service restaurants, diners, commissaries, and
catering operations; or hospitals, nursing homes, and
preschools preparing and serving potentially hazardous
foods.
(d) Risk Type 4.
1. A retail food establishment that conducts specialized
processes such as smoking, curing, canning, bottling,
acidification designed to control pathogen proliferation, or
any reduced oxygen packaging intended for extended
shelf-life where such activities may require the assistance
of a trained food technologist.
2. Such establishments include those conducting specialized
processing at retail.
3. Note: Some retail food establishments will be classified as
a Risk Type 3 and 4 because of food processing done on
site. (Retail food establishments that prepare sushi on site
will fall into both risk types due to the acidification process
used when preparing sushi rice.)
§ 235-6 HAMILTON CODE § 235-6
1:322
§ 235-7. Suspension or revocation of license.
In addition to the grounds for revocation set forth in § 285-10, any license
issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for failure to comply
with any provision of Chapter 24 of the State Sanitary Code.
§ 235-8. Reinspection of food establishments receiving conditional
satisfactory or unsatisfactory rating.
(e) Temporary retail food establishment. A retail food
establishment that operates for a period of no more than 14
consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or
celebration.
(f) Vending machine. A self-service device that, upon insertion of a
coin, paper currency, token, card, or key, or by optional manual
operation, dispenses unit servings of food in bulk or in
packages without the necessity of replenishing the device
between each vending operation.
(2) The definition of each of the establishments mentioned in
Subsection A(1) of this section shall be the same as those in § 550-7
or as applied in common usage.
B. Fee schedule. The fees under this article for the license classes
described in this section shall be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of
the Township Code.87
C. Exemption. The following applicants shall be exempt from the payment
of fees for the licenses described in this section: any corporation or
association organized and operated for religious, charitable, literary,
recreational or educational purposes and which has a properly issued
tax immunity certificate from the Director of the Division of Taxation of
the state. In lieu of a tax immunity certificate, the corporation or
association may provide the Township with an affidavit of its president
or duly authorized official stating that the corporation or association is
organized and operated for religious, charitable, literary, recreational
or educational purposes.
D. Late fee schedule. Any licensee who fails to renew a license shall be
required to pay a late fee as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the
Township Code, for each 30 days the renewal is late. The license
renewal and applicable fee are due by January 31 of each year.88
A. The reinspection fees for retail food establishments that receive a
conditional satisfactory or unsatisfactory rating, as defined in N.J.A.C.
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 235-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-8
1:323
8:24-8.11, are set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.
[Amended 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 15-02589]
B. Fee shall be paid prior to reinspection to determine if the cause for the
"conditional satisfactory" or "unsatisfactory", as defined by N.J.A.C.
8:24-8.11, has been abated.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 235-8 HAMILTON CODE § 235-8
1:324
Chapter 242
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 242-1. Purpose of chapter.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate all games of chance held,
operated or conducted within the Township pursuant to the acts of the
legislature of the state known as the Bingo Licensing Law90 and the Raffles
Licensing Law91 and in accordance with the rules and regulations issued or
to be promulgated by the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission
in the Department of State of the state. All applications, licenses and
proceedings in connection therewith shall be subject to the provisions of
the acts and the rules and regulations and any laws, rules and regulations
hereafter enacted, and shall be further subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 242-2. Hours of operation.
No licensee authorized by law shall hold, operate or conduct any game of
chance at the place where the game of chance is being conducted under any
license except between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. every day of
the week.
§ 242-3. Eligibility for license.
No license to conduct a game of chance as authorized by law shall be
issued to any organization not having a bona fide situs established in good
faith within the state and actively engaged in serving one or more of the
authorized purposes as defined by the rules and regulations of the Legalized
Games of Chance Control Commission.
§ 242-4. Issuing authority for raffle and bingo licensing. [Added
4-22-2010 by Ord. No. 10-018]
The Municipal Clerk is hereby authorized and delegated the authority to
approve the granting of raffle and bingo licenses to be held in the Township
of Hamilton.
Chapter 246
GANGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 345.
90.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq.
91.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.
§ 235-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-4
1:325

ARTICLE I
Gang Loitering
[Adopted 12-20-2005 by Ord. No. 05-054 (Ch. 86, § 86-25, of the
1994 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 246-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY — The commission, attempted commission
or solicitation of the following offenses, provided that the offenses are
committed by two or more persons, or by an individual at the direction of,
or in association with, any criminal street gang with the specific intent to
promote, further, or assist in any criminal conduct commonly engaged in by
criminal street gang members.
The following is a listing of such activity under the New Jersey Code of
Criminal Justice:
(1) N.J.S.A. 2C:11-2, Homicide;
(2) N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1b, Aggravated Assault (Firearm);
(3) N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1, Kidnapping;
(4) N.J.S.A. 2C:13-2, Criminal Restraint;
(5) N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1, Robbery (Home Invasion);
(6) N.J.S.A. 2C:18-2, Burglary;
(7) N.J.S.A. 2C:28-5, Tampering with Witnesses;
(8) N.J.S.A. 2C:33-28, Gang Recruitment, Threats, Intimidation;
(9) N.J.S.A. 2C:35-1, Controlled Dangerous Substances;
(10)N.J.S.A. 2C:35-3, Leader of Narcotics Trafficking Network;
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-4, Maintaining or Operating a Controlled Dangerous
Substance House or Facility;
(11)
(12)N.J.S.A. 2C:35-4.1, Fortified Premises;
(13)N.J.S.A. 2C:35-6, Employing a Juvenile in Drug Distribution;
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, Controlled Dangerous Substance (CDS) Within
1,000 Feet of School;
(14)
(15)N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10, Possession of CDS;
(16)N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, Possessions of Firearms and all subsections;
A.
§ 246-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-1
1:327
CRIMINAL STREET GANG — As defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:33-29.92
GANG LOITERING — Remaining in any one place under circumstances that
would warrant a reasonable person to believe that the purpose or effect
of that behavior is to enable a criminal street gang to establish control
over identifiable areas, to intimidate others from entering such areas, or
to conceal illegal activities of which criminal street gangs engage in daily
causing an extreme danger to the public at large.
PATTERN OF CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY — Two or more acts of criminal
gang activities of which at least two such acts were committed within five
years of each other.
PUBLIC PLACE — The public way and any other location open to the public,
whether publicly or privately owned.
§ 246-2. Enforcement; exceptions.
N.J.S.A. 2C:39-4, Possession of Weapons (Firearms) for Unlawful
Purpose;
(17)
(18)N.J.S.A. 2C:39-13, Unlawful Use of Bulletproof Vest.
All subsections of the statutes listed apply as well as those that were
mentioned specifically.
B.
A. Whenever a police officer observes a member of a criminal street gang
engaged in gang loitering with one or more persons in any public place,
the police officer shall:
(1) Inform all such persons that they are engaged in gang loitering
within an area in which loitering by groups containing criminal
street gang members is prohibited;
(2) Order all such persons to disperse and remove themselves from the
designated area at which the order was issued;
(3) Inform those persons that they will be subject to arrest if they fail
to obey the order promptly or engage in further loitering, within
the next three hours, within the designated place at which the
order was issued.
B. This section shall not apply to persons who are engaged in collective
advocacy activities that are protected by the Constitution of the United
States or the State of New Jersey.
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 246-1 HAMILTON CODE § 246-3
1:328
§ 246-3. Violations and penalties.93
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2 of the Code of the
Township of Hamilton, as same may be amended.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 246-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-3
1:329

ARTICLE II
Gang-Free Zones
[Adopted 12-6-2006 by Ord. No. 06-037 (Ch. 86, § 86-21, of the 1994
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 246-4. Recruitment for criminal street gangs near schools and
parks.
No individual shall solicit or recruit another person to join or actively
participate in a criminal street gang on, or within 2,500 feet of, school
property or any Township park.
§ 246-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRIMINAL STREET GANG — As defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:33-29.94
§ 246-6. Enforcement.
Section 246-4 shall be enforced by the administrative officials of the school
districts and/or school facility where such prohibited activities are
undertaken. The Hamilton Township Police Department shall also have the
authority to enforce § 246-4.
§ 246-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2 of the Code of the
Township of Hamilton, as same may be amended.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 246-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-7
1:331
Chapter 254
GRAFFITI
§ 254-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
FAMILY COURT — The Superior Court of New Jersey, Chancery Division,
Family Part, as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2A:4A-22.
GRAFFITI — Any letters, numbers, word or words, writing, inscription,
symbol, drawing, carving, etching or other marking of any nature
whatsoever which defaces, obliterates, covers, alters, damages, mars or
destroys the real or personal property of another. It shall not include easily
removable chalk markings on the public sidewalk and street in connection
with traditional children's games, such as bases for stickball, handball,
hopscotch and the like, nor temporary, easily removable chalk markings in
connection with any lawful business or public purpose or activity.
MINOR — Any juvenile under 18 years of age as set forth in N.J.S.A.
2A:4A-22.
§ 254-2. Prohibited acts and conduct; parental responsibility.
§ 254-3. Removal.95
Any person owning either real or personal property upon which graffiti has
been placed in violation of this chapter shall remove said graffiti from said
A. No person shall without the prior consent of the owners, purposely or
knowingly place, write, paint, draw, figure, inscribe or mark or cause
any graffiti to be placed upon any public property or the real or
personal property of another.
B. Any parent, guardian or custodian in charge of a minor who is convicted
of violating this chapter who has neglected to properly supervise such
minor shall be presumed to have aided and assisted, allowed and/or
permitted said minor in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
C. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:53A-15 and Chapter 334, Parental
Responsibility, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton, any parent,
guardian or other person having custody of a minor who fails or
neglects to exercise reasonable supervision and control of the conduct
of such minor shall be liable in a civil action for any willful, malicious or
unlawful injury or destruction by such minor of the real or personal
property of another.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 246-7 HAMILTON CODE § 254-3
1:332
property within 90 days of being notified by the Township that graffiti has
been placed on said property. All costs associated with the removal of said
graffiti shall be reimbursed to said property owner through the Township
Municipal Court in accordance with the penalty provisions set forth in
§ 254-5 hereinbelow.
§ 254-4. Prosecution of persons under 18 years of age; action in
court.
§ 254-5. Violations and penalties.
A. If, at the time of the offense charged under this chapter, any person(s)
shall be under the age of 18 years, the Family Court shall have exclusive
jurisdiction of the trial of such minor(s), and such minor(s) shall be
surrendered to the court, and the case, including all papers and process
thereto, shall be transferred to said court as provided in N.J.S.A.
2A:4A-25.
B. The parent, or legal guardian or other person having care and custody
of said minor, shall be summoned or arrested and brought before the
Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township and may be subject to the
penalties provided herein.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter with respect to
defacing or placing graffiti on any public property or private property of
another by any means whatsoever shall be subject to a minimum
mandatory fine of $500 and all of the penalties provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code of the
Township of Hamilton. Each day in which such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. Repeat offenders, as that term in defined
in § 1-2, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in § 1-2.
B. As a condition of sentencing, the Municipal Court shall have the
authority to order that the offender be responsible for cleaning,
repairing, painting or otherwise restoring the damaged property to the
condition it was prior to being damaged, if said property has not
already been restored by the owner in accordance with § 254-3
hereinabove. If the owner of the property has already restored the
property, the Municipal Court shall assess a fine or penalty which shall
be intended to reimburse the owner for the expenses incurred by said
owner to restore the property. The owner shall file a certification setting
forth the amount of said expenses with the Court Administrator. In the
event that the property has not been restored by the owner, and the
offender is unable to clean, repair, paint or otherwise restore the
damaged property to the condition it was prior to being damaged, then
the Municipal Court shall have further authority to order that said
offender make the necessary monetary restitution to restore the
property to its original undamaged condition.96
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 254-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-5
1:333
§ 254-6. Reward.
Upon the written recommendation of the Chief of Police, the Township
Council may authorize the payment of a reward of $200 or up to $500,
to any person who provides information or assistance leading to the
apprehension and conviction of any person violating § 254-2. No reward
shall be paid to any public employee whose duty it is to investigate or
enforce this chapter.
Chapter 260
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental events — See Ch. 206. Fire prevention — See Ch. 228.
C. An exception to Subsections A and B applied in the case of a minor who
shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties imposed on him/her
by the Judge of the Family Court.
§ 254-5 HAMILTON CODE § 254-6
1:334
ARTICLE I
Reimbursement for Expenses
[Adopted 7-6-1995 by Ord. No. 95-033 (Ch. 64 of the 1994 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 260-1. Generally.
Any costs and expenses incurred by the Township and by voluntary
hazardous material response teams (including those who respond through
mutual aid, including, without limitation, fire companies and first aid
squads) shall be borne by the spiller and/or responsible party and/or
releasor of such hazardous materials and/or substances and pollutants
as defined herein and as may be set forth and defined under state law,
including, without limitation, those hazardous substances, chemicals,
pollutants and materials that may be defined in any Act of the state,
including, without limitation, the Spill Compensation and Control Act and
such legislation and regulations that define same and as also provided
under the NFPA Guide of Hazardous Materials; the New Jersey Department
of Transportation Guidebook; the Hazardous Substances List adopted by
the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States pursuant to the
Clean Water Act, the Clean Air Act, the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act and other pollutants and toxins designated by Congress and/or the
EPA and/or NJDEP as well as any hospital or medical waste, any materials
or substances warranting removal or cleanup in the opinion of the Office
of Emergency Management of the Township and/or the County Board of
Health.
§ 260-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have and include the
meanings hereinafter prescribed:
COLLECTING AGENCY — The Township of Hamilton.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional act, action or omission
resulting in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting,
emptying or dumping of any hazardous substances into any waters which
flow within the jurisdiction of this Township or any land within the corporate
limits and/or jurisdiction of the Township.
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any items used to extinguish or prevent any
hazardous material fire, or stop or contain any leak, release or spill
involving any hazardous material which cannot be reused or cannot be
replenished without cost after that particular incident. These expendable
items include, but are not limited to, firefighting foam, chemical
extinguishing agents, absorbent materials, sand recovery drums and any
protective equipment and clothing to include, but not restricted to, chemical
protective suits, chemical protective gloves, goggles and any other items
owned or controlled by the Township and/or any public-related full-time or
voluntary response team.
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-2
1:335
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, solid, liquid or gas, listed as
such under the NFPA Guidebook of Hazardous Materials, the list of
hazardous substances adopted by the Federal Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), pursuant to § 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Amendment of 1972, as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977, and
as amended and supplemented and the list of toxic pollutants designated
by Congress or the EPA, pursuant to § 307 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act and any hospital or medical waste, including, but not limited
to, syringes, bandages and discarded pharmaceutical products, and any
material warranting removal or cleanup in the opinion of the Township
Division of Police.
TOWNSHIP — Includes the Hamilton Township employees, agents, officers,
officials and supporting units as directed by the Hamilton Township Division
of Police.
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment, registered or unregistered,
including, but not limited to, a passenger car, motorcycle, truck, tractortrailer,
tank truck, construction equipment, farm machinery, watercraft,
aircraft and trains.
VESSEL — Any container, drum, box cylinder or tank used to hold or contain
or carry or store any hazardous materials, whether or not said container
was manufactured for the containment of a hazardous material.
§ 260-3. Purpose.
§ 260-4. Discharge of hazardous materials and substances;
reporting; removal.
A. Without limitation, this article provides for the reimbursement of any
and all equipment utilized by the Township and other as defined for
costs expended without regard to ownership for the purposes of
mitigating, controlling or containing any incident in which a hazardous
material is involved in a fire, leak, release or spill, or where the
potential thereof exists, or for the prevention of same; also for the
reimbursement for the expenses incurred by the Township for the
wages (regular and overtime) paid to its employees, agents or servants
as a result of any incident involving a hazardous material fire, leak,
release or spill of a hazardous material and for the costs incurred by
agents, servants and employees of the Township and others as
defined.97
B. This article also provides for penalties and, as indicated aforesaid,
provides for the repayment and collection of all expenses incurred by
voluntary hazardous material response teams, including those who
respond through mutual aid such as fire companies and first aid squads.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 260-2 HAMILTON CODE § 260-4
1:336
§ 260-5. Parties responsible.
Reimbursement to the Township and voluntary hazardous material response
teams and others as hereinbefore indicated shall be made by the owner or
operator of the vehicle responsible for the hazardous material, fire, leak
or spill of hazardous material; by the owner or person responsible for the
vessel containing the hazardous material involved in such fire, leak or spill
on public or private property, whether stationary or in transit, and whether
accidental or through negligence; by the owner or person responsible for
any property from which any leak or spill of hazardous material emanates,
whether accidental or through negligence; and by the person responsible
for the hazardous material fire, leak or spill of hazardous material on public
or private property whether accidental or through negligence. They are also
to be deemed to be strictly liable for same.
§ 260-6. Reimbursement for services of recovery company, towing
company or technical assistance.
Any person and/or entity causing any hazardous material fire, leak, spill
or release involving a hazardous material and substance must provide for
services rendered by any recovery company, towing company or any other
technical assistance called for by the Township to handle such incident. In
the event of a vehicle having been responsible for an incident, such vehicle
shall be impounded until such time as it has been deemed safe to proceed by
the responsible official in conjunction and in cooperation with the Township
and state police and until such time as arrangements have been made to
A. The discharge of hazardous substances and materials is prohibited.
This section shall not apply to discharge of hazardous substances
pursuant to and in full authorized compliance with the conditions of a
federal or state permit.
B. Any person and/or entity who may be subject to liability for a discharge
or become aware of a discharge which occurred prior to or after the
effective dates of this chapter shall immediately notify the Township
Division of Police.
C. Whenever any hazardous substance is discharged, the Township may in
its discretion act to remove or arrange for the removal of such
discharge.
D. Any person and/or entity who has discharged a hazardous material and/
or substance or who has failed to report a discharge or who is in any
way responsible for any hazardous substance and material which has
been or shall be removed by the Township shall be strictly liable, jointly
and severally, without regard to fault for all cleanup and removal costs
and shall be liable for the wages (regular and overtime) paid and the
costs of medical and hospital treatment for injuries and diseases
incurred by the agents, servants and employees of the Township and/or
others as defined herein.
§ 260-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-6
1:337
reimburse the Township and the towing company for their expenditures
under the terms of this article.
§ 260-7. Period of payment.
Any person and/or entity responsible for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous
materials shall reimburse the Township the full price of expendable items
and costs used to extinguish such fire, or to stop or contain such leak,
or to control such spill and for all costs and expenses set forth in this
article within 45 days after receipt of a bill therefor. The collecting agency
shall utilize its best efforts to collect costs hereunder and shall reimburse
its agents or the local units of amounts collected. In the event that the
collecting agency is not able to collect said costs or only a portion thereof,
the collecting agency shall not be responsible to its agents or the local units
for the full amount of same.
§ 260-8. Violations and penalties.
A. The Township may seek such remedies in any court as it may determine
in its discretion.
B. Any person, corporation, entity and/or others violating any provisions of
this article and any person, corporation or entity or others responsible
for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous materials or substances who fail
to reimburse the Township and others as provided herein within the
time required shall be liable and subject to a penalty and/or fine for
each violation and each offense in accordance with Chapter 1, General
Provisions, § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code of the Township of
Hamilton.98
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 260-6 HAMILTON CODE § 260-8
1:338
Chapter 268
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit or abandoned buildings — See Ch. 146.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 167.
Fees — See Ch. 215.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 228.
Nuisances — See Ch. 317.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 362.
Solid waste — See Ch. 420.
§ 268-1. Definitions. [Amended 5-6-2009 by Ord. No. 09-011]
A. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is incidental
to that of the main building, and which is attached thereto or located
on the same premises.
APPROVED — As applied to a material, device or method of
construction, approved by the Construction Official under the
provisions of this chapter or approved by other authority designated by
law to give approval in the matter in question.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building located partly underground
but having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height
above the average grade of the adjoining ground.
BATHROOM — A room which has a floor area, including fixtures, of at
least 35 square feet and which contains a minimum of one flush water
closet, one washbasin and one bathtub or shower stall.
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any private dwelling or dwelling unit where the
owner, tenant or operator thereof is engaged in keeping one or more
roomers or boarders who are not husband or wife, son or daughter,
mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner, tenant or operator,
or of the spouse of the owner, tenant or operator, and in serving food to
some or all of such lodgers, for a part of a day or longer period, under
expressed contract or rate of payment.
BUILDING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, used for human
habitation, use or occupancy and shall include any accessory buildings
and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
BUILDING CODE — The building code officially adopted or authorized
by the state legislature for the regulation of construction, alteration,
additions or repairs.99
§ 260-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-1
1:339
CELLAR — That portion of a building located partly or wholly
underground and having more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CHIEF HOUSING INSPECTOR — The official designated herein or
otherwise charged with the responsibilities of administering this
chapter, or his/her authorized representative.[Added 12-18-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-068]
DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended
to be used for toilet and bathing needs and for living, sleeping and
cooking by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT, APARTMENT, FLAT AND LIVING UNIT, AND OTHER
SIMILAR DESIGNATIONS — Any room or group of rooms located
within a dwelling or building and forming a single habitable unit for one
or more persons for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking and toilet
and bathing needs.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS — The open space on the premises and
on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such
premises.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing
or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by
poison, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest
elimination methods.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a
nonprofit single housekeeping unit living together as a stable living
unit under a common housekeeping management plan based on an
intentionally structured relationship which contemplates permanency
and provides organization and structure.[Amended 7-18-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-029]
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total of all habitable space in a building or
structure.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space arranged for
living, eating and sleeping purposes, not including kitchen, kitchenette,
living room, dining room, bathroom, water closet compartment,
laundries, pantries, foyers, hallways and other accessory floor space.
HOTEL — A building arranged or used for sheltering, sleeping or
feeding more than 20 individuals for compensation.
HOUSING INSPECTOR — A legally designated Housing Inspector of
the Township as provided for in provisions of Chapter 5, Administration
of Government, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton pertaining to
99.Editor's Note: See Ch. 167, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 268-1 HAMILTON CODE § 268-1
1:340
the Department of Community Planning and Compliance or any other
duly authorized officer of the Department of Community Planning and
Compliance.
INFESTATION — The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests.
LANDLORD — The legal entity listed upon the title as it appears in the
public records after the deed is properly recorded.
LANDLORD LICENSE — A license issued by the Township of Hamilton
authorizing the license holder to maintain, operate, or otherwise
conduct the business of landlord in the Township of Hamilton.
MULTIPLE DWELLING and APARTMENT HOUSE — Any dwelling
containing more than two dwelling units.
OCCUPANT — Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a building
or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
OPENABLE AREA — That part of a window or door which is available
for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
OWNER'S AGENT — An agent for service of process, but not a real
estate agent unless specifically stated.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association,
partnership or other entity.
PLUMBING — Includes all of the following supplied piping, facilities
and equipment: the house sewer from the septic tank, cesspool, curb
or property line to the building foundation; the water service from the
curb or property line to the building foundation, or from the well to the
building foundation; the system of soil, vent and waste pipes from their
connection at the foundation to the house sewer, to their connections
to the various plumbing fixtures and to their termination through the
roof; all hot water and cold water lines in the dwelling or building; every
Shall have legal title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, hotel, motel,
rooming house, rooming unit or boardinghouse, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or
(1)
Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit,
hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or boardinghouse as
owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of
the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner
shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter and the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the same extent
as if he were the owner.
(2)
§ 268-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-1
1:341
plumbing fixture, trap, floor drain or any fixture directly or indirectly
connected to the plumbing system; the gas piping from the gas meter
to the connections to the various gas appliances; and any other similar
supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas
lines.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT ACTION PLAN ("PMAP") — A plan
developed between the Mayor or his designee and the landlord to
ensure compliance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws.
RENTAL UNIT — Any residential dwelling unit occupied by persons
other than the landlord and for which rent is paid to the landlord
thereof, including individual units in all types of dwellings defined in
this section, including boardinghouses, lodging houses, tourist houses,
habitable rooms, multifamily apartment houses, residence buildings
and rooming houses.
RESIDENCE BUILDINGS — A building in which sleeping
accommodations and cooking facilities, as a unit, are provided, except
when classified as an institution under the building code.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling or part of any dwelling containing
one or more rooming units in which space is let by the operator to one
or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother
or father, or sister or brother of the owner, tenant or operator, or of the
spouse of the owner, tenant or operator.
ROOMING UNIT — A room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping and
having a private bathroom or the use of a common bathroom with
other rooming units in the same building, within the meaning of this
chapter, but such rooming units shall not be used for cooking or eating
purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste material,
including boxes, barrels, sticks, stones, bricks, bottles, cans, metal
drums, iron pipe, old sheet metal, old furniture, unused motor vehicles
and boats, auto parts, tires, unused bicycles and bicycle parts, filth,
junk, trash, debris, old lumber or firewood, unless such lumber or
firewood is neatly stacked or piled on supports or a platform at least
eight inches above the ground. It shall also include weeds or grass that
have attained a growth of more than 10 inches in height. It shall also
include diverse or sundry articles which the Housing Inspector, in his
judgment, shall declare to be rubbish.
STUDIO APARTMENT — A zero-bedroom apartment consisting of a
main room, kitchenette and bathroom.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of
the owner or operator.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing two independent
dwelling units.
§ 268-1 HAMILTON CODE § 268-1
1:342
§ 268-2. Inspections generally; access to premises. [Amended
5-6-2009 by Ord. No. 09-011]
VENTILATION — The process of supplying and removing air by natural
or mechanical means to or from any space.
WORKMANLIKE — Whenever the words "workmanlike state of
maintenance and repair" are used in this chapter, they shall mean that
such maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful
manner.
YARD — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building
extending along the entire length of a street, or rear or interior lot line.
B. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "flat," "semidetached
house," "row house," "apartments," "living unit," "rooming house,"
"hotel," "motel," "rooming unit," "boardinghouse" and "premises" are
used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were
followed by the words "or any part thereof."
C. Terms defined in building code. Where terms are not defined in this
section and are defined in the building code, they shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the building code.
A. The Director of Community Planning and Compliance is hereby directed
to make inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling
units, hotels, motels, rooming units, boardinghouses and premises
located in the Township in order that he may perform his duty of
safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of
the general public. For the purpose of making such inspections, the
Director of Community Planning and Compliance is hereby authorized
to enter, examine, inspect and survey, at any time deemed necessary by
him, all dwellings, dwelling units, hotels, motels, rooming units,
boardinghouses and premises. The owner or occupant of every
dwelling, dwelling unit, hotel, motel, rooming unit, boardinghouse or its
premises, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Director or his
agent free access at all reasonable times for the purpose of making
such inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling,
dwelling unit, hotel, motel or rooming unit shall give the owner thereof
or his agent or employee access to any dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit, or its premises, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of
making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances in
force in the Township or of state statutes pertaining to health.
B. No inspection of any dwelling or premises shall include an inspection of
any swimming pool or any other artificial structure meant to contain
water for swimming unless such structure shall exist entirely within the
confines of the foundation of a dwelling.
C. Interference with inspection. No person shall refuse entrance to or
impede an inspector or officer authorized under this chapter in the
§ 268-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-2
1:343
§ 268-3. Inspection prior to change in occupancy; certificate of
approval. [Amended 6-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-040; 5-6-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-011; 12-1-2010 by Ord. No. 10-039]
performance of his/her duties. If any owner, occupant or other person
in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit or a multifamily
or rooming house subject to the provisions of this chapter refuses,
impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts or obstructs entry and free
access to any part of the structure or premises where inspection
authorized by this chapter is sought, such person shall be in violation of
this chapter and subject to the penalties hereunder.
D. Search warrant. The Chief Housing Inspector may, upon affidavit, apply
to the Municipal Judge of the Township for a search warrant setting
forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a
reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this
chapter exists on the premises. If the Municipal Judge is satisfied as to
the matter set forth in the affidavit, (s)he shall authorize the issuance of
a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the
premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist. [Amended
12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068]
A. Prior to any change in occupancy of any house, hotel, dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming house, rooming unit, boardinghouse, motel, apartment
unit or premises which is used, partially used or intended to be used for
human occupancy, a certificate of approval shall first have been
obtained from the office of Housing Inspections, stating that the
building and premises comply with the requirements of the Township
ordinances. In the case of a hotel or motel, this section shall only apply
in those cases involving permanent, rather than transient, residence.
[Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068]
B. An inspection shall be obtained either by the owner or the owner's
agent prior to a change in occupancy and shall be performed by the
Office of Housing Inspections for the purpose of determining if a
certificate of approval may be issued. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-068]
C. Inspections pursuant to Subsection B of this section shall be conducted
using the following criteria:
(1) All violations of Township ordinances shall be reflected in the
inspection report in order to provide notice to the owner or
prospective owner or occupant of such violations.
(2) A violation of the plumbing code which poses a positive or obvious
major threat to the health, safety or welfare of any potential
occupancy, a violation of the electrical code which poses a positive
or obvious major threat to the health, safety or welfare of any
potential occupancy, or any other condition which poses a positive
or obvious threat to the health, safety or welfare of any potential
§ 268-2 HAMILTON CODE § 268-3
1:344
occupancy shall be deemed a major violation of the housing code
and shall be designated to the owner, potential owner or occupant
separately on the inspection report.
(3) For any property sold or transferred where the existing sidewalks
are in need of repair or replacement as solely determined by the
Chief Housing Inspector, the sidewalks shall be repaired or
replaced to the satisfaction of the Chief Housing Inspector prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. [Added 7-19-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-024; amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068]
D. Violations of the kind described in Subsection C(2) of this section must
be corrected by the owner of the unit before the issuance of a certificate
of approval for occupancy. The responsibility for correction of a
violation of the housing code which is not a major violation may, except
in the case of a rental, be assumed by the buyer, with the written
notification and approval of the seller, buyer and the Chief Housing
Inspector. At the time of such assumption of responsibility, a conditional
certificate of approval may be issued, and the violations shall be
corrected by the buyer within 30 days of the date of issuance of the
conditional certificate of approval for occupancy. The Director of
Community Planning and Compliance may grant an extension not
exceeding 30 days for just cause. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No.
18-068]
E. An unconditional certificate of approval shall be issued by the Office of
Housing Inspections at such time as the Chief Housing Inspector and
his/her designee is satisfied that all violations have been corrected.
[Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068]
F. The completed certificate of approval shall contain the names of both
the seller or landlord and the buyer or tenant. One copy of the
completed certificate of approval as provided by the Township shall
remain each with the seller or landlord and the buyer or tenant.
G. In the case of a rental, the landlord shall ensure that the tenant shall
sign a tenant's receipt as provided by the Township upon receiving the
tenant's copy of the certificate of approval. The landlord shall then,
within 10 days, upon securing the tenant's signature, forward the
signed tenant's receipt to the Chief Housing Inspector. [Amended
12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068]
H. A certificate of approval for occupancy is valid for the authorization of
occupancy for a period of 90 days after issuance. The Director of
Community Planning and Compliance may authorize extensions of 30
days only upon presentment of sufficient proof that the extension is
necessary due to unforeseeable circumstances beyond the control of
parties involved.
I. The purpose of this section is to continue to ensure compliance with the
various Township ordinances and the housing code in order to maintain
§ 268-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-3
1:345
§ 268-4. Inspection fees; change of occupancy. [Amended 3-20-2002
by Ord. No. 02-009; 6-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-040; 5-6-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-011; 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
§ 268-5. Information to be provided to tenants. [Amended 5-6-2009
by Ord. No. 09-011]
high standards of housing both for homeowners and apartment
dwellers within the Township. However, the Township, by this section,
is not acting as a guarantor of any property insofar as any potential
owner or occupant is concerned, nor shall the Township be considered
to be involved in any manner in the contractual relationships between
the parties.
J. Requirements for resale of residential property with potable well and
individual sewage disposal systems: [Amended 10-1-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-040]
(1) Contact a certified laboratory for sample collection and have the
water tested for parameters set forth in accordance with the
Private Well Testing Act regulations (N.J.A.C. 7:9E). Total coliform
results are good for six months. All other required parameters are
good for one year. [Amended 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-058]
(2) Contact a licensed septic contractor or home inspection service to
perform an inspection of the individual sewage disposal system.
The inspection report shall indicate the system is functioning
properly. Results are only valid for a period of nine months.
A. For each initial inspection and one reinspection for all unit types,
except Township registered rental units, the fee shall be as set forth in
Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.
B. For each additional reinspection beyond the first reinspection in all unit
types, except Township registered rental units, the fee shall be as set
forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.
C. For Township registered rental units, the fee for the initial inspections
shall be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.
D. For each additional reinspection of Township registered rental units,
the fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.
E. For each smoke detector, sewer or multifamily certification inspection,
the fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.
F. Should an inspector arrive for a scheduled inspection and no adult is
present to grant access, the full amount of the inspection fee shall be
charged and the landlord/owner will be required to reschedule the
inspection at a fee of as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township
Code.
§ 268-3 HAMILTON CODE § 268-5
1:346
§ 268-6. Notice of violation; summons.
A. Notice on lease form. Every owner and operator of a rental unit,
multiple dwelling or apartment house containing two or more dwelling
units shall be responsible for ensuring that the following notice is
printed, stamped, typed or otherwise permanently provided on all
copies of any lease form or certificate of approval presented to the
tenant for his review and signature:
Township regulations require that all apartment units be inspected
whenever there is a change of occupant. A copy of the certificate of
approval must be presented to the new tenant. In addition, a summary
of tenant's rights and responsibilities is available at (location) for
inspection by the public (when available).
B. Office sign.
(1) Every owner and operator of a rental unit, multiple dwelling or
apartment house containing two or more dwelling units shall be
responsible for ensuring that the following or a similar notice,
printed on a sign provided by the Township, is posted in a
conspicuous place or in the owner's or agent's onsite office:
Township regulations require that all rental units be inspected
whenever there is a change of occupant. A copy of the certificate
of approval must be presented to the new tenant. In addition,
a summary of tenants' rights and responsibilities is available at
(location) for inspection by the public (when available).
(2) Signs bearing this notice shall be provided by the Office of Housing
Inspections for a reasonable fee. Substitutes may be used only if
they are an exact likeness. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No.
18-068]
C. Landlord-tenant guide. Every owner and operator of a multiple dwelling
or apartment house containing two or more dwelling units shall be
responsible for ensuring that copies of a booklet entitled "A Guide to
the Landlord-Tenant Relationship" are purchased and made available at
a location and times which allow reasonable opportunity for inspection
by tenants, with the location and times to be written in the spaces
provided on the signs described in Subsections A and B of this section.
The minimum number of copies required is two copies, plus one copy
for each 50 units above the first 50 units owned. Copies of the booklet
are available for a fee through the following address: Division of
Housing and Urban Renewal, New Jersey State Department of
Community Affairs, 363 West State Street, Trenton, New Jersey 08625.
A. Notice of violation.
(1) Whenever the Director of Community Planning and Compliance or
the Chief Housing Inspector determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of § 268-3, notice
§ 268-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-6
1:347
of the alleged violation shall be given to the owner, owner's agent
or occupant. Such notice shall: [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-068]
(a) Put in writing the various violations and section and subsection
violated.
(b) Be served personally on the owner, owner's agent or occupant,
or be sent by registered mail to the last known address of the
owner, owner's agent or occupant, or a copy thereof shall be
posted on the building where the violations occur, or such
notice shall be served by any other method authorized under
the laws of the state.
(2) Whenever the Director of Community Planning and Compliance or
the Chief Housing Inspector determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision
other than § 268-3 or any other rule or regulation, notice of the
alleged violation shall be given to the owner, owner's agent or
occupant responsible, as provided. Such notice shall: [Amended
12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068]
(a) Put in writing the various violations and section and subsection
violated.
(b) Allow a reasonable time to abate or correct such violations, not
to exceed 30 days from the date of notice.
(c) Be served personally on the owner, owner's agent or occupant,
or be sent by registered mail to the last known address of the
owner, owner's agent or occupant, or a copy thereof shall be
posted on the building where the violations occur, or such
notice shall be served by any other method authorized under
the laws of the state.
B. Summons.
(1) Whenever the Director of Community Planning and Compliance or
the Chief Housing Inspector determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of § 268-3, the
Chief Housing Inspector or his/her designee shall summon the
owner or the owner's agent or the occupant before the Municipal
Court of the Township or any other court having jurisdiction.
[Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068]
(2) At the expiration of the time given to abate a nuisance or correct a
condition set forth in any notice of violation of this chapter except a
violation of § 268-3, where a reasonable effort, at the discretion of
the Chief Housing Inspector has not been made by the owner, the
owner's agent or the occupant to correct the violations
enumerated, the Chief Housing Inspector or his/her designee shall
summon the owner or the owner's agent or the occupant before the
§ 268-6 HAMILTON CODE § 268-6
1:348
§ 268-7. Emergency orders.
Whenever the Housing inspector finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without
written notice or hearing, issue a verbal order reciting the existence of
such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Any person to whom such an order is
directed shall comply therewith immediately.
§ 268-8. General maintenance requirements. [Amended 6-18-2008
by Ord. No. 08-040; 5-6-2009 by Ord. No. 09-011]
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling, hotel, motel, rooming house or boardinghouse for the purpose
of living therein which does not comply with the following requirements:
Municipal Court of the Township or any other court having
jurisdiction. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068]
(3) Enforcement authority. Inspectors under the authority of the
Director of Community Planning and Compliance and/or the Health
Officer shall have the authority to issue a notice of violation or
summons for any violations found under any section in this chapter.
The Hamilton Township Police Division is also authorized herein to
issue appropriate summonses. [Added 2-18-2014 by Ord. No.
14-008; amended 4-1-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017]
A. Foundation. Every foundation shall adequately support the building at
all points and shall be free of breaks, holes or cracks which make the
building unsafe to occupy or which admit rain, cold air, dampness,
rodents, insects or vermin.
B. Outside walls. The outside building walls shall not have any holes or
loose boards or any broken, cracked or damaged finish which admits
rain, cold air, dampness, rodents, insects or vermin.
C. Doors and windows. Every exterior door, window and cellar or
basement entrance shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight and
rodentproof and shall open and close easily, and their locks, hinges,
pulleys and hardware shall be kept in good repair.
D. Interior walls. All interior walls and ceilings shall be so constructed and
maintained that there shall not be any cracks, voids or holes which shall
provide a harborage for insects or vermin.
E. Roof and gutters. Every roof, roof gutter, flashing, rain conductor and
roof cornice shall be weathertight and raintight and shall be kept in
good repair.
F. Exterior wood surfaces. All exterior wood surfaces shall be reasonably
protected against the elements and against decay by paint or other
approved protective coating applied in a workmanlike fashion.
§ 268-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-8
1:349
§ 268-9. Space, use and location requirements. [Amended 5-6-2009
by Ord. No. 09-011]
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy, for the purpose of
living therein, any dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply with the
following requirements:
G. Floors. The floor of every room and porch and every inside and outside
stair and their supports, and every appurtenance thereto, shall be so
constructed and maintained as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon,
and shall be kept in good repair and sound condition.
H. Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors. There shall be smoke
detectors and carbon monoxide detectors sufficient in numbers to
comply with the requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code, as amended.
I. Stairs, porches and railing. Stairs and other exit facilities shall be
adequate for safety as provided in the construction code, and shall
comply with the following requirements:
(1) Structural safety. Every outside stair, every porch and every
appurtenance attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe
to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected,
as required by the construction code, and shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair.
(2) Handrails. Every flight of stairs which is more than four risers high
shall have handrails, which shall be located as required by the
construction code. Every porch which is more than 36 inches in
height high shall have guardrails located and of a design required
by the construction code. Every handrail and balustrade shall be
firmly fastened and shall be maintained in good condition.
[Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068]
J. Free from dampness. In every dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming house and rooming unit, cellars, basements and crawl
space shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent
conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure, as
required by the construction code.
K. Structural members. The supporting structural members of every
dwelling and multifamily dwelling used for human habitation shall be
maintained structurally sound, showing no evidence of deterioration
which would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads, in
accordance with the provisions of the construction code.
A. Occupancy of cellars. Occupancy of cellars for dwelling purposes is
prohibited.
§ 268-8 HAMILTON CODE § 268-9
1:350
§ 268-10. Light and ventilation.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does
not comply with the following requirements:
B. Minimum floor space. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall contain at
least 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at
least 150 square feet of additional floor space for every additional
occupant thereof, with the floor space to be calculated on the basis of
total habitable room area. The kitchen, bathroom, shed and porch are
not to be included in total habitable area.
(1) Required space in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit of two or
more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes of one
occupant shall contain at least 90 square feet of floor space, and
every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for
each occupant thereof.
(2) Separation of sleeping rooms. Each room occupied for sleeping
purposes shall be separated from all other rooms by doors that
afford privacy. This provision shall not apply to studio apartments.
(3) Occupancy of dwelling units below grade. No cellar space shall be
used as a habitable room or dwelling unit.
C. Basement space. No basement space shall be used as a habitable room
or dwelling unit unless:
(1) Floors and walls are weathertight.
(2) Total window area, total open area and ceiling height are in
accordance with this subsection.
(3) Required window area of every habitable room shall be entirely
above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area.
D. Minimum air space. Every dwelling and dwelling unit, hotel, motel,
rooming house and boardinghouse shall provide at least 450 cubic feet
of air space for each adult for sleeping purposes. Children shall have at
least 350 cubic feet of air space for sleeping purposes. The cubic feet of
air space is calculated in the room in which persons sleep and not the
total habitable area.
E. Use for business purposes. The habitable area of every dwelling and
dwelling unit shall not be used for business or commercial purposes,
and, if so used, that area used for business or commercial purposes
shall be subtracted and shall not be included in the total habitable area.
A. Required window area. Every habitable room shall have at least one
window facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window
area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of
§ 268-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-10
1:351
§ 268-11. Disposal of garbage and trash; outside maintenance;
parking of vehicles.
the floor area of such room. Whenever the only window in a room
is a skylight-type window in the top of such room, the total window
area of such skylight shall equal at least 15% of the total floor area of
such room. Skylight-type windows existing on the effective date of this
chapter may, if less than 15% of the total floor area, be increased to
15%, but no skylight-type window shall be installed in lieu of a window
where a skylight has not previously existed.
B. Ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or
skylight which can easily be opened, or such other device as will
adequately ventilate the room. The total of openable window area in
every habitable room shall be equal to at least 50% of the minimum
window area size or minimum skylight-type window size as mentioned
in Subsection A of this section, except where there is supplied some
other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the
Housing Inspector.
A. All garbage kept on the outside of any building subject to this chapter
shall be kept in flytight, covered metal garbage containers.
B. All garbage shall be drained of its moisture and properly wrapped in
heavy paper before such garbage is placed outside. Garbage shall be
placed at the curb the morning of garbage pickup. Ashes, bottles, cans
and rubbish must be placed at the curb in boxes, baskets, cans or other
receptacles easily handled by the garbageman.
C. The front, side and back yards and the driveway, walks or other parts of
the outside premises of any building, or on any lot on which no building
is located, shall not contain any boxes, barrels, sticks, stones, bricks,
bottles, cans, metal drums, iron pipe, old sheet metal, old furniture,
unused motor vehicles and boats, auto parts, old tires, unused bicycles
or parts, filth, junk, rubbish, trash, debris, old lumber or firewood,
unless such lumber or firewood is neatly stacked or piled on supports at
least eight inches above the ground; nor shall the grass or weeds on
such premises be allowed to attain a growth of more than 10 inches.
Shrubs and flowering woody plants shall be kept under control and not
be allowed to grow beyond the boundaries of the premises on which a
building is located. Various and sundry shacks and outbuildings,
including toolhouses, storage sheds and garages, shall be repaired or
improved so that they shall be aesthetically acceptable or shall be
demolished.
D. The front, side, and back yards of any lot containing any building shall
not contain motor vehicles, except in a driveway or parking area as
defined in § 550-7. Such driveways or parking areas are to be designed
and constructed pursuant to § 550-119 and maintained in a clean,
orderly and dustfree condition. [Amended 5-3-2016 by Ord. No.
16-017]
§ 268-10 HAMILTON CODE § 268-11
1:352
§ 268-12. Plumbing standards. [Amended 5-6-2009 by Ord. No.
09-011]
E. Every fence which wholly or partially encloses premises on which a
building is located must be maintained in a manner that is aesthetically
acceptable and shall not have broken posts or broken supporting
members or have holes or voids in such fence.
A. Every dwelling used or occupied to house individual families living
separately for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, eating, bathing
and defecating must comply with the following supplied requirements:
a kitchen sink, flush water closet, washbasin, and bathtub or shower
stall. Every kitchen sink, washbasin, bathtub or shower shall be
properly connected with supplied water heating facilities which are
capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an
adequate amount of water drawn to each fixture at a temperature of not
less than 120° F. Families or individuals living separately in the same
dwelling or building cannot share the same bathroom, nor can they
share the use of a kitchen.
(1) Plumbing facilities. In buildings and structures used for human
habitation, water lines, plumbing fixtures, vents, drains, plumbing
stacks, waste and sewer lines shall be properly installed, connected
and maintained in working order and shall be kept free from
obstructions, leaks and defects to prevent structural deterioration
and health hazards and capable of performing the function for
which they are designed. All repairs and installations shall be made
in accordance with the provisions of the construction code or
plumbing code.
B. Bathroom requirements in hotels, rooming houses and boardinghouses
are as follows:
(1) In every hotel, rooming house and boardinghouse where separate
bathroom accommodations are not supplied for each room or suite,
separate bathroom accommodations shall be provided for each sex
as follows: one water closet, one washbasin and one bathtub or
shower stall for each five persons or fraction thereof who room or
board therein.
(2) In hotels, rooming houses and boardinghouses where separate
bathrooms are provided for each sex, the door openings to each
bathroom shall be placed as to afford privacy and shall be plainly
marked for male and female usage.
(3) Bathrooms in hotels, rooming houses and boardinghouses shall be
located so as to be accessible from a common hall or passageway to
persons using the facilities. Such hall or passageway shall be
directly accessible from a roomer's or boarder's rooming unit and
not through any other rooming unit.
§ 268-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-12
1:353
§ 268-13. Heating standards.
(4) Where rooming units are provided on more than one floor, separate
bathrooms must be provided for each sex on each floor, except in a
rooming house or boardinghouse operated and inhabited by the
owner. Such an establishment which has rooming units on more
than one floor may have one bathroom in the building for both
sexes if the total combined number of occupants, including both the
owner's family and roomers, male and female, adults and children,
does not exceed five. Where the combined number of occupants
exceeds five, the bathroom facilities for the roomers shall comply
with Subsection B(1) through (3) of this section.
C. All water closets must flush easily and completely discharge the waste
matter in a single operation. All plumbing fixtures must function
perfectly at all times. The finish of toilet seats must not be chipped or
cracked and shall have a smooth finish. Water closets shall be set after
the finished floor is laid. There shall not be any leaking faucets, leaking
or clogged traps, clogged drains, broken handles on fixtures, or
anything that would cause any part of the plumbing system or fixtures
to be unsanitary, inconvenient to use or in any way detrimental to the
health of the individual. The plumbing fixtures and floors, walls and
ceilings in bathrooms and kitchens must be kept in a sanitary condition
at all times.
D. All plumbing installed in dwellings, hotels, motels, rooming houses or
boardinghouses shall conform to this chapter and the state plumbing
subcode.
E. Plumbing fixtures and other facilities and their uses in kitchens of
hotels and boardinghouses shall conform to the restaurant
requirements of the State Plumbing Subcode and Chapter 12 of the
State Sanitary Code.
F. Owners of buildings located beyond the public sewer system that are
used for human habitation and which do not have installed therein a
water closet, washbasin, and bathtub or shower shall, before such
plumbing facilities and the individual sewage disposal system
connected therewith shall be installed, cause to be obtained a
percolation test of the soil in the area of the proposed sewage disposal
system. The installation of the sewage disposal system shall comply
with the Township individual sewage disposal system code.
A. It shall be the duty of every person who shall contract, undertake or
agree or who shall have contracted, undertaken or agreed, orally or in
writing, to heat or to furnish heat for any building within the Township
occupied as a residence by two or more families to furnish sufficient
heat to any occupied part of such building so as to maintain, at all times
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., a minimum temperature
of 68° F. and, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., a
minimum temperature of 65° F. The supply of heat required in this
§ 268-12 HAMILTON CODE § 268-13
1:354
§ 268-14. Electrical standards. [Amended 6-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-040; 10-3-2012 by Ord. No. 12-047]
section shall be furnished for or to all buildings or parts thereof used
for business or living purposes from October 1 in each year to May
1 of the succeeding year and on all other days of the year when
the outside temperature falls below 55° F. for any twenty-four-hour
period, provided that the requirement of this section shall not apply
to buildings or parts thereof used for any trade or business in which
high or low temperatures are essential. The term "contracted," as used
in this section, shall be construed to mean and include any written
or implied contract, lease or letting, and the presence of any heating
outlets, radiators, risers or returns in any hall, room or other part of
a building shall be prima facie evidence of an implied contract. The
presence of any central heating plant, furnace or boiler under the
control of the owner, lessee or person in charge of the building shall
also be prima facie evidence of an implied contract.
B. Every dwelling, hotel, motel, rooming house and boardinghouse which
has a central heating system shall keep it in good repair, and the
heating system shall not have any leaks in the heater furnace, boiler,
smoke pipes, flues, pipe fittings, valves or other appurtenance of the
system and shall be kept in such condition so that all habitable rooms
can safely and adequately be maintained at a temperature of 65° F.
under average winter conditions.
C. Every dwelling, hotel, motel, rooming house and boardinghouse shall
have a tight masonry chimney lined with fire clay or a chimney of other
approved noncombustible material properly constructed and supported
so as to avoid overheating adjacent combustible elements.
D. Every dwelling, hotel, motel, rooming house or boardinghouse shall be
prohibited from using a room heater, heating stove, space heater or
tank water heater designed for the use of kerosene, gasoline, oil, gas,
wood, coke, charcoal or coal as a fuel, unless it has a direct smoke pipe
or flue connection to a properly constructed chimney capable of
carrying all the products of combustion to the outer air.
E. Every hotel, motel, rooming house and boardinghouse shall comply
with Subsection A of this section as to the temperature to be kept and
the hours it is to be maintained, for all rooms occupied or used by
roomers, lodgers and boarders.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this code is to provide requirements for
evaluating installed electrical systems within and associated with
existing dwellings to identify safety, fire and shock hazards, such as
improper installations, overheating, physical deterioration, abuse and
similar conditions. This code provides criteria that enable the
identification of hazardous conditions that are evident during a visual
inspection of an existing dwelling. It is not intended that inspections in
accordance with this code will identify future conditions, such as failure
§ 268-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-14
1:355
of components or other portions of equipment or wiring. This code does
not cover the inspection of new construction, or the factory installed
internal wiring and construction of appliances and utilization of
equipment.
B. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACCESSIBLE (AS APPLIED TO WIRING METHODS) — Capable of
being removed or exposed without damaging the building, the building
structure or finish, or not permanently closed in by the structure or
finish of the building.
APPLIANCE — Utilization equipment, generally other than industrial,
normally built in standardized sizes or types that are installed or
connected as a unit to perform one or more functions, such as clothes
washing and air conditioning.
APPROVED — Acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction.
ARC-FAULT CIRCUIT INTERRUPTER — A device intended to provide
protection from the effects of arc-faults by recognizing characteristics
unique to arcing and by functioning to de-energize the circuit when an
arc-fault is detected.
BONDING — The permanent joining of metallic parts to form an
electrically conductive path that assures electrical continuity, and the
capacity to conduct safely any current likely to be imposed.
BRANCH CIRCUIT — The circuit conductors between the final over
current device protecting the circuit and the outlet(s).
CODE — A standard that is an extensive compilation of provisions
on a broad subject matter or that is suitable for adoption into law
independently of other codes and standards.
CONCEALED — Rendered inaccessible by the structure or finish of the
building. Wires in concealed raceways are considered concealed, even
though they may become accessible by withdrawing them.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms for the use of one or more
persons as a house keeping unit with space for eating, living, sleeping
and permanent provisions for cooking and sanitation.
EQUIPMENT — A general term including material, fittings, devices,
appliances, fixtures, apparatus and the like used as a part of or in
connection with an electrical installation.
EQUIPMENT GROUNDING CONDUCTOR — The conductor used to
connect the non-current-carrying metal parts of equipment, raceway,
and other enclosures to the system-grounded conductor, to the ground
electrode conductor, or to both, at the service equipment or the source
of a separately derived system.
§ 268-14 HAMILTON CODE § 268-14
1:356
EXPOSED — Capable of being inadequately touched or approached
nearer than a safe distance by a person. It is applied to parts that are
not suitably guarded, isolated or insulated.
GROUNDED — Connected to earth or to some other conducting body
that serves in place of the earth.
GROUNDED CONDUCTOR — A system or circuit conductor that is
intentionally grounded.
GROUNDING CONDUCTOR — A conductor used to connect equipment
or the grounded circuit of a wiring system to a grounding electrode.
GROUNDING ELECTRODE CONDUCTOR — The conductor used to
connect the grounding electrode to the equipment grounding conductor
to the grounding conductor, or to both of the circuit at service
equipment or at the source of a separately derived system.
GROUND-FAULT CIRCUIT INTERRUPTER — A device intended for the
protection of personnel that functions to de-energize a circuit or portion
thereof, within an established period of time when a current to ground
exceeds some predetermined value that is less than that required to
operate the over current protective device of the supply circuit.
LIGHTING OUTLET — An outlet intended for the direct connection of a
lamp holder, a lighting fixture or a pendent cord terminating in a lamp
holder.
LISTED — Equipment, materials or services included in a list published
by an organization that is acceptable to the authority having
jurisdiction and concerned with evaluation of products or services that
maintains periodic inspection of production of listed equipment or
materials or periodic evaluation of services and whose listing states
that the equipment, material or service meets appropriate designated
standard or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building that contains three or more
dwelling units.
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building that consists solely of one
dwelling unit.
OUTLET — A point on the wiring system at which current is taken to
supply utilization equipment.
PANEL BOARD — A single panel or group of panel units designed for
assembly in the form of a single panel, including buses and automatic
over current devices and equipped with or without switches for the
control of light, heat or power circuits designed to be placed in a
cabinet or cutout box that is placed in or against a wall or partition and
accessible only from front.
PROPER — An installation or part thereof that is made in a thorough
manner to ensure a nonhazardous condition.
§ 268-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-14
1:357
RACEWAY — An enclosed channel made of metal or nonmetallic
materials designed exclusively for holding wire, cable or bus bars with
additional functions as permitted in this code. Raceways include but
are not limited to rigid metal conduit, liquid tight flexible conduit,
electrical nonmetallic tubing, and electrical metallic tubing, under floor
raceways, cellular concrete floor raceways, cellular metal floor
raceways, surface raceways, wire ways and bus ways.
RECEPTACLE — A contact device installed at the outlet for the
connection of an attachment plug. A single receptacle is a single
contact device with other contact device on the same yoke. A multiple
receptacle is two or more contact devices on the same yoke.
RECEPTACLE OUTLET — An outlet where one or more receptacles are
installed.
SERVICE — The conductors and equipment for delivering energy from
the electricity supply system to the wiring system of the premises
served.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building that consists of two dwelling
units.
UTILIZATION EQUIPMENT — Equipment that utilizes electric energy
for electronic, electromechanical, chemical, heating, lighting or similar
purposes.
C. General requirements.
(1) Services, outside feeders and branch circuits.
(a) Interior metal water piping systems shall be bonded to the
electrical service grounding system, including the bonding
jumping wire for the water meter.
(b) The service shall be adequate to serve the connected load.
(c) Weather-heads shall be securely fastened in place.
(d) Service entrance conductors shall not show evidence of
excessive deterioration or alteration of conductor, insulation
and cable sheath.
(e) Service conductors, outside feeders and outside branch
circuits shall have sufficient clearances above roofs, from
ground, from building openings and from swimming pools to
prevent accidental contact.
(f) Service-entrance raceways or cable shall be securely fastened.
(g) Service entrance raceways and cable shall be terminated with
fitting or connectors that are approved for the purpose.
(h) Service-entrance equipment shall be readily accessible.
Sufficient access and working space shall be provided and
§ 268-14 HAMILTON CODE § 268-14
1:358
maintained to permit ready and safe operation and
maintenance.
(i) Service-entrance equipment, cable, raceways or conductors
shall not show evidence of excessive physical damage,
corrosion or other deterioration.
(j) Service equipment shall be effectively grounded. The
grounding electrode conductor shall be sized, terminated and
connected to one or more ground electrode(s) to provide
sufficiently low impedance and have sufficient current carrying
capacity to prevent the build-up of voltages that might result in
undue hazard to connected equipment or to a person.
(2) Panel boards and distribution equipment.
(a) Panel boards and distribution equipment shall be accessible.
Sufficient access and work space shall be provided and
maintained to permit safe operation and maintenance.
(b) Panel boards and distribution equipment shall not show
evidence of excessive physical damage, corrosion or other
deterioration.
(c) All cables entering the equipment shall be secured with
approved connectors. All used opening shall be properly
closed.
(d) All metal parts shall be effectively grounded or bonded using
approved fittings.
(e) Dead front panels, partitions or parts of the enclosure shall be
installed to ensure protections from live parts.
(f) Each disconnecting means for motors and appliances and each
service, feeder or branch circuit at the point where it
originates shall be legibly marked to indicate its purpose
unless located and arranged so the purpose is evident. The
marking shall be of sufficient durability to withstand the
environment involved.
(3) Over-current protective devices.
(a) Over-current protective devices shall be properly rated for the
conductor under the conditions of use. The devices shall not
show evidence of physical damage or overheating.
(b) Connection and terminations of over-current protective
devices shall not be loose or corroded.
(c) Listed over-current protective devices shall be used or
installed in the listing or labeling.
§ 268-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-14
1:359
(d) Where evidence of over fusing or tampering with Edisonbased-
type fuses exist, type S nontamperable adapters and
fuses shall be installed.
(4) Conductors, cables and cable assemblies.
(a) Conductors, cables and cable assemblies shall be properly
terminated and supported at panel boards, boxes and devices.
The same shall not show evidence of overheating,
deterioration, fraying, damage or physical abuse.
(b) The conductor size shall not be less than the ampere rating of
the circuit unless otherwise permitted for specific types of
utilization equipment.
(c) Splices and taps shall be made in an approved manner.
(d) Cables and cable assemblies shall be properly secured and
supported.
(5) Flexible cords and cables. Flexible cords and cables shall not be
used as a substitute for fixed wiring or a structure run through
holes in walls, ceilings, floors, through doorways or windows or be
attached to building surfaces.
(6) Raceways.
(a) Raceways shall be terminated in fittings or connectors that are
designed for the specific wiring method with which they are
used and will be securely fastened in place.
(b) Raceways shall not show evidence of excessive deterioration or
physical damage.
(7) Permanently connected lighting fixtures.
(a) Fixture taps and branch-circuit supply conductors shall not
show evidence of damage or deterioration from overheating.
(b) Fixture canopies shall be in place and properly secured.
(c) Where identified fixtures shall be lamped in accordance with
available instructions and shall not exceed marked maximum
ratings.
(d) Open incandescent lamps installed in clothes closets shall have
12 inches of clearance from combustible materials.
(8) Boxes and similar enclosures.
(a) All boxes shall have properly secured covers in place. Any
unused openings shall be effectively closed to afford protection
that is substantially equivalent to that of the wall of the box.
§ 268-14 HAMILTON CODE § 268-14
1:360
(b) Wet locations shall have installed boxes, covers or similar
enclosures identified for such use.
(c) Damp locations shall have boxes or similar enclosures installed
or equipped so to prevent moisture from entering and/or
accumulating.
(d) All conductive surfaces that are likely to become energized
shall be effectively grounded when an equipment grounding
conductor is provided.
(9) General-use switches and receptacles.
(a) Enclosures shall be fastened securely.
(b) All switches and receptacles shall have a faceplate in place that
is free of defects.
(c) No termination point can have evidence of arching or
overheating and all conductors shall insure good connection to
devices.
(d) Switches and receptacles shall not have paint or other coating
unless listed for such use. The function shall not be impaired by
physical damage or show evidence of overheating or arching
also shall be secured properly.
(e) Receptacles shall be tested with a listed receptacle tester to
ensure proper wiring. This tester will indicate when branch
circuit conductors are not connected to the intended terminals.
All grounding-type receptacles shall be grounded or shall have
ground-fault circuit interrupter protection where installed on a
circuit that does not have an equipment grounding conductor
and shall be labeled such. Where receptacles and branch
circuit conductors are identified for polarization receptacles
shall be properly polarized.
(f) Receptacles that do not have acceptable blade retention shall
be replaced.
(g) Switches shall be rated for the load that it is connected.
(h) Flexible cords or cables shall not be used to supply outlets in a
room or area and shall be removed. If the fixed wiring in such
rooms or area is inadequate, the outlets will be replaced with
permanently installed receptacles.
(10) Appliances and special equipment.
(a) Where ground-fault circuit interrupters are installed they shall
operate properly.
§ 268-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-14
1:361
§ 268-15. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
(b) Smoke detectors shall be installed on each level of the dwelling
including the basement as per the manufacturer's
recommendation.
(c) Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed not more than 10
feet from all bedroom areas.
(d) When appliances or utilization are present they shall be
installed properly and functional for their designed purpose.
They shall have proper disconnecting means and over-current
protection that shall be labeled as such.
A. Every owner and operator of a multiple dwelling or apartment house
containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for
maintaining in a sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the
dwelling and premises.
B. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and
sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises
thereof which he occupies and controls.
C. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in rubbish
containers as required by § 268-11A and B.
D. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
garbage or any other organic waste which might provide food for
rodents, insects or vermin, in a clean and sanitary manner, by placing it
in the garbage storage containers required by § 268-11A and B. It shall
be the responsibility of the owner to provide such garbage containers
for all dwelling units in a multiple dwelling containing more than two
dwelling units. In all other cases it shall be the responsibility of the
occupant to furnish such garbage containers.
E. Every occupant, owner or operator of a dwelling shall be responsible
for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or
on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling
containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such
extermination whenever his dwelling unit is infested. Notwithstanding
the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is
caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or
reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more
of the dwelling units in any dwelling containing two or more dwelling
units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
F. Every occupant, owner or operator of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall maintain the inside of the dwelling or dwelling unit and the
outside premises over which he has control clean and orderly.
§ 268-14 HAMILTON CODE § 268-16
1:362
§ 268-16. License for operation of hotels, rooming houses and
similar accommodations. [Amended 5-6-2009 by Ord. No. 09-011]
A. Required. No person shall operate, manage, conduct or maintain a
hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or boardinghouse without
first having obtained a license therefor in the manner provided in this
section.
B. Application; issuance.
(1) An application for a license to conduct, carry on or manage the
business of a hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or
boardinghouse shall be made in writing under oath, signed by the
operator, to the Director of Community Planning and Compliance,
on forms provided by him, and shall set forth the following in
addition to general requirements:
(a) The number and location of bedrooms to be used for rooming
or boarding, and the size of each room.
(b) A statement as to the number of toilets, washbasins, urinals,
bathtubs or showers and their location in the hotel, motel,
rooming house, rooming unit or boardinghouse.
(2) Each application shall be referred to the Chief Housing Inspector
for inspection and his/her report to the Director of Community
Planning and Compliance. The Director shall also request an
investigation by the Police Division of each applicant. If the report
of the Chief Housing Inspector or the Police Division discloses the
applicant was convicted of a crime involving morals or the health
and sanitation ordinances of the Township or any other
municipality, no license shall be issued. If the report of the Chief
Housing Inspector discloses no violation and the report of the Chief
of Police is favorable, a license shall be issued by the Director of
Community Planning and Compliance, which license shall be for
the calendar year. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068]
C. Fee.
(1) Fees for a license shall be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the
Township Code. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
(2) All fees shall accompany the application for the total number of
roomers or boarders desired in any calendar year. No more
roomers or boarders shall be allowed in any calendar year than the
number enumerated on the application.
D. Compliance with applicable regulations. Every licensee under this
section shall be required to comply with all housing codes, sanitary
codes and other laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the state and
the Township.
§ 268-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-17
1:363
§ 268-17. Standards for operation of hotels, rooming houses and
similar accommodations. [Amended 5-6-2009 by Ord. No. 09-011]
A. Inspections; correction of violations. Each building or room licensed as
a hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or boardinghouse under
the terms of this chapter may be inspected at any hour deemed
necessary and as often as the Director of Community Planning and
Compliance or Housing Inspector may deem it necessary. If any of the
inspections discloses a condition existing in the building tending to
create a violation of this chapter and such condition is not corrected
within 10 days after notice in writing to the owner or operator of the
business, the Director, upon notice to the holder of the license, may
order the holder to show cause before him, on notice of not less than
five days, why the license should not be revoked. Whenever the Housing
Inspector finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate
action, he may give verbal order to the owner or operator of a hotel,
motel, rooming house, rooming unit or boardinghouse, and it shall have
the same effect and force as a written notice and shall be complied with
immediately or within the time that the Housing Inspector stipulates.
B. Space requirements.
(1) No room in any hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or
boardinghouse shall be so constructed that there shall be afforded
less than 450 cubic feet of air space for each child under 12 years
of age. Where the same room is used for both living and sleeping,
there shall be at least 550 cubic feet of air space for each adult and
450 cubic feet of air space for each child under 12 years of age.
(2) Every sleeping room in a hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit
or boardinghouse shall have a clear height between floor and
ceiling of not less than seven feet. In sleeping rooms with sloping
ceilings, more than 50% of the floor area of such sleeping room
must have a clear height between floor and ceiling of seven feet.
The least horizontal dimension of a sleeping room shall not be less
than seven feet.
(3) Every room occupied for sleeping purposes in a hotel, motel,
rooming house, rooming unit or boardinghouse shall contain at
least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied by two
persons for sleeping purposes shall contain at least an additional
50 square feet of floor space.
C. Windows and screens.
(1) Every room used for sleeping purposes in a hotel, motel, rooming
house, rooming unit or boardinghouse shall have a window placed
in an outside wall, with the openable area of such window to
comply with § 268-10. Such window shall be constructed so that it
can be opened and closed easily by the occupant of the room.
§ 268-17 HAMILTON CODE § 268-17
1:364
(2) All windows in hotels, motels, rooming houses, rooming units and
boardinghouses in sleeping rooms, dining rooms, kitchens, halls,
bathrooms, and all other outside openings and outside doors shall
have placed on the outside of such windows, openings or doors a
full-length screen of a size mesh to provide adequate ventilation
while excluding mosquitoes and insects and kept in good repair, to
be placed on May 1 of each year and remain thereon until October
1 of the same year. Those owners of such establishments who
install a combination storm and screen window in which only a half
window or screen is available shall comply with the meaning of this
subsection.
D. Bathrooms. In every hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or
boardinghouse, there shall be a water closet, washbasin, urinal, bath or
shower as § 268-12 and the state plumbing subcode shall declare. All
doors on toilet rooms and bathrooms shall be equipped with self-closing
springs or other devices to close the door, and such doors shall be kept
closed when in use or not in use. On each toilet room or bathroom door,
there shall be an adequate locking device on the inside of such door so
that privacy can be had by the user of the room.
E. Bedding. Clean sanitized sheets and pillowcases shall be provided for
each bed occupied in all hotels, motels, rooming houses, rooming units
and boardinghouses and shall be changed for each occupant and, for
continued occupancy, shall be changed each week.
F. Cleaning of floors and floor coverings. In every hotel, motel, rooming
house, rooming unit or boardinghouse, all wool, cotton or mixed fabric
rugs or other coarse floor coverings shall be kept in a sanitary
condition. All exposed wooden floors or diverse impervious floor
coverings shall be washed thoroughly with hot water and soap or
detergent at least once a week or cleansed by other methods approved
by the Housing Inspector.
G. Lighting. In every hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or
boardinghouse, adequate lighting of at least 25 watts of illumination
shall be provided over the entrance, in the entrance hall and in all
interior halls. Bathrooms must be provided with at least 40 watts of
illumination.
H. Cleaning of garbage containers. In every hotel, motel, rooming house,
rooming unit or boardinghouse, garbage pails shall be cleaned
thoroughly at least once a week, or more often if deemed necessary by
the Housing Inspector.
I. Heating. Every hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit and
boardinghouse shall maintain heat to comply with § 268-13A.
J. Pest control. Every hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit and
boardinghouse shall be kept free and clean of and shall not harbor or
have on the premises rats, mice, flies, bedbugs, cockroaches, ants,
silverfish or other insects or vermin.
§ 268-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-17
1:365
§ 268-18. Standards for operation of residential rental units.
[Added 5-6-2009 by Ord. No. 09-011; amended 5-17-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-018]
K. Animals. In every hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit and
boardinghouse, there shall not be kept, harbored or maintained in any
room in such establishment or on the outside grounds or premises any
rabbit, parakeet, chicken, pigeon, dog, goat, sheep, cat or any other
animal, bird or fowl unless the facilities for maintaining the animal are
such that an unsanitary or unsafe condition will not be created or
maintained.
L. Outside maintenance. The exterior grounds and premises of every
hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit and boardinghouse shall be
kept clean and orderly and shall comply with § 268-11C.
M. Cooking or keeping food in rooms; heating devices in rooms. No
occupant of any hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit or
boardinghouse shall cook food, keep food or have in such room the
utensils for cooking food, nor shall any occupant have a heating device
in his room that does not comply with § 268-13C and D.
N. Daybook. Every hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit and
boardinghouse shall keep a daybook showing the name and permanent
address of each guest and showing the room occupied by each guest.
Such book shall be kept up to date and shall be available for inspection
at all times by the Housing Inspector.
O. Posting of regulations. There shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
every hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit and boardinghouse a
copy of this chapter, which copy shall be furnished by the Director of
Community Planning and Compliance.
P. Sanitation generally. The owner or operator of every hotel, motel,
rooming house, rooming unit and boardinghouse shall be responsible
for the clean and sanitary maintenance of all floors, walls and ceilings
and for the maintenance in a clean and sanitary condition of every other
part of such establishment.
A. Definitions. Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning,
the following words or phrases when used in this section shall have the
following meanings:
AGENT — The individual or individuals designated by the owner as
the person(s) authorized by the owner to perform any duty imposed
upon the owner by this section. The term does not necessarily mean a
licensed real estate broker or salesman as those terms are defined by
N.J.S.A. 45:15-3; however, such term may include a licensed real estate
broker or salesman if such person designated by the owner as his agent
is so licensed.
§ 268-17 HAMILTON CODE § 268-18
1:366
APARTMENT COMPLEX — Two or more buildings, each containing two
or more apartments, which are located within close proximity of each
other and are owned by the same owner.
APARTMENT or DWELLING — Any apartment, cottage, bungalow,
single-family dwelling, any room or rooms in a rooming house or
boardinghouse or other dwelling unit consisting of one or more rooms
occupying all or part of a floor or floors in a building, whether designed
with or without housekeeping facilities for dwelling purposes and
notwithstanding whether the apartment be designed for residence, for
office, or the operation of any industry or business, or for any other type
of independent use.
CHANGE IN TENANCY — A change in the tenant renting a rental unit.
HABITABLE SPACE — The space in a structure for living, sleeping,
eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls,
storage or utility space in similar areas are not considered habitable
space.
LANDLORD — The legal entity listed upon the title as it appears in the
public records after the deed is properly recorded.
LANDLORD REGISTRATION — A registration issued by the Township
of Hamilton identiging the registration holder as being permitted to
maintain, operate, or otherwise conduct the business of landlord in the
Township of Hamilton.[Amended 12-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-061100]
OWNER — Any person or group of persons, firm, corporation or officer
thereof, partnership, association, or trust, who owns, operates,
exercises control over or is in charge of a rental facility.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
trust or other legal entity, or any combination thereof.
RENTAL FACILITY — Every building, group of buildings or a portion
thereof which is kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to be a
place where living accommodations are supplied, whether furnished or
unfurnished, for pay or other consideration, to one or more individuals
and is meant to include apartments and apartment complexes.
RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit which is available for lease or rental
purposes and is meant to include individual apartments located within
apartment complexes.
TENANT — Any person, including minors, who resides in a rental unit
on a continuous basis for more than 180 days.
B. Periodic inspections.
(1) Each rental unit shall be inspected at least once in every five-year
period, and upon each change in tenancy, for purposes of the
issuance of a certificate of approval for occupancy. The five-year
100. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definitions of "license" and
"licensee," which immediately followed this definition.
§ 268-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-18
1:367
period shall begin anew upon the conduct of an inspection due to a
change in tenancy. Such five-year inspection and the applicable fee
required by Subsection E shall be waived if the landlord provides
to the proper Township officials a proof of inspection for the rental
unit in the form of a state approved multidwelling satisfactory
inspection report, a satisfactory private home inspection conducted
by a New Jersey licensed home inspector, or a satisfactory
Township housing inspection. Such proof of inspection shall
include, if applicable, any notice of violations issued to the
landlord, to be provided to the Township within 30 days of issuance,
as well as any letter of compliance issued to the landlord, to be
provided to the Township within 30 days of receipt.
(2) Initial inspection following passage of this section shall be
staggered in accordance with the following schedule:
(a) Area 1 - Properties with odd house numbers in August 2009.
(b) Area 2 - Properties with even house numbers in December
2009.
(c) Area 3 - State licensed multiunit facilities in April 2010.
(3) An initial inspection fee as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the
Township Code, per unit, collected in equal annual installments
over a five-year period, shall be due within the first 90 days
following the passage of this ordinance. [Amended 7-18-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-029]
(4) Inspections shall be performed by such person, persons or agency
duly authorized and appointed by the Township pursuant to the
direction of the Director of the Department of Community Planning
and Compliance Inspections made by persons or an agency other
than the duly authorized and appointed person, persons or agency
of the Township shall only be accepted in accordance with
Subsection B(1) of this section. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-068]
(5) Such inspection shall be for the purpose of determining Zoning
Ordinance compliance and, to the extent applicable, to determine if
the property complies with the property maintenance code and
housing code as embodied in this chapter. Upon compliance, the
Chief Housing Inspector or his/her designee shall cause to be
issued a certificate of approval for occupancy. [Amended
12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068]
(6) Unsatisfactory inspection. In the event that the inspection of a
rental unit indicates the need for maintenance and/or repairs, the
owner of the property, or his agent, shall not lease or rent such
property, nor shall any tenant occupy the property until the
necessary maintenance, repairs and corrections have been made so
as to bring the property and rental unit into compliance with the
§ 268-18 HAMILTON CODE § 268-18
1:368
applicable code(s) and the property is thereafter subsequently
reinspected and approved. Repairs not completed within 30 days
of reinspection shall result in the issuance of a court summons.
Requests for extensions shall be in writing demonstrating
compelling reasons for the need for such extension. The grant of
such extension is subject to the Township's discretion. In the event
that the property is occupied when such conditions are discovered,
all such corrections shall be made within 30 days, and if not made
within that time period, the owner shall be deemed in violation
of this section and every day that the violation continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation, subject to the penalty
provisions of this section.
C. Access for inspections; repairs.
(1) The inspection officers are hereby authorized to make inspections
to determine the condition of rental facilities, rental units and
rooming houses and boardinghouses in order that they may
promote the purposes of this section to safeguard the health, safety
and welfare of the occupants of rental facilities, rental units and
rooming houses and boardinghouses and of the general public. The
owner or occupant of every rental facility, rental unit and rooming
houses and boardinghouses shall give the inspecting officer free
access to the rental facility, rental unit and rooming houses and
boardinghouses at all reasonable times for the purpose of such
inspections, examinations and surveys.
(2) Every occupant shall give the owner of the rental facility, rental
unit and rooming houses and boardinghouses access to any part of
such rental facility, rental unit and rooming houses and
boardinghouses at all reasonable times for the purpose of making
such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance
with the provisions of this section or any lawful order issued
pursuant thereto.
(3) Complaints. Within 10 days of receipt of a complaint alleging a
reported violation of this section, an inspecting officer shall
conduct an inspection as hereinbefore provided.
D. Registration of landlords. In addition to any other requirements herein,
each landlord shall apply to the appropriate office within the Township
of Hamilton for a landlord registration within 90 days of the publication
of this amended ordinance. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-029; 12-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-061]
(1) The purpose of the landlord registration requirement is to provide
the Township with a means to identify landlords in the Township in
order to ensure compliance with this section. The purpose of the
registration fee is to defray the costs associated with administering
the provisions of this section.
§ 268-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-18
1:369
(2) No landlord shall be entitled to rent a rental unit unless said
landlord is in possession of a valid landlord registration.
(3) The fee for a landlord registration shall be as set forth in Chapter
215, Fees, of the Township Code, and must be renewed every five
years.
(4) The fee for a landlord registration for owner-occupied rental units
containing four units or less shall be as set forth in Chapter 215,
Fees, of the Township Code, and must be renewed every five years.
(5) Landlord registrations are not transferable to other entities or
parties.
(6) The Mayor or his designee shall develop the form of application
required by this amended ordinance which shall require the
landlord to provide the following information:
(a) Name, address and phone number of the owner.
(b) Address(es) of rental unit(s) or other identifying information
for the rental unit(s).
(c) Proof of current payment of property taxes, assessments
against property, sewer charges, or other municipal charges,
or assessments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:52-1.2.
(d) Payment of registration fees.
(e) A certification from the owner that the rental unit(s) to be
rented complies with this chapter.
(7) A landlord possessing a landlord registration shall be required to
advise the Mayor or his designee of any change in the information
on the application for such registration within 30 days of any such
change.
E. Fees. At the time of initial registration of a landlord, expiration of every
five-year period as required under Subsection B, or upon any change of
occupancy of a rental unit, the landlord or agent thereof must pay a fee
in accordance with the following schedule for the purpose of having the
rental unit inspected by the Township: [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-029; 12-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-061]
(1) Upon initial registration of a landlord and when adding a rental
unit or units to the registration, a fee as set forth in Chapter 215,
Fees, of the Township Code per rental unit shall be assessed, which
includes an inspection and one subsequent reinspection to be
completed within 30 days of a failed initial inspection). Multiunit
facilities containing four or more units shall be assessed a fee as set
forth in Chapter 215, Fees, per unit collected in equal installments
over a five-year period. Prepayment of this fee shall not be
penalized.
§ 268-18 HAMILTON CODE § 268-18
1:370
(a) Upon the full payment of the inspection fee set forth in Chapter
215, Fees, the landlord or agent thereof shall receive a coupon
that may be used for one reinspection or change of occupancy
inspection required to be conducted of the particular rental
unit for which the fee has been paid. This coupon is not
transferable to any other rental unit and expires at the end of
the five-year period for which it was issued; or
(b) In the alternative, if the total inspection fee due for a multiunit
facility is paid at the time of initial licensing of a landlord, then
the landlord or agent shall receive a number of coupons
calculated by dividing the total inspection fee paid, by 75.
These coupons may be used for reinspection or change of
occupancy inspections at the multiunit facility.
(2) Following the expiration of every five-year period, a fee as set forth
in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code shall be assessed, to be
collected within 90 days following passage of this ordinance, which
includes an inspection and one subsequent reinspection (to be
completed within 30 days of a failed initial inspection). Multiunit
facilities containing four or more units shall be assessed a fee as set
forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code per unit collected
in equal installments over a five-year period, with the first payment
due within 90 days following passage of this section. Prepayment of
this fee shall not be penalized.
(a) Upon the full payment of the inspection fee set forth in Chapter
215, Fees, the landlord or agent thereof shall receive a coupon
that may be used for one reinspection or change of occupancy
inspection required to be conducted of the particular rental
unit for which the fee has been paid. This coupon is not
transferable to any other rental unit and expires at the end of
the five-year period for which it was issued; or
(b) In the alternative, if the total inspection fee due for a multiunit
facility is paid at the beginning of every five-year period, then
the landlord or agent shall receive a number of coupons
calculated by dividing the total inspection fee paid, by 75.
These coupons may be used for reinspection or change of
occupancy inspections at the multiunit facility.
(3) Any change of occupancy, except those changes of occupancies
upon each subsequent five-year inspection, shall be assessed a fee
as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code, which
includes one inspection.
(4) Any subsequent reinspection conducted in excess of those specified
in Subsections E(1), (2) and (3) above shall be assessed a fee as set
forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code (to be completed
within 30 days of most recent reinspection).
§ 268-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-18
1:371
(5) Should an inspector arrive for a scheduled inspection and no adult
is present to grant access to the rental unit, the full amount of the
inspection fee shall be charged and the landlord will be required to
reschedule the inspection at a fee as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees.
(6) Fees not paid shall be subject to a late fee as set forth in Chapter
215, Fees, per month.
(7) Senior citizen exemption. If the owner of the property is a senior
citizen who resides in a unit of the property and rents out the
remaining unit and would otherwise qualify under the State of New
Jersey property tax deduction under N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.41, there shall
be no fee.
F. Occupant(s) standards.
(1) Nuisance prohibited. No rental facility shall be conducted in a
manner which shall result in any unreasonable disturbance or
disruption to the surrounding properties and property owners or of
the public in general, such that it shall constitute a nuisance as
defined in Chapter 311, Noise, and Chapter 317, Nuisances, of the
Code of the Township of Hamilton.
(2) Compliance with other laws. The maintenance of all rental facilities
and the conduct engaged in upon the premises by occupants and
their guests shall at all times be in full compliance with all
applicable ordinances and regulations of the Township and with all
applicable state and federal laws.
G. Prohibition on occupancy. No person shall hereafter occupy any rental
unit, nor shall the owner permit occupancy of any rental unit within the
Township, which is not licensed and for which a certificate of occupancy
has not been issued in accordance with this chapter.
H. Tenant subject to removal. Any tenant renting a premises in the
Township of Hamilton who occupies the premises in violation of
Subsection G above shall be subject to immediate removal from the
premises. Any costs associated with the removal and subsequent
relocation of tenants that are incurred by the Township of Hamilton
shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or tenant.
I. Limitations of occupancy. The maximum number of persons which may
inhabit a rental unit shall be computed in accordance with § 268-9 of
this chapter. Rental units shall not be occupied by more occupants than
permitted under § 268-9.
J. Procedure upon increase of occupants. Every owner shall use its best
efforts by adopting rental policies and procedures to monitor the
number of tenants in each rental unit. When an owner becomes aware
of a violation of its occupancy policies, the owner will advise the
Township Inspection Office within 10 days of an increase in the number
of tenants beyond that permitted under § 268-9.
§ 268-18 HAMILTON CODE § 268-18
1:372
K. Maximum number of occupants; posting. The maximum number of
occupants shall either be posted in each rental unit or set forth in the
lease agreement. It shall be unlawful for any person, including the
owner, agent, tenant or registered tenant, to allow a greater number of
persons than the posted maximum number of occupants to sleep in or
occupy overnight the rental unit for a period exceeding 180 days. Any
person violating this provision shall be subject to the penalty provisions
set forth in this section.
L. Violation of occupancy requirements; enforcement.
(1) It shall be unlawful and in violation of this section for a landlord,
owner or a tenant of a rental unit to allow a greater number of
people than the permitted maximum number of tenants to rent or
occupy any rental unit.
(2) It shall also be unlawful and in violation of this section for a tenant,
landlord or an owner to allow a number of people greater than the
maximum number of people permitted to occupy the deck, balcony
or porch of said rental unit.
(3) The Director of the Department of Community Planning and
Compliance or his agents or duly designated designee is authorized
to issue summons for violations of this section to any owner,
landlord or tenant found to be in violation of this section.
M. Unlawful activities. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this section
for a landlord or owner of a rental unit or tenant of a rental unit:
(1) To knowingly permit or allow people to reside in a rental unit in a
number in excess of the number of people for which sleeping
accommodations are provided in accordance with this chapter.
(2) To lease or rent a rental unit where the number of tenants exceeds
the total number of sleeping accommodations as set forth in
Subsection I of this section.
(3) To knowingly permit a number of people, greater than the
maximum number of occupants or tenants permitted, to occupy a
rental unit.
(4) To violate any section of this chapter.
N. Reporting of violations. It shall be the legal duty of each owner to
immediately report any breaches of the peace or violations of this
section which he or she may know or believes to have occurred on the
leasehold premises. Such report shall be made to the Director of the
Department of Community Planning and Compliance or his agents or
duly designated designee or the Police Department of the Township of
Hamilton by the most expedient means.
O. Violation for false information. Any person who is found to have
submitted false information, documentation or identification in
§ 268-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-18
1:373
connection with an application under this section shall pay a minimum
fine of $250, plus court costs for the first offense; a minimum fine of
$1,000, plus court costs for a second offense; and a minimum fine of
$2,000, plus court costs for each offense thereafter, for each document
containing false information, documentation or identification. Any
person who submits a false certification or documentation shall be
subject to criminal prosecution, in addition to the penalties contained
herein.
P. Violations and penalties. In addition to the penalties set forth in
Subsection O, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section shall be liable to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, § 1-2, Violations; penalties. Each day such violation
continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation, and each
violation of this section shall be deemed a separate and distinct
violation. In a Municipal Court proceeding an owner shall not be found
to be in violation of this section during such period of time as the owner
shall be proceeding to evict the tenants in accordance with all statutory
procedures pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1 et seq. [Amended
7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
Q. Revocation of landlord registration; procedure. [Amended 7-18-2017
by Ord. No. 17-029; 12-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-061]
(1) In order to validly possess a landlord registration, a landlord shall
comply with all applicable local, state, and federal laws relating to
the renting of residential rental units. A landlord may be found in
violation of a landlord registration upon the happening of the
following nonexclusive events:
(a) The landlord, or any partner or corporate officer of the
landlord or the manager or other agent of the rental unit,
sought be operated under the landlord registration has refused
inspection of a rental unit and its premises by public
authorities acting pursuant to law or failed to provide sufficient
proof of inspection as provided for in Subsection B(1) of this
section;
(b) The landlord obtained a landlord registration through fraud,
collusion or illegality;
(c) The landlord, or any partner or corporate officer or manager or
other agent, has materially or substantially failed to comply
with a Property Management Action Plan (PMAP);
(d) The landlord failed to remediate any material statutory or code
violations of any rental unit;
(e) A landlord registration application filed by an owner, including
required updates, contains any material omissions and/or
materially false or misleading information;
§ 268-18 HAMILTON CODE § 268-18
1:374
(f) The landlord failed to obtain a change in occupancy inspection
prior to reoccupancy by a new tenant:
(g) Conviction of a violation of this section in the Municipal Court
or any other court of competent jurisdiction;
(h) Determination of a violation of this section at a hearing held
pursuant to Subsection Q(4)(b) of this section;
(i) Continuously permitting the rental unit to be occupied by more
than the maximum number of occupants.
(2) Enforcing authority. The Mayor or his designee is empowered to
enforce the provisions of this section.
(3) Notice of landlord registration violations.
(a) The Mayor or his designee may at any time file a complaint
alleging violations of Subsection Q(1) of this section. The
Mayor or his designee may file a complaint on the basis of
information and belief and need not rely on personal
information.
(b) A complaint alleging violations of applicable law may be filed
with the Mayor or his designee by any one or more of the
following: Chief of Police, Director of the Department
Community Planning and Compliance, Construction Official,
Housing Inspector or the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The
person filing a complaint may do so on the basis of information
and belief and need not rely on personal information.
(c) Any complaint alleging a violation shall be in writing and filed
with the Township Inspections Office. The complaint shall be
specific and shall be sufficient to apprise the landlord of the
charges and permit the landlord 10 days to correct the
violation.
(4) Landlord registration disciplinary action.
(a) Property Management Action Plan ("PMAP").
1. If after 10 days following receipt of notice of a violation,
the violation continues, the landlord shall meet with the
Mayor or his designee within 10 days to create a Property
Management Action Plan which will bring the landlord
and/or rental unit into compliance by a specified date.
2. The PMAP may concern but is not limited to the following
issues:
a. Providing a habitable dwelling;
b. Observing occupancy limits;
§ 268-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-18
1:375
c. Maintaining electrical systems meeting code
requirements;
d. Maintaining plumbing systems meeting code
requirements;
e. Maintaining heating and cooling systems meeting
code requirements;
f. Maintaining proper fire protection systems;
g. Eliminating health and safety hazards;
h. Improving or providing for the security of the
premises; or
i. Requiring inspections more than once a year should
problems with the rental unit occur regularly.
3. The landlord shall be in violation of this subsection by:
a. Not meeting with the Mayor or his designee to create
the PMAP;
b. Not implementing the PMAP; or
c. Not completing the PMAP by the required date.
4. For violations constituting an immediate danger to the
public health, safety, and welfare of the Township, the
Mayor or his designee does not have to issue a PMAP and
may take actions in accordance with other provisions of
applicable local, state, and federal laws to remedy the
situation.
(b) Disciplinary action, notice and hearing. If the landlord fails to
remedy a violation or comply with a PMAP, the Mayor or his
designee shall immediately inform the Township Council, and a
date for a hearing to consider the landlord's registration
suspension or revocation shall be scheduled which shall not be
sooner than 10 nor more than 30 days thereafter. The Mayor or
his designee shall forward a copy of the original complaint and
any relating documentation to the Township Council. The
Township Council shall serve the landlord and any applicable
agent with a notice as to the date of the hearing at the address
indicated on the landlord registration form. Service upon the
agent shall be sufficient. Said notice shall be specific and shall
be sufficient to apprise the landlord of the charges so as to
permit the landlord to present a defense.
1. The hearing required by this subsection shall be held
before the Township Council. The Council shall render a
decision within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing.
§ 268-18 HAMILTON CODE § 268-18
1:376
2. If the Council finds the landlord guilty of any violation of
applicable law, the Township Council has the right to
impose the penalties against the landlord as prescribed in
Subsection Q(4)(c).
3. The hearing shall be taped. If determined to be necessary
the Township Council may have a stenographic transcript
prepared. All witnesses shall be sworn prior to testifying.
The strict rules of evidence shall not apply. All relevant
evidence shall be admissible. The burden of proof shall be
that which generally controls administrative hearings.
4. It shall be a defense to any disciplinary proceeding
involving a landlord registration by demonstrating that the
landlord or his agent has taken appropriate action and has
made a good faith effort to abate the conditions or
circumstances giving rise to the revocation proceeding,
including but not limited to the institution of legal action
against the tenant(s), occupant(s) or guests for recovery of
the premises; eviction of the tenant(s) or otherwise.
(c) Landlord registration penalties. The Township Council may
impose the following maximum penalties against a landlord
after finding the landlord guilty of any violation of applicable
law, including by way of example all Township Code provisions
relating to the condition(s) of housing units, applicable
statutes, and/or regulations enforced by the Township of
Hamilton, but promulgated by the County of Mercer, the State
of New Jersey, and/or the United States of America.
1. First violation: suspension of landlord registration up to 90
days.
2. Second violation: suspension of landlord registration up to
one year.
3. Third and subsequent violations: permanent revocation of
landlord registration.
(d) Effect of landlord registration penalties.
1. Suspension. A suspension of a landlord registration
prohibits the landlord from engaging in any new lease
agreements for any rental unit during the suspension
period.
2. Revocation. A revocation of a landlord registration
prohibits the landlord from maintaining, operating, or
otherwise conducting the business of landlord in the
Township of Hamilton.
(e) Reinstatement of landlord registration.
§ 268-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-18
1:377
Chapter 270
HUNTING AND FIREARMS
§ 270-1. Discharge of firearms; hunting.
Except as noted in Subsection D:
1. Generally.
a. The landlord registration is not automatically
reinstated at the conclusion of a suspension.
b. The landlord must affirmatively reapply with the
appropriate Township authority for a new landlord
registration after serving the suspension.
c. A landlord whose registration was revoked may apply
for reinstatement no earlier than one year after a
revocation.
d. In addition to meeting all the requirements necessary
to obtain a landlord registration, the landlord shall be
prepared to submit, at the request of the Council,
proof of changed circumstances demonstrating
correction of the violation(s) which caused the
previous suspension and/or revocation.
e. All landlord registration reinstatement applications
shall be determined by the Council in its sole
discretion.
2. Fees. A landlord seeking a landlord registration
reinstatement shall be assessed a fee as set forth in
Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code, in addition to all
other applicable landlord registration fees.
A. No person shall, within the territorial limits of the Township, hunt,
attempt to hunt, cast an arrow or discharge firearms of any type,
including rifles, shotguns, pistols, air guns and BB guns, at any time.
B. At no time shall hunting of any kind be permitted on Township-owned or
leased property.
C. No person shall cast an arrow or discharge any firearm upon or across
any state, county or Township road or highway.
D. No person except the owner or lessee of the property, or persons
specifically authorized by the owner in writing, shall hunt, cast an
arrow, discharge a firearm or have in his possession a nocked arrow or
loaded gun while within the safety zone established pursuant to state
law.
§ 268-18 HAMILTON CODE § 270-2
1:378
§ 270-2. Exceptions to firearms restrictions.
§ 270-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties provided for in § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of this
Code.
Chapter 273
JEWELRY, PRECIOUS METALS, GEMS AND SECONDHAND
GOODS DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 215. Licenses and permits — See Ch. 285.
§ 273-1. License required; term of license.
No person shall engage in the business of the purchase of precious metals
and gems and all forms of previously owned jewelry without first obtaining
a license from the Municipal Clerk. Licenses shall be issued for a period of
one year commencing May 1 and ending April 30 of the succeeding year.
§ 273-2. Purpose and intent; license required.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of firearms for the
protection of life, persons or property.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any archery, pistol,
shotgun or rifle range equipped with proper safeguards for the
protection of life and property, or operated by any club under the
control and supervision of the duly constituted officers of such club, and
the duly authorized Hamilton Township Police Division pistol range.
A. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to assist law enforcement
officials and victims of crime in recovering stolen precious metals,
gems, gemstones and/or other articles by requiring minimum reporting,
maintenance and distribution criteria for secondhand and transient
dealers.
B. No person shall use, exercise or carry on the business, trade or
occupation of buying scrap gold, old gold, silver, jewelry, home
electronics/audio and visual equipment, musical instruments,
telephones and telephonic equipment, cell phones, scales, computers,
computer hardware and software, typewriters, word processors, coins,
electronic tablets, cameras, scanners, sporting goods of all kind,
platinum, all other precious metals, tools of all kind, televisions, DVRs,
GPS, camcorders, car stereos, gift cards, furniture, clothing or other
§ 270-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 273-2
1:379
§ 273-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings ascribed herein. Words used in the
present tense shall include the future, words in the plural number shall
include the singular number and words in the singular number shall include
the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — Acceptable forms of identification
include a current valid New Jersey driver's license or identification card,
a current valid photo driver's license issued by another U.S. state, a valid
United States passport, or other verifiable U.S. government-issued
identification.
ARTICLE — Any article of merchandise, including any portion of such
article, whether a distinct part thereof, whether separable or not, and also
including material for manufacture, and as so defined in N.J.S.A. 51:6-1.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Township of Hamilton or his
or her designee/representative.
DATABASE — A computerized internet-capable database with hardware and
software compliant to that set by the Chief of Police.
DEALER — Any person, partnership, corporation, or other entity, whether
permanent or itinerant, who on one or more occasions (through any means)
buys or sells or otherwise exchanges or trades secondhand gold, silver,
precious metals, gems, or jewelry, and includes anyone advertising the
purchase or sale of any of the aforementioned items.
DESIGNATED VENDOR — A person or entity who is appointed or
designated by the Chief of Police who is authorized to collect and maintain
precious metal transaction information, or other purchase information as
defined herein, for the Township of Hamilton.
GIFT CARD — A restricted monetary equivalent or scrip that is issued by
retailers or banks to be used as an alternative to a nonmonetary gift.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business conducted intermittently within the
Township of Hamilton or at varying locations.
PERSON — Any individual natural person, partnership, joint venture,
business, society, associate, club, trustee, trust, corporation, or
unincorporated group, or an officer, agent, employee, servant, factor or any
form of personal representative of any thereof, in any capacity, acting for
self or on behalf of another.
valuable articles, hereinafter referred to as "secondhand goods or
articles" or being a secondhand dealer within the Township of Hamilton
without having first obtained a license from the Township of Hamilton
Municipal Clerk as hereinafter provided.
C. The provisions of the preamble hereof are incorporated by reference in
this chapter.
§ 273-2 HAMILTON CODE § 273-3
1:380
PRECIOUS METALS — Comprised of gold, silver, sterling, platinum and/or
their alloys as defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq., and/
or N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq.; gems, gemstones, coins and all forms of jewelry
herein contained.
PUBLIC — Individuals and retail sellers, not to include wholesale
transactions or transactions between other merchants.
PURCHASE — The exchange of money and the exchange, deposit, pledge,
sale, conveyance or trade of any tangible or intangible article.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Every transaction conducted by a dealer
in which precious metals, or other tangible property, are purchased or
exchanged from or with the public.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Any article previously sold, acquired, exchanged,
conveyed, traded, or otherwise formerly owned, including but not limited
to scrap gold, old gold, silver, jewelry, home electronics/audio and visual
equipment, musical instruments, telephones and telephonic equipment, cell
phones, scales, computers, computer hardware and software, typewriters,
word processors, coins, electronic tablets, cameras, scanners, sporting
goods of all kind, antiques, platinum, all other precious metals, tools of all
kind, televisions, DVRs, GPS, camcorders, car stereos, gift cards, furniture,
clothing or other valuable articles.
TRANSIENT BUYER — A dealer who has not been in any retail business
continuously for at least six months at any address in the municipality
where the dealer is required to register or who intends to close out or
discontinue all retail business in the Township of Hamilton within six
months. Or as so defined in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-5 and N.J.A.C. 13:47C-1.1.
Vendors doing business during a community event sponsored/sanctioned by
the Township of Hamilton shall not be considered a transient buyer.
§ 273-4. Application for license; issuance or denial of license.
A. Upon receipt of an application for a license under this chapter
completed pursuant to Chapter 285, Licenses and Permits, of the Code
of the Township of Hamilton, the Municipal Clerk shall refer such
application to the Division of Police and the Department of Community
Planning and Compliance for review and recommendation as to
whether a license should be issued or denied. The review and
recommendation shall take no more than 10 days. The Division of Police
shall institute such investigation of the applicant's moral character and
business responsibility as it deems necessary for the protection of the
public welfare. The Department of Community Planning and
Compliance shall cause to be investigated weight and measure devices.
Upon completion of the investigation, the Division of Police and the
Department of Community Planning and Compliance shall return the
application or a copy thereof to the Municipal Clerk, accompanied by a
recommendation as to whether the license should be issued or denied.
If the recommendation of the Division of Police and the Department of
Community Planning and Compliance is to deny the license, the
§ 273-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 273-4
1:381
§ 273-5. Identification required at time of sale.
All licensees under this chapter shall require of each person offering an item
for sale to produce identification and to sign a receipt for the item.
§ 273-6. Dealer's responsibilities, requirements and recordkeeping.
Every dealer within the Township of Hamilton shall, upon the purchase of
any precious metals or secondhand goods from the public, be required to do
as follows:
grounds for such recommendation shall be stated. Grounds for
recommending denial of a license may include information indicating
that the applicant is not of good moral character or is of questionable
business responsibility, and a recommendation of denial shall be given
if the applicant has been convicted of any crime involving dishonesty,
fraud, deceit or misrepresentation. Upon receipt of the
recommendation of the Division of Police and the Department of
Community Planning and Compliance, the Municipal Clerk shall issue
or deny the license accordingly. Any person aggrieved by such denial
may appeal to the Township Council, who may confirm or reverse the
denial as deemed advisable.
B. A dealer of precious metals, gems, gemstones or secondhand goods
shall, prior to buying, attempting to buy or offering to buy, register with
the Chief of Police, providing the following information on an
application prescribed by the Police Department:
(1) Name and address of the dealer.
(2) Address from which the dealer shall conduct business.
(3) Copy of valid zoning and/or construction permits from the
Township of Hamilton.
(4) Proof that the dealer has obtained computer equipment and
software required in § 273-6 of this chapter, for purposes of
reporting all transaction data in electronic format to the Hamilton
Township Police Department.
A. Record on a numbered receipt the name, address and telephone
number of the purchaser; the name, address and telephone number of
the seller or sellers; the time and date of the transaction: the net weight
in terms of pounds (Troy), pennyweight (Troy) or kilograms/grams of
the precious metals; fineness in terms of karats for gold, and sterling or
coin for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq., and N.J.S.A.
51:6-1 et seq. This information is to be documented through use of an
electronic database software system as designated by the Chief of
Police. These records shall be subject to the inspection of any
authorized police officer of the Township of Hamilton.
§ 273-4 HAMILTON CODE § 273-6
1:382
B. Through the use of applicably required computer equipment, and using
the electronic format approved by the Chief of Police, enter all
transactions into the electronic database within 48 hours from the date
of purchase. The information entered will contain the information in
§ 273-6A above, plus the following:
(1) A physical description of the seller.
(2) The receipt number.
(3) A full description of the item or items purchased, including but not
limited to marks, numbers, dates, sizes, shapes, initials,
monograms and serial numbers.
(4) The price paid for the item.
(5) The form must be signed by the seller.
(6) The form must be legibly initialed by the clerk or the dealer who
made the transaction so as to readily identify that individual.
(7) A color photograph or color image of the seller's presented
identification.
(8) A color photograph or color image of the seller.
(9) A color photograph or color image of all items sold. When
photographing or imaging all items must be positioned in a manner
that makes them readily and easily identifiable.
(10) Items can be grouped together more than five at a time when
photographing or imaging.
C. In the event of a database failure, or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police. In the event that paper
forms are used, the dealer is responsible to enter all transaction
information into the database as soon as possible upon the dealer's
equipment being repaired or replaced, or the database coming back
into service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain computer
equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the dealer to replace
faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer being cited for a
violation of this chapter and subsequently being subject to the penalties
for doing so.
D. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the Hamilton Township Police Department to examine any
database, book, ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to
the purchase of precious metals from the public, as well as the articles
purchased or received, and to take possession of any article known by
the police officer or official to be missing or to have been stolen, or
§ 273-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 273-6
1:383
§ 273-7. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to purchases made by jewelers or other dealers
from wholesalers or other suppliers, but shall only apply to those purchases
made from the public or other retail purchases.
§ 273-8. Purchases from minors prohibited.
No dealer within the Township of Hamilton shall purchase any precious
metals from any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 273-9. Bond.
Each licensee under this chapter shall deliver a bond to the Municipal Clerk,
executed by the applicant as principal, with a surety company authorized to
do business under the laws of the state as surety. The bond, to be approved
by the Township Attorney, shall be in the penal sum of $10,000, conditioned
for the due and proper observance of and compliance with the provisions
and requirements of all ordinances of the Township in force or which may
be adopted respecting the conduct of this business, and conditioned also
that the bond shall be and remain for the benefit of any person who shall
have received judgment against any person licensed under this chapter by
reason of any damage sustained by any such person as a result of having
made a sale to such licensee, due to dishonesty, fraud or deceit practiced in
effecting purchase.
§ 273-10. License fee.
The fee for initial application for a license under this chapter shall be as
set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code. Each annual renewal
fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code. If on
the effective date of this chapter a person has been in business pursuant to
§ 273-1 for a period not less than five years, the fee for initial application
shall be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code, and
investigation pursuant to § 273-4 may be waived by the Municipal Clerk.
§ 273-11. Suspension or revocation of license.
where the police officer or official has probable cause to believe the
article is missing or stolen.
A. Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended for
violation of any provision of this chapter or for any reasons listed in
§ 285-10, Grounds for revocation.
B. The Township shall institute proceedings for any license suspension or
revocation by service of an appropriate notice at least five days prior to
the effective date of the license suspension or revocation, and a
reasonable opportunity for hearing before the Mayor or his designee
shall be afforded to the licensee prior to the effective date. If the license
is denied, the applicant may appeal to the Township Council.
§ 273-6 HAMILTON CODE § 273-12
1:384
§ 273-12. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished by a minimum fine of $100 or a maximum fine of $2,000
or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days and a ten-day suspension of its
license. Each and every violation shall be considered a separate violation.
Every day that a violation continues shall be a separate violation. Each
violation shall result in an additional ten-day suspension. Any person who
is convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter within one year of
the date of a previous violation and who was fined for the previous violation
may be sentenced by the Court to an additional fine as a repeat offender.
The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender shall not be less than the
minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided herein, and same shall be
calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of this chapter.
Chapter 277
JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Automobile dealers — See Ch. 119.
Fees — See Ch. 215.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 285.
§ 277-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
JUNK — Old or secondhand metal, bottles, glassware, hardware, paper,
lumber, plumbing fixtures, dismantled or inoperable machinery or any other
thing which is no longer used or usable for its intended purpose but which
has value because of the parts or materials it contains, or four or more
unregistered motor vehicles, which, in the opinion of the Superintendent of
the Division of Inspections or his designee, are unfit for reconditioning for
use for highway transportation, or used parts of motor vehicles or material
which has been a part of a motor vehicle, the sum of which parts or material
shall, in the opinion of the Superintendent of the Division of Inspections or
his designee, be equal in bulk to four or more motor vehicles.
JUNK DEALER — Any person who acquires, stores or collects junk for
commercial purposes within the Township.
JUNKYARD — Any place where junk is collected or stored, regardless of
whether the place is covered or uncovered and regardless of whether it is
located within any building or structure.
§ 273-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 277-1
1:385
MOTOR VEHICLE JUNK BUSINESS or MOTOR VEHICLE JUNKYARD —
Any business and any place of storage or deposit adjacent to or visible from
a state highway, which displays, or in or upon which there are displayed,
to the public view, two or more unregistered motor vehicles which, in
the opinion of the Commissioner, are unfit for reconditioning for use for
highway transportation, or used parts of motor vehicles or material which
has been part of a motor vehicle, the sum of which parts or material shall,
in the opinion of the Commissioner, be equal in bulk to two or more motor
vehicles.
§ 277-2. License required; license fee.101
§ 277-3. Application for license.
In addition to the information required by § 285-2, an application for a
license under this chapter shall be accompanied by the following: a plot plan
in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions of the premises, the
location of all fences and screening and any other information which may
appropriately be required for the effective enforcement of this chapter.102
§ 277-4. Licensing of motor vehicle junkyards.103
Where any person desires to obtain a permit from the Commissioner of
Motor Vehicles for a motor vehicle junkyard in accordance with N.J.S.A.
39:11-1 et seq., such person shall deposit with the Township Clerk such fees
as are provided for in the Act and comply with all provisions therein. Upon
obtaining a permit under the Act from the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles,
such person may obtain a Township license upon payment of a license fee
as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code; provided, however,
that, in case such person shall desire to operate in any manner different
from the operation permitted by the state permit, such person shall, in
A. No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer or operate a
junkyard within the Township without first obtaining a license to do so.
The fee for a license under this chapter shall be as set forth in Chapter
215, Fees, of the Township Code, per year, and a separate license shall
be required for each location at which the licensee conducts business.
B. Every person not licensed as a junk dealer but who intends using or
authorizing the use of any cart, wagon, truck or vehicle in the Township
for the collection, purchase or sale of any articles of junk shall make
application to the Township Clerk and receive a license for that purpose
and pay the sum as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township
Code, for each and every such cart, wagon, truck or vehicle.
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
102. Editor's Note: Former § 78-4, pertaining to bonds, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 12-5-2012 by Ord. No. 12-053.
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 277-1 HAMILTON CODE § 277-4
1:386
addition to the requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:11-1 et seq., take out a
regular Township license and pay the license fee provided in § 277-2A.
§ 277-5. Consent of property owner to be endorsed on application
for license.
If the applicant for a license under this chapter is not the owner of the site
where the business is to be conducted, the owner's consent to the conduct
of the business shall be endorsed on the application.
§ 277-6. Inspection of premises prior to issuance of license.
[Amended 12-5-2012 by Ord. No. 12-053]
In addition to the investigation provided for by § 285-4, the Department of
Community Planning and Compliance shall inspect the premises for which
a license under this chapter is desired, to determine whether the premises
comply with the provisions of this chapter. The Department shall report
the results of its investigation to the Municipal Clerk. No license shall be
issued unless the report of the Department of Community Planning and
Compliance is favorable.
§ 277-7. Hearing on license application. [Amended 12-5-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-053]
§ 277-8. Notice of hearing to affected property owners.
A. Upon receiving the report of the Department of Community Planning
and Compliance, the Township Council shall set a date for a hearing
upon the application for a license under this chapter and notify the
applicant. After hearing all the evidence, the Township Council shall
grant the license unless it is satisfied by a fair preponderance of the
evidence that granting the license would unreasonably affect the public
health, safety and welfare.
B. On an application for the renewal of an existing license, no hearing
shall be required unless a formal complaint has been filed against the
licensee alleging a violation of this chapter or other unlawful conduct.
C. Any application seeking enlargement of the licensed premises shall be
regarded as an application for a new license.
A. The applicant for a license under this chapter shall, at least five days
prior to the time appointed for hearing on the application, give personal
notice to all property owners within 200 feet of the property lines of the
proposed junkyard or junk shop. The notice shall be given either by
handing a copy thereof to the property owners, or by leaving a copy at
the usual place of abode of the property owners if the owners are the
occupants of the property affected by the application or are residents of
the Township.
§ 277-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 277-8
1:387
§ 277-9. Screening.
All junkyards shall be enclosed by a solid wall or fence at least eight feet in
height and so constructed that the interior of the junkyard will not be visible
from a public street. The wall or fence shall be painted white, dark green
or some similar color and shall be kept in good repair. It shall contain no
more than two entrances or exits, each not less than 15 feet and not more
than 20 feet wide. In place of a wall or fence, a junkyard may be enclosed
by a planting of dense evergreen screening, provided that the screening is
sufficient to prevent the interior of the junkyard from being visible from a
public street. If such screening is used, the junkyard shall also be enclosed
by a cyclone or similar type of chain-link fence erected inside the screening
and sufficient to prevent unauthorized persons from gaining entrance.
§ 277-10. Safety standards; conduct of business.
Every person licensed under this chapter shall comply with the following
regulations:
B. If the owners are nonresidents of the Township, the notice may be given
by sending written notice by registered mail to the last known address
of the property owner as shown by the most recent tax lists of the
Township. Where the owners are partnerships, service upon any
partner as outlined in this subsection shall be sufficient, and, where the
owners are corporations, service upon any officer as set forth in this
subsection shall be sufficient.
C. The applicant shall, by affidavit, present satisfactory proof to the
Township Council, at least three days prior to the hearing, that the
notices have been duly served. Upon the hearing, any person may
appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
A. Fire prevention. Adequate precaution shall be taken in every junkyard
to prevent fire from breaking out or spreading. No junk shall be stored
within 15 feet of any frame building or within 10 feet of any fireproof
building, and no explosives or extremely flammable materials shall be
stored in a junkyard.
B. Open burning. The burning of junk or refuse material in the open air is
prohibited.
C. Storage generally. Junk shall be stored in a manner that will permit
customers of the junkyard and other persons to move about easily and
without risking injury. No junk shall be stored within 10 feet of any
sidewalk, and no junk shall be stored in such a manner that it may be
easily dislodged or caused to fall.
D. Pest control. No licensee shall permit rodents, vermin or insects, or
conditions likely to attract them, or any other unhealthy or unsanitary
conditions to exist on the licensed premises.
§ 277-8 HAMILTON CODE § 277-10
1:388
Chapter 285
E. Purchases from minors. No junk shall be purchased from any person
under the age of 18 years.
F. Purchase or possession of vehicle with altered serial number or other
identification. No licensee or agent or employee of a licensee shall
purchase or have in his possession any motor vehicle or part of a motor
vehicle from which the manufacturer's serial number or any other
number or identification mark has been removed, altered, concealed or
destroyed. Any licensee or agent or employee of a licensee to whom
such a motor vehicle or part is offered shall immediately report that fact
to the Township Police Division.
G. Prohibited areas for storage of goods. No goods, articles, merchandise
or motor vehicle shall be placed by the licensee on the sidewalk or any
part thereof, or on or above the fence, or between the fence or any
building and the sidewalk, nor shall the licensee use the street or any
part thereof for the storage, repair or sale of goods, articles,
merchandise or motor vehicles.
H. Payment of taxes. No license shall be granted or renewed if the
applicant is indebted to the Township for taxes or if there are due any
taxes upon the premises for which the license is sought.
I. Record of purchases. Every licensee shall provide and keep a book in
which shall be written at the time of each purchase a description of the
articles so purchased, the name and residence of the person from whom
such purchase was made, and the date of such purchase. Such book
shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection by the Chief of Police
or any person who shall be duly authorized in writing for that purpose
by him, who shall exhibit such written authority to such licensee.
J. Vehicles. Every person licensed shall be entitled to keep one cart,
wagon, truck or vehicle for the purpose of collecting the junk articles in
the Township; provided, however, that, if the person so licensed desires
to keep more than one cart, wagon, truck or vehicle, the licensee shall
apply to the Township Clerk, who shall authorize the vehicle to be used,
and the licensee shall cause to be painted on the outside of such cart,
wagon, truck or vehicle the name of the licensee at length and the
street and number of the licensee's place of business in plain letters.
The letters shall be not less than 2 1/2 inches in length, and the licensee
shall also attach to one side of every such cart, wagon, truck or other
vehicle a metal tag bearing the number of the vehicle.
K. Inspections. All licensed premises shall be open to inspection at any
reasonable time by the Building Inspector, the Health Officer, any
member of the Township Council, any member of the Police Division or
any other duly authorized municipal official for the purpose of
ascertaining whether the provisions of this chapter and other
applicable laws and ordinances are being complied with.
§ 277-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 277-10
1:389
LICENSES AND PERMITS
§ 285-1. Purpose of chapter.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a uniform set of procedures
for administering the issuance, renewal and revocation of all licenses and
permits issued by the Township, except alcoholic beverage licenses, dog
licenses and taxicab licenses; provided, however, that any provisions
established otherwise by a Township ordinance with respect to specific
licenses shall control as to applications for, issuance of, renewal and
revocation of such licenses.
§ 285-2. Application for license.
A. All applications for licenses shall be made to the Township Clerk upon
forms provided by him and shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and permanent and local address of the applicant, or, if
the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of its
registered agent.
(2) If the licensed activity is to be carried on at a fixed location, the
address and a description of the premises.
(3) If a vehicle is to be used, its description, including the license
number.
(4) If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of
the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact
relationship.
(5) The days of the week and the hours of the day during which the
licensed activity will be conducted.
(6) A description of the nature of the business and the goods, property
or services to be sold or supplied.
(7) A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or the violation of any municipal ordinance of any
municipality other than traffic offenses and, if so, the date and
place of conviction, the nature of the offense and the punishment or
penalty imposed.
(8) Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant so that an investigator may properly
evaluate his character and responsibility.
B. The applicant shall be fingerprinted if the Chief of Police determines
that fingerprints are necessary for proper identification. Fingerprint
records shall be immediately processed for classification and
identification.
§ 277-10 HAMILTON CODE § 285-2
1:390
§ 285-3. Reimbursement to Township for fingerprint check.
When deemed necessary by the Chief of Police to institute a fingerprint
check through the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the applicant for a
license shall reimburse the Township for any charge by the Federal Bureau
of Investigation.
§ 285-4. Investigation of applicant; denial; appeal of denial.
§ 285-5. Contents.
Licenses shall be in a form which the Mayor shall prescribe and shall
contain the following information:
C. Applications by partnerships shall be signed by all partners, with the
information required by this section supplied in detail as to each
partner; and applications of corporations shall have attached individual
statements containing all of the information required by this section
relating to each employee or agent who shall engage in the licensed
activity, and shall be signed by each employee or agent.
D. Two photographs, not over one year old, showing the applicant's face,
front and profile, of a minimum size of 1 1/2 by 1 1/2 inches, shall be
affixed to the application.
A. Where the Municipal Clerk deems it necessary, applications for licenses
shall be referred to the Chief of Police or a police officer designated by
him, who shall immediately institute such investigation of the
applicant's business responsibility, moral character and ability to
properly conduct the licensed activity as he considers necessary for the
protection of the public. He shall communicate his findings in writing to
the Municipal Clerk within a reasonable time after the application has
been filed. If the investigator decides that the applicant's character,
ability or business responsibility is unsatisfactory or that the products,
services or activity are not free from fraud, he shall disapprove the
application and the Municipal Clerk shall refuse to issue the license and
shall so notify the applicant. Otherwise, the Municipal Clerk shall issue
the license immediately, provided the required license fees have been
paid, except in cases where approval of the Township Council or Mayor
is required. In the case of an application for a peddler's license, the
license may be issued immediately, subject to the investigation.
B. In the event of the denial of a license, the applicant may appeal to the
Township Council. The decision of the Township Council shall be final.
A. The name and address of the licensee.
B. The number and type of the license and the nature of the licensed
activity.
C. The address at which the licensed activity is conducted, if the activity is
carried on at a fixed location.
§ 285-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-5
1:391
§ 285-6. Record of licenses.
The Municipal Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this
chapter. The record shall be in a form prescribed by the Mayor and shall
contain the same information as is required by § 285-5 to be contained in
the license. It shall also indicate the amount of the fee paid for the licenses,
the date upon which payment was received, the date of the issuance of the
license, whether the license is a new license or a renewal, and any other
information which the Mayor may require.
§ 285-7. Display.
When the licensed activity is conducted at a fixed location or from a vehicle,
the license shall be prominently displayed at the location or on the vehicle.
In all other cases the licensee shall have the license in his possession at
all times and shall display it upon the request of any police officer or any
person with whom he is doing business.
§ 285-8. Transfer.
Each license shall apply only to the person to whom it was issued, and no
license shall be transferable to another person.
§ 285-9. Expiration and renewal; proration of fee.
§ 285-10. Grounds for revocation.
D. If the licensed activity is conducted from a vehicle, the make, model and
license number of the vehicle.
E. The expiration date of the license.
F. Any other appropriate information which the Mayor may require.
A. Except where expressly provided otherwise, all licenses shall expire on
December 31 of the year of issue at 12:00 midnight, local time.
Applications for the renewal of licenses shall be made not later than
December 1 of the year of issue.
B. When an application for a license is made during the course of any
calendar year, the fee shall be prorated to the nearest month. Any
period of time greater than 1/2 month shall be considered as a full
month for this purpose.
A. Any license or permit issued by the Township may be revoked by the
Mayor, after notice and a hearing, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit or
license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity.
§ 285-5 HAMILTON CODE § 285-10
1:392
§ 285-11. Notice of revocation hearing.
Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a license or permit shall be given
in writing by the Municipal Clerk. The notice shall specifically set forth the
grounds upon which the proposed revocation is based and the time and
place of the hearing. It shall be served by mailing a copy to the licensee at
his last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least
five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 285-12. Procedure for revocation hearing. [Amended 11-2-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-050]
Hearings for the revocation of a license or permit shall be conducted before
the Mayor or a designee thereof. At the hearing, the licensee shall have the
right to appear and be heard, to be represented by an attorney, to present
witnesses in his own behalf, to cross examine opposing witnesses, and to
have a permanent record made of the proceedings at his own expense.
The Mayor or designee thereof shall revoke or suspend the license if he is
satisfied by a preponderance of the evidence that the licensee is guilty of
the acts charged. If the license is suspended or revoked, the licensee may
appeal to Township Council.
§ 285-13. Reinstatement after revocation or denial.
The Township may issue another license to a person whose license has been
revoked or denied as provided in this chapter if after hearing it is satisfied
by clear and convincing evidence that the acts which led to the revocation
or denial will not occur again. Otherwise, no person whose license has been
revoked or denied, or any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall
be issued another license to carry on the same activity.
(3) Failure to maintain the building, structure or premises in such
condition as complies with any Township ordinance or regulation,
or any other violation of any Township ordinance or regulation.
(4) Conviction of the licensee for any felony or high misdemeanor or a
misdemeanor or disorderly person's offense involving moral
turpitude.
(5) Conduct of the licensed activity, whether by the licensee himself or
his agents or employees, in an unlawful manner or in a manner that
constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the public health,
safety or general welfare.
B. Whenever a license has been issued immediately upon an application,
pending the results of the investigation provided for by this chapter,
such license may be summarily revoked if the result of the investigation
is such as would have resulted in denial of the application.
§ 285-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-14
1:393
§ 285-14. Authority to prescribe additional regulations.
The Township Council may, by resolution, make rules and regulations which
interpret or amplify any provision of this chapter or for the purpose of
administering the provisions of this chapter or making them more effective.
No regulation shall be inconsistent with or alter or amend any provision
of this chapter, and no regulation shall impose any requirement which is
in addition to or greater than the requirements that are expressly or by
implication imposed by any provision of this chapter.
§ 285-15. Right of entry.
For the purpose of making inspections and enforcing the provisions of this
chapter and any other ordinance or regulation pertaining to a licensed
business or activity, the Director of Community Planning and Compliance
or the director of the department having jurisdiction over such licensed
business or activity, or their designee, shall have the right of entry to any
premises during reasonable hours.
§ 285-16. Payment of delinquent property taxes or assessments
required.104
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:52-1.2, as a condition of issuance or renewal of a
license, all delinquent property taxes or assessments on the property that
is the subject of the license or on which a licensed activity or business is or
will be conducted must be paid. The license shall be revoked or suspended
if property taxes are not paid for three consecutive quarters or more. The
license shall be restored upon payment of taxes. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to or include any alcoholic beverage license or permit
issued pursuant to the New Jersey Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, N.J.S.A.
33:1-1 et seq.
Chapter 289
LITTERING
§ 289-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish, and all other waste material which,
if thrown or deposited as prohibited in this chapter, tends to create a danger
to public health, safety and welfare.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — Any container suitable for the depositing of litter.
104. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 285-14 HAMILTON CODE § 289-1
1:394
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys,
beaches or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
docks, grounds and buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 289-2. Deposit of litter generally.
No person shall sweep, throw, deposit or dump litter in or upon any
occupied, open or vacant property, whether owned by such person or not,
or in or upon any street, sidewalk, park or other public place or any pond,
lake or stream or other body of water within the Township, except in public
receptacles or in authorized private receptacles for collection. Persons
placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall
do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by
the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private
property.
§ 289-3. Sweeping litter into gutter or street.
No person, including merchants owning or occupying a place of business,
shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within
the Township the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from
any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
§ 289-4. Throwing litter from vehicle.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the Township or upon
private property.
§ 289-5. Vehicles scattering load or depositing mud, dirt, etc., on
street.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
Township unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any
load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley
or other public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or
truck within the Township, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit
in any street, alley or other public place any mud, dirt, sticky substances,
litter or foreign matter of any kind.
§ 289-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-6
1:395
§ 289-6. Transporting litter into Township.
No person shall bring, cart, remove, transport or collect any litter from
outside the Township and bring such material into the Township for the
purpose of dumping or disposing thereof. No truck or other vehicle
containing litter which has been transported into the Township shall be
parked or allowed to remain standing on any street or on any public
property for a period in excess of two hours.
§ 289-7. Distribution of handbills.
No person shall cast or place or cause to be cast or placed any
advertisement, handbill, circular or paper on any public street, on
sidewalks, into any vestibules or yards, upon porches of any dwelling house
or other buildings or into any vehicle while on the public highways or on
private property within the Township, except that this section shall not
apply to newspapers and addressed envelopes delivered to subscribers
and addresses. Advertisements, handbills, circulars and papers may be
distributed in the Township, provided they are securely placed at each
dwelling so as not to be blown away by the wind.
§ 289-8. Litter receptacles required in certain places and at special
events.
Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following public
places which exist in the Township: sidewalks used by pedestrians in active
retail commercially zoned areas, such that at a minimum there shall be
no single linear quarter mile without a receptacle; buildings held out for
use by the public, including schools, government buildings and railroad
and bus stations; parks; drive-in restaurants; all street vendor locations;
self-service refreshment areas; construction sites; gasoline service station
islands; shopping centers; parking lots; campgrounds and trailer parks;
marinas, boat moorage and fueling stations; boat launching areas; public
and private piers operated for public use; and beaches and bathing areas;
and at special events to which the public is invited, including sporting
events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals. The proprietors of these
places or the sponsors of these events shall be responsible for providing and
servicing the receptacles such that adequate containerization is available.
§ 289-9. Violations and penalties. [Added 8-22-2012 by Ord. No.
12-037105]
Any person violating this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to
the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations;
penalties, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton, as same may be
amended.
Chapter 296
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 289-6 HAMILTON CODE § 289-9
1:396
MASSAGE AND/OR SOMATIC ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 296-1. Declaration of policy; adoption of standards.
§ 296-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — The conduct, in
accordance with applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations, of
a check to determine whether a person has a criminal record by exchanging
and/or cross-referencing that person's name and fingerprints with those
on file with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the State Bureau of
Identification in the Division of State Police.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPIES — Any systems of
activity of structured touch which include, but are not limited to, holding,
applying pressure, stroking, kneading, positioning and mobilizing soft
tissue of the body by manual technique and use of visual, kinesthetic,
auditory and palpating skills to assess the body for purposes of applying
therapeutic massage, bodywork or somatic principles. Such applications
may include, but are not limited to, the use of therapies such as
heliotherapy or hydrotherapy, the use of moist hot and cold external
applications, external application of herbal or topical preparations not
classified as prescription drugs, movement and neuromyofacial education
and education in self-care and stress management. Massage, bodywork
and somatic therapies do not include the diagnosis or treatment of illness,
disease, impairment or disability.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPIST — Any person licensed
pursuant to the provisions of the Massage and Bodywork Therapist
Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT —
Any establishment wherein massage, bodywork and/or somatic therapies
are administered or are permitted to be administered, when such therapies
are administered for any form of consideration.
A. It is hereby declared that the business of operating a massage business,
as defined in this chapter, is a business affecting the public health,
safety and general welfare of the Township of Hamilton.
B. New Jersey Administrative Code, Title 13, Law and Public Safety,
Chapter 37A, New Jersey Board of Massage and Bodywork Therapy
Rules (N.J.A.C. 13:37A-1.1 et seq.), as amended, deleted and
supplemented, is hereby incorporated into this chapter and made a part
thereof. [Added 1-3-2017 by Ord. No. 16-055]
§ 289-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-3
1:397
§ 296-3. Nonlicensed therapists prohibited.
The administering of massage, bodywork and/or somatic therapies for any
form of consideration by any person not licensed by the State of New Jersey
pursuant to the Massage and Bodywork Therapist Licensing Act, P.L. 1999,
c. 19, amended by P.L. 2007, c. 337,106 shall be prohibited throughout the
Township.
§ 296-4. License for establishment or premises required.
No person, firm or corporation shall operate any establishment or utilize
any premises in the Township for a massage, bodywork and somatic therapy
establishment unless or until such person, firm or corporation has obtained
a license for such establishment or premises from the Municipal Clerk in
accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter.
§ 296-5. License renewals.
§ 296-6. Application for license.
Any person desiring a massage, bodywork and somatic therapy
establishment license shall file a written application with the Municipal
Clerk upon a form provided by the Clerk. The application form shall contain
the following information:
A. All licenses shall be valid for a period of three years from the date of
issuance.
B. Licensees may renew their licenses prior to expiration by filing a new
application with the Municipal Clerk in the manner prescribed in this
chapter and accompanied by the requisite fee.
C. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at the end of the
respective calendar year. Renewal applications are due by November 1
of that year the license expires.
A. The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual,
partnership, corporation or otherwise.
B. The name, style and designation under which the business is to be
conducted.
C. The business address and all telephone numbers, including facsimile,
where business is to be conducted.
D. A complete list of the names and residence addresses of all massage,
bodywork and somatic therapists and employees of the business and
the name and residence address of the manager or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business, which shall be
updated for each new employee.
106. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 24:11-53 et seq.
§ 296-3 HAMILTON CODE § 296-6
1:398
E. A sworn statement indicating that all massage, bodywork and somatic
therapists employed or to be employed by the establishment or
otherwise permitted to work at the establishment have been licensed by
the State of New Jersey pursuant to the Massage and Bodywork
Therapist Licensing Act, P.L. 1999, c. 19, amended by P.L. 2007, c.
337.107
F. The following personal information concerning the applicant(s), if an
individual; concerning each stockholder holding more than 10% of the
stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the applicant
is a corporation; concerning the partners, including limited partners, if
the applicant is a partnership; and concerning the manager or other
person principally in charge of the operation of the business shall be
provided:
(1) The name, complete residence address and residence telephone
number.
(2) The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant.
(3) Written proof of age.
(4) Height, weight, sex, color of hair and eyes.
(5) Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of the application and at least two inches by two inches in size.
(6) Provide any massage therapy or similar business history and
experience, including, but not limited to, whether or not such
person has previously operated in this or another municipality or
state under a license or permit or has had such license or permit
denied, revoked or suspended and the reason therefor and the
business activities or occupations subsequent to such action or
denial, suspension or revocation.
(7) All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted and the offense
for which convicted and circumstances thereof. The applicant shall
execute a waiver and consent to allow a criminal history record
background check by the Hamilton Township Police Division.
Failure to execute such a waiver and consent shall result in a denial
of a license. Criminal history record background check can be
waived if the applicant holds a current license issued by the State
of New Jersey pursuant to the Massage and Bodywork Therapist
Licensing Act, P.L. 1999, c. 19, amended by P.L. 2007, c. 337.
(8) The fingerprints of the applicant(s).
107. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 24:11-53 et seq.
§ 296-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-6
1:399
§ 296-7. Inspection requirements.
G. At the time the application is filed, a fee, as established in § 296-20,
shall be paid to the Municipal Clerk to cover the cost of processing the
application and investigating the facts stated therein.
A. The Municipal Clerk, upon receiving an application for a massage,
bodywork and somatic therapy establishment license, shall refer the
application to the various applicable municipal departments for review
and conformance with applicable state and Township codes for such an
establishment.
B. No massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment shall be
issued a license or be operated, established or maintained in the
Township unless inspections by the appropriate municipal departments
reveal that the establishment complies with the minimum requirements
of the Uniform Construction Code and health codes for businesses
operating in the Township. In addition, the establishment must comply
with each of the following minimum requirements:
(1) All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas
and floors shall be constructed of material with surfaces which are
smooth, nonabsorbent, and which may be readily disinfected.
(2) A public rest room shall be available to clients and employees
during all business hours.
(3) Water closets and lavatories shall be in conformance with the
regulations set forth in the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:23.
(4) If bathing, dressing and locker facilities are provided for the
patrons and male and female patrons are served simultaneously,
separate bathing, dressing, locker and massage room facilities
shall be provided.
(5) The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting
nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering
massages. Such nondisposable instruments and materials shall be
disinfected after use on each patron.
(6) Adequate hand washing facilities shall be available within the
premises to maintain clean hands and arms of all employees before,
after and during treatments.
(7) Hand sinks shall be provided with hot and cold water capable of
delivering running water under pressure at a temperature of 90° to
110° F.
(8) Liquid soap and disposable paper towels shall be conveniently
located to each hand washing facility.
§ 296-6 HAMILTON CODE § 296-8
1:400
§ 296-8. Investigation; issuance of license.
§ 296-9. Revocation or suspension of license.
A. When said application is properly filled out, signed by the applicant and
has been filed with the Municipal Clerk with all accompanying
information, the application shall be referred by the Clerk to the
Hamilton Township Police Division and Hamilton Township Division of
Health. The Chief of Police and the Health Officer or their designee(s)
shall investigate the information available as to the applicant's business
and good moral character of the applicant as deemed necessary for the
protections of the public health, welfare and safety.
B. If as a result of such investigation the applicant's character or business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory or that the issuance of a
license to the applicant would present a danger to the public health,
welfare or safety, the Chief of Police and/or the Health Officer shall
indicate on such application his/her disapproval and reasons for same
and return the application to the Township Clerk, who shall notify the
applicant that the application is disapproved.
C. If as a result of such investigation the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory and the
issuance of the license to the applicant will present no danger to the
public health, safety and welfare, the Chief of Police and the Health
Officer shall indicate their approval on the application and return the
application to the Township Clerk, who shall execute and deliver to the
applicant the license. A copy and any renewals, suspensions or
revocations of the license shall be kept on file in the Hamilton Township
Division of Health.
D. Any applicant denied a license pursuant to the provisions set forth in
this chapter may appeal to the Township Council, in writing, stating
reasons why the license should be granted. The Council may grant or
deny the license. The Council may also review any determination of the
Chief of Police and/or the Health Officer granting or denying a license
on its own motion.
A. Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Chief of
Police and/or the Health Officer, after notice and a hearing, for any of
the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the application for
the license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the licensed business in the Township.
(3) If the Chief of Police, Health Officer or their designee is denied
access to the premises for the purpose of conducting an inspection.
(4) Any violation of this chapter.
§ 296-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-9
1:401
§ 296-10. Criteria for immediate suspension.
The licenses issued under this chapter may be immediately suspended by
the Chief of Police and/or the Health Officer or their designee for the
following reasons:
§ 296-11. Display of license.
The massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment shall display
its license as well as the New Jersey license of each and every massage,
bodywork and somatic therapist employed in the establishment in an open
and conspicuous place on the premises of the establishment.
§ 296-12. Operating requirements.
Every massage, bodywork, and somatic therapy establishment shall comply
with the following:
(5) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude, a felony, an offense
involving sexual misconduct, keeping or residing in a house of
prostitution, and any crime involving dishonesty.
(6) Conducting the licensed business in the Township in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for the revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the
time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be given personally or
mailed to the licensee at his/her last known address at least five days
prior to the date set for the hearing.
C. Such license may, pending revocation proceedings, be suspended for
not more than 10 days by the Chief of Police and/or the Health Officer if,
in his/her opinion, the conduct of the licensee is detrimental to the
health, safety and general welfare of the Township.
D. The Chief of Police and/or the Health Officer or their designee shall
serve as hearing officer for any hearing pursuant to this subsection.
A. Massage, bodywork or somatic therapy is provided by an unlicensed
therapist.
B. Unsanitary or unsafe conditions which may adversely impact the health
and/or safety of the public.
A. Every portion of the massage, bodywork, and somatic therapy
establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean
and operated in a sanitary condition. A broad spectrum antimicrobial
disinfectant shall be used.
§ 296-9 HAMILTON CODE § 296-12
1:402
B. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted (brochures or
price list) in the reception area in a location available to all prospective
customers.
C. All employees, including massage, bodywork, and somatic therapists,
shall be clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments.
Dressing rooms must be available on the premises. Doors to such
dressing rooms shall open inward, be self-closing, and be nonlockable.
D. The hand wash sink shall be used solely for the washing of hands, arms
and other parts of the body.
E. Hand sinks shall be supplied with liquid soap and disposable hand
towels at all times.
F. Every area of the establishment shall be provided with lighting capable
of providing a minimum of 50 footcandles of artificial light. Lighting
may be dimmed during treatment sessions.
G. Massage tables shall be maintained in good condition.
H. Toilet paper, covered trash, liquid hand soap and disposable paper
towels or alternate means of hand drying shall be provided in rest
rooms.
I. All massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishments shall be
provided with clean laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity
which shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary
manner.
J. Soiled linens and draping materials shall be either commercially
laundered or washed on site in a clothes washing machine, in hot water
with detergent and at least one cup of bleach or an antibacterial agent,
and dried on the high heat setting in a clothes dryer.
K. Linens used in a licensed establishment may not be laundered in a
private home.
L. Closed containers shall be provided for soiled linens.
M. The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths
or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or massage,
bodywork or somatic therapist.
N. No massage, bodywork or somatic therapy shall be knowingly served on
any patron infected with any fungus or other skin infection, nor shall
service be performed on any patron exhibiting skin inflammation or
eruptions unless a duly licensed physician has certified that person may
be safely served.
O. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly, in a massage, bodywork,
and somatic therapy establishment, to place his or her hand upon or
touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner or to
§ 296-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-12
1:403
§ 296-13. Inspections by Police Division or Health Division.
§ 296-14. Sleeping quarters.
No part of any quarters of any massage, bodywork and somatic therapy
establishment shall be used for or connected with any bedroom or sleeping
quarters, nor may any person sleep in such massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy establishment except for limited periods incidental to and directly
related to a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy treatment or bath. This
massage a sexual or genital area of any other person. No massage,
bodywork and somatic therapist, employee or operator shall perform
or offer to perform any act which would require the touching of the
patron's sexual or genital area.
P. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all
other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat-rooms, steam or vapor
rooms or steam or vapor cabinets and shower compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in
operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each
use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.
Q. Oils, creams, lotions and other preparations used in administering
massage, bodywork and somatic therapies shall be kept in clean closed
containers or cabinets.
R. Animals, except for Seeing Eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the
massage work area.
S. Each massage, bodywork and somatic therapist shall wash his or her
hands in hot running water, using a proper soap or disinfectant before
administering a massage.
T. Hours of operation. No such business shall begin operations before
9:00 a.m. or continue after 10:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, 8:00
a.m. or continue after 8:00 p.m. on Saturday, and 9:00 a.m. or continue
after 6:00 p.m. on Sunday.
A. The Chief of Police and Health Officer and/or their designees are
authorized to conduct random inspections of massage, bodywork and
somatic therapy establishments granted a permit under the provisions
of this chapter for the purpose of determining whether the provisions of
this chapter are being complied with. Such inspections shall be
unannounced but shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable
manner. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or employee of the licensee
to fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or to
hinder such officer in any manner.
B. The operator shall permit access to all parts of the establishment, and
all pertinent records required for the inspection shall be made available
to the health authority representative for review.
§ 296-12 HAMILTON CODE § 296-14
1:404
provision shall not preclude the location of massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy establishment in separate quarters of a building housing a hotel or
other separate businesses or clubs.
§ 296-15. Prohibited acts.
§ 296-16. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to massage, bodywork or
somatic therapies given:
§ 296-17. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the revocation or suspension of the license granted under this
chapter, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine in the amount no lower than $500 and no more than $2,000 as
determined by the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 296-18. Relicensing after revocation.
A. No owner or manager of a massage, bodywork and somatic therapy
establishment shall tolerate in his or her establishment any activity or
behavior prohibited by the laws of the State of New Jersey, particularly,
but not limited to, laws proscribing prostitution, indecency and
obscenity, including the sale, uttering or exposing and public
communication of obscene material; laws which relate to the
commission of sodomy, adultery and proscribing fornication, nor shall
any owner or manager tolerate in his or her establishment any activity
or behavior which violates this chapter.
B. Any conviction of any employee of a massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy establishment of a violation of the aforementioned statutes and
codes may devolve upon the owner or manager of such establishment, it
being specifically declared that following such conviction of an
employee, the owner or manager of the establishment may be
prosecuted as an accessory to such violation and the licenses which
have been issued may be automatically revoked.
A. In the office of licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist; or
B. By a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanitarium having
a staff which includes licensed physicians, chiropractors and/or
physical therapists; or
C. By any licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist in the
residence of his or her patient; or
D. By a licensed barber or cosmetologist/hairstylist limited to the areas of
the face, neck, scalp or upper part of the body as set forth in the
Cosmetology and Hairstyling Act of 1984, N.J.S.A. 45:5B-1 et seq.
§ 296-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-18
1:405
§ 296-19. Service of notices.
Whenever notice is required or permitted to be given by this chapter, such
notice may be effected by personal service upon the licensee if an individual
or any general partner, if a partnership, or upon any corporate officer, if a
corporation, or alternatively, to any of foregoing, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the last address listed in the Municipal Clerk's office
in conjunction with the license information. It shall be the duty of each
licensee to keep the Township advised of any subsequent change of address.
Upon failure of a licensee to comply with this requirement, any notice
returned with the notation "unknown," "moved," or "not claimed" shall be
deemed proper service of all notices required by this chapter.
§ 296-20. Fees.
Chapter 306
NEWSPAPER VENDING MACHINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435.
A. Any person whose license has been revoked under the provisions of this
chapter may apply to be relicensed upon filing of proof that all loss
caused by the actor or omissions for which the license was revoked had
been fully satisfied and that all conditions imposed by the decision of
the revocation have been complied with.
B. Payment of a registration fee as established in § 296-20 is required.
A. Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate or conduct a
massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment shall file an
application with the Municipal Clerk upon a form provided by the Clerk
and pay a fee set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code,
which shall be nonrefundable, unless the applicant voluntarily
withdraws the application within five days of filing and can demonstrate
that it has not operated the business for which the application is
pending during said five-day period, in which event $50 shall not be
refundable.108
B. Additional fees to conduct the criminal history record background
check, fingerprinting and related items shall be in the maximum
amount set, and subject to change, by the state.
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 296-18 HAMILTON CODE § 306-1
1:406
§ 306-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them by this section:
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person, association of persons, firm, or corporation
responsible, in whole or part, jointly or severally, for placing, locating,
installing, or maintaining a newspaper vending machine in a public right-ofway
or public place in the Township.
NEWSPAPER, NEWS PERIODICAL, AND NEWS MAGAZINE — Any
newspaper, periodical, or magazine of general circulation as defined by
general law; and newspaper, periodical, or magazine duly entered with the
Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal
statutes or regulations; and any newspaper periodical or magazine filed and
recorded with any recording officer as required by general law.
ROADWAY — That portion of any street improved, designed, or ordinarily
utilized for vehicular traffic.
SIDEWALK — Any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians,
including the area between the curb of any street and the property line
adjacent to it, or, if there is no curb, the area between the edge of the street
and the property line adjacent to it and shall include the public right-of-way
along such street or sidewalk.
STREET — All that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes,
including, but not limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys, and sidewalks.
§ 306-2. Location and placement.
Any newspaper vending machine that rests in whole or in part on any
portion of a public sidewalk or public right-of-way or that projects onto, into,
or over any part of a public right-of-way in the Township shall comply with
the following standards:
A. No newspaper vending machine shall be used or maintained that
projects onto, into, or over any part of the roadway of any public street
or that rests, wholly or partly, upon, along, or over any portion of the
roadway of any public street.
B. No newspaper vending machine shall be permitted to rest upon, in, or
over any public sidewalk when such installation, use, or maintenance:
(1) Endangers the safety of persons or property; or
(2) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians
along the public sidewalk or public right-of-way; and
(3) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of vehicular
traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, along the
public roadway; or
§ 306-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-2
1:407
(4) Unreasonably interferes with the ingress into or egress from any
public or private property or place of business; or
(5) Unreasonably interferes with the use of, or is attached to, traffic
signs, traffic signals, fire hydrants, police or fire call boxes, utility
poles, mailboxes, or other equipment located on or near the public
roadway, public sidewalk, or the public right-of-way; or
(6) Unreasonably interferes with public access to benches or rest stops
provided along the public right-of-way.
C. Newspaper vending machines shall be weighted so as to prevent their
unauthorized removal or their accidental movement within the public
sidewalk.
D. Newspaper vending machines must be placed next to each other and
grouped; provided that no group of newspaper vending machines shall
extend for a distance of more than four feet along a curb. A "group"
shall mean up to two machines and separated from any other group by a
distance of at least 20 feet. A "group" of machines shall be aligned in a
manner so as to provide a uniform grouping and the minimization of
incursions into the public right-of-way.
E. Newspaper vending machines shall be placed adjacent to a curbline;
provided that all newspaper vending machines so installed shall face
away from the roadway so as not to provide drive-up access to
motorists.
F. No newspaper vending machines shall be placed, installed, located,
used or maintained:
(1) Within 12 feet of any marked crosswalk;
(2) Within 12 feet of a curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;
(3) Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box, or
other emergency facility or equipment;
(4) Within five feet of any driveway;
(5) Within three feet of or on any public area improved with lawn,
flowers, shrubs, trees, or other landscaping other than that strip of
the public easement between the curb and sidewalk;
(6) Within five feet of a "No Stopping—No Standing" zone;
(7) Within three feet of the entrance of a bus shelter;
(8) Within a designated bus stop marked by a yellow curb, except that
newspaper vending machines may be located within the first five
feet along the yellow curb measured from the nearside point of
yellow curb, and within the last five feet along the yellow curb,
measured from the farside point of the yellow curb; provided,
however, that such newspaper vending machines do not
§ 306-2 HAMILTON CODE § 306-2
1:408
§ 306-3. Standards for installation, maintenance, and operation.
Any newspaper vending machine that in whole or in part rests upon, in, or
over any public sidewalk or public right-of-way or that projects onto, into,
or over any part of a public right-of-way within the Township shall comply
with the following standards:
unreasonably interfere with the loading and unloading of
passengers.
A. No newspaper vending machine shall exceed 48 inches in height, 24
inches in width, or 20 inches in depth.
B. No newspaper vending machine shall be used for commercial
advertising or commercial publicity purposes other than to display,
promote, or advertise the sale of the newspaper, news periodical, or
magazine sold in it.
C. Each newspaper vending machine shall be equipped with a coin-return
mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an
immediate refund in the event that he is unable to receive the
publication paid for. The coin-return mechanism shall at all times be
maintained in good working order.
D. Each newspaper vending machine shall have affixed to it, in a readily
visible place so as to be seen by anyone using the newspaper vending
machine, a notice setting forth the name and address of the distributor
and the telephone number of a working telephone service to call to
report a malfunction or to secure a refund in the event of a malfunction
of the coin-return mechanism or to give the notices provided for
§ 306-4.
E. Each newspaper vending machine shall be maintained in a neat and
clean condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, each newspaper vending
machine shall be serviced and maintained so that:
(1) It is reasonably free of loose, chipped, peeling, and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas;
(2) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible metal areas;
(3) The clear plastic or glass parts, if any, through which the
publications are viewed are not broken and are reasonably free of
cracks, dents, blemishes, and discoloration;
(4) The paper or cardboard parts or inserts, if any, are reasonably free
of tears, peelings, or fading;
(5) The structural parts are not broken, cracked, or otherwise
dangerous to users of them;
(6) The surrounding area shall remain in a satisfactory condition.
§ 306-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-4
1:409
§ 306-4. Enforcement.
§ 306-5. Violation and penalties.
A. The Hamilton Division of Police, the Township Zoning Enforcement
Officer and the Township Public Works Inspectors are empowered with
the responsibility of enforcing the requirements governing newspaper
vending machines. If the enforcement official determines that a
newspaper vending machine does not comply with the provisions
hereof, the enforcement official shall mail a written notice to the
distributor of such newspaper vending machine, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, stating the reasons why such newspaper
vending machine does not comply with the foregoing provisions.
B. If a distributor fails to adjust, correct, or otherwise cause such
newspaper vending machine to comply with the provisions hereof
within seven days from the date written notice of noncompliance is
mailed by the enforcement official, then such distributor shall be
deemed in violation of the provisions.
A. Any distributor who fails to comply with the provisions of §§ 306-2 and
306-3 shall, upon conviction in the Municipal Court, be punishable as
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations; penalties.
Each day a distributor fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter
shall constitute a separate violation under this section.109
B. If a distributor is convicted of a violation of this chapter by the
Municipal Court and if such distributor thereafter refuses to remedy or
correct the violation within 10 days from the date of conviction, then
the enforcement official shall be empowered to remove the newspaper
vending machine that is the basis for the conviction from the public
sidewalk or public right-of-way or other place and return the newspaper
vending machine to the distributor identified on the newspaper vending
machine.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, deface, or vandalize
any newspaper vending machine within the Township. Any person who
shall violate this subsection shall, upon conviction in the Municipal
Court, be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2,
Violations; penalties.110
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 306-4 HAMILTON CODE § 306-5
1:410
Chapter 311
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 94.
§ 311-1. Definitions. [Amended 7-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-024]
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this chapter have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures.
dBC — The sound level as measured using the "C" weighting network with
a sound level meter meeting the standards set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983 or
its successors. The unit of reporting is dB(C). The "C" weighting network is
more sensitive to low frequencies than is the "A" weighting network.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures, or roadways.
DEP or DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary at the site of an
emergency to restore or deliver essential services, including, but not limited
to, repairing water, gas, electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public
transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way,
dredging navigational waterways, or abating life-threatening conditions or
a state of emergency declared by a governing agency.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MINOR VIOLATION — A violation that is not the result of the purposeful,
reckless or criminally negligent conduct of the alleged violator; and/or the
activity or condition constituting the violation has not been the subject of
an enforcement action by any authorized local, county or state enforcement
agency against the violator within the immediately preceding 12 months for
the same or substantially similar violation.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound-dissipative device or system for
abating the sound on engines or equipment where such a device is part of
the normal configuration of the equipment.
§ 306-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-1
1:411
MULTI-DWELLING-UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER (NCO) — An employee of a local, county or
regional health agency which is certified pursuant to the County
Environmental Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise
enforcement activities or an employee of a municipality with a DEPapproved
model noise control ordinance. All NCOs must receive noise
enforcement training as specified by the DEP at N.J.A.C. 7:29 and is
currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must be acting
within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized to issue a
summons.
NOISE CONTROL INVESTIGATOR (NCI) — An employee of a municipality,
county or regional health commission that has a DEP-approved model noise
control ordinance and the employee has not received noise enforcement
training as specified by the DEP at N.J.A.C. 7:29. However, they are
knowledgeable about their model noise ordinance and enforcement
procedures. A noise control investigator may only enforce sections of the
ordinance that do not require the use of a sound level meter. The employee
must be acting within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be
authorized to issue a summons.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a NCO or NCI
using his or her unaided hearing faculties of normal acuity. As an example,
if the sound source under investigation is a portable or vehicular sound
amplification or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass
component of the music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The
NCO or NCI need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist
performing the song.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any real property or structures thereon that are
owned, leased, or controlled by a nongovernmental entity.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
nongovernmental entity.
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
A.
A building which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property, located above, below or otherwise adjacent to.
B.
§ 311-1 HAMILTON CODE § 311-1
1:412
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley, park or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either (a) the vertical boundary that separates
one parcel of property, i.e., lot and block, from another residential or
commercial property; (b) the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a
dwelling unit that is part of a multi-dwelling-unit building; or (c) on a
multi-use property as defined herein, the vertical or horizontal boundaries
between the two portions of the property on which different categories of
activity are being performed (e.g., if the multi-use property is a building
which is residential upstairs and commercial downstairs, then the real
property line would be the interface between the residential area and the
commercial area, or if there is an outdoor sound source such as an HVAC
unit on the same parcel of property, the boundary line is the exterior wall
of the receiving unit). This definition shall not apply to a commercial source
and a commercial receptor which are both located on the same parcel of
property (e.g., a strip mall).
SOUND PRODUCTION DEVICE — Any device whose primary function is the
production of sound, including, but not limited to, any musical instrument,
loudspeaker, radio, television, digital or analog music player, public address
system or sound-amplifying equipment.
SOUND REDUCTION DEVICE — Any device, such as a muffler, baffle,
shroud, jacket, enclosure, isolator, or dampener provided by the
manufacturer with the equipment, or that is otherwise required, that
mitigates the sound emissions of the equipment.
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKENDS — Beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the
following Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 311-2. Applicability.
A. This chapter applies to sound from the following property categories:
(1) Industrial facilities;
(2) Commercial facilities;
(3) Public service facilities;
(4) Community service facilities;
(5) Residential properties;
(6) Multi-use properties;
(7) Public and private rights-of-way;
§ 311-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-2
1:413
§ 311-3. Enforcement officers.
§ 311-4. Measurement protocols.
(8) Public spaces; and
(9) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
B. This chapter applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
(1) Commercial facilities;
(2) Public service facilities;
(3) Community service facilities;
(4) Residential properties;
(5) Multi-use properties;
(6) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings; and
(7) Industrial facilities.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. Noise control officers shall have the authority within their designated
jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any section of this
chapter and pursue enforcement activities. Any Hamilton Township law
enforcement officer can be qualified as a NCO and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Noise control investigators shall have the authority within their
designated jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any
section of this chapter that do not require the use of a sound-level meter
(i.e., plainly audible, times of day and/or distance determinations) and
pursue enforcement activities.
C. Noise control officers and investigators may cooperate with NCOs and
NCIs of an adjacent municipality in enforcing one another's municipal
noise ordinances.
A. Sound measurements made by a noise control officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior soundlevel
measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in
Subsection B of this section and with the definition of "real property
line" as contained herein.
B. When conducting indoor sound-level measurements across a real
property line, the measurements shall be taken at least three feet from
§ 311-2 HAMILTON CODE § 311-4
1:414
§ 311-5. Maximum permissible sound levels.
any wall, floor or ceiling and all exterior doors and windows may, at
the discretion of the investigator, be closed. The neighborhood residual
sound level shall be measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2.
When measuring total sound level, the configuration of the windows
and doors shall be the same and all sound sources within the dwelling
unit must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo). Measurements shall not
be taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways,
closets and bathrooms.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any property described in § 311-2A in such a manner
as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the sound level limits
set forth in Table I, II or III when measured at or within the real
property line of any of the receiving properties listed in Table I, II or III,
except as specified in § 311-4B.
B. Impulsive sound. Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., impulsive sound which occurs less than four times in any hour
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Impulsive sound which repeats
four or more times in any hour shall be measured as continuous sound
and shall meet the requirements as shown in Tables I and II.
Table I
Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Levels When
Measured Outdoors
Receiving
Property
Category:
Residential Property, or
Residential Portion of a
Multi-Use Property
Commercial
Facility, Public
Service
Facility,
Nonresidential
Portion of a
Multi-Use
Property, or
Community
Service
Facility
Time: 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
10:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
24 hours
Maximum Aweighted
sound
level standard
65 dB 50 dB 65 dB
§ 311-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-5
1:415
Table II
Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Levels When
Measured Indoors
Receiving
Property
Category:
Residential Property, or
Residential Portion of a
Multi-Use Property
Commercial
Facility, Public
Service
Facility,
Nonresidential
Portion of a
Multi-Use
Property, or
Community
Service Facility
Time: 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
10:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
24 hours
Maximum Aweighted
sound
level standard
55 dB 40 dB 55 dB
Note: Table II shall only apply when the source and the receptor are
separated by a real property line and they also share a common or
abutting wall, floor or ceiling, or are on the same parcel of property.
§ 311-5 HAMILTON CODE § 311-5
1:416
§ 311-6. Sound production devices.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any sound
production device in such a manner that the sound crosses a property line
and raises the total sound levels above the neighborhood residual sound
level by more than the permissible sound level limits set forth in Table
Table III
Maximum Permissible Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels (in decibels)
Receiving
Property
Category:
Residential Property,
or Residential
Portion of a Multi-
Use Property
Residential Property,
or Residential Portion
of a Multi-Use
Property
Commercial
Facility,
Public
Service
Facility,
Nonresidential
Portion of a
Multi-Use
Property, or
Community
Service
Facility
Commercial
Facility,
Public
Service
Facility,
Nonresidential
Portion of a
Multi-Use
Property, or
Community
Service
Facility
Outdoors Indoors Outdoors Indoors
Octave Band
Center
Frequency,
Hz
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level (dB)
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level (dB)
Octave
Band Sound
Pressure
Level (dB)
Octave Band
Sound
Pressure
Level (dB)
Time: 7:00 a.m.
to 10:00
p.m.
10:00
p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
10:00
p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
24 hours 24 hours
31.5 96 86 86 76 96 86
63 82 71 72 61 82 72
125 74 61 64 51 74 64
250 67 53 57 43 67 57
500 63 48 53 38 63 53
1,000 60 45 50 35 60 50
2,000 57 42 47 32 57 47
4,000 55 40 45 30 55 45
8,000 53 38 43 28 53 43
Note: When octave measurements are made, the sound from the
source must be constant in level and character. If octave band sound
pressure level variations exceed plus or minus 2 dB in the bands
containing the principal source frequencies, discontinue the
measurement.
§ 311-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-6
1:417
IV when measured within the residence of a complainant according to
the measurement protocol in § 311-4B of this chapter. These sound level
measurements shall be conducted with the sound level meter set for "C"
weighting, "fast" response.
Table IV
Maximum Permissible Increase in Total Sound Levels Within A
Residential Property
Week nights from 10:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.:
3 dB(C)
Weekend nights from 11:00 p.m. to
9:00 a.m.:
3 dB(C)
All other times: 6 dB(C)
§ 311-7. Restricted uses and activities. [Amended 7-19-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-024]
The following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set
forth below:
A. Excluding emergency work, power tools, home maintenance tools,
landscaping and/or yard maintenance equipment used by a residential
property owner or tenant shall not be operated between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet the applicable
limits set forth in Table I, II or III. At all other times the limits set forth
in Table I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in these
activities shall be operated with a muffler and/or sound-reduction
device.
B. Excluding emergency work, power tools, landscaping and/or yard
maintenance equipment used by nonresidential operators (e.g.,
commercial operators, public employees) shall not be operated on a
residential, commercial, industrial or public (e.g., golf course, parks,
athletic fields) property between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends or federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the limits
set forth in Table I, II or III. At all other times the limits set forth in
Table I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in these
activities shall be operated with a muffler and/or sound-reduction
device.
C. All construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work,
shall not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends and federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the
limits set forth in Table I, II or III. At all other times the limits set forth
in Table I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in these
activities shall be operated with a muffler and/or sound-reduction
device.
§ 311-6 HAMILTON CODE § 311-7
1:418
§ 311-8. Motor vehicles.
Violations of each subsection of this section shall be considered purposeful
and therefore nonminor violations.
D. Motorized snow removal equipment shall be operated with a muffler
and/or sound-reduction device when being used for snow removal. At all
other times the limits set forth in Table I, II or III do not apply.
E. All interior and exterior burglar alarms of a building or motor vehicle
must be activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates
its operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for intermittent sound after it has been activated. At all other
times the limits set forth in Table I, II or III do not apply.
F. Self-contained, portable, nonvehicular music or sound production
devices shall not be operated on a public space, public right-of-way,
private property or private right-of-way in such a manner as to be
plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the
operator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., sound, operated on a public space,
public right-of-way, private property or private right-of-way, from such
equipment shall not be plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet in any
direction from the operator.
G. Animals.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any property owner or tenant to allow any
domesticated or caged animal to create a sound across a real
property line which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the
peace, comfort, and repose of any resident, or to refuse or
intentionally fail to cease the unreasonable noise when ordered to
do so by a noise control officer or noise control investigator. Prima
facie evidence of a violation of this section shall include, but not be
limited to:
(a) Vocalizing (howling, yelping, barking, squawking, etc.) for five
minutes without interruption, defined as an average of four or
more vocalizations per minute in that period; or
(b) Vocalizing for 20 minutes intermittently, defined as an average
of two vocalizations or more per minute in that period.
(2) It shall be an affirmative defense under this subsection that the dog
or other animal was intentionally provoked to bark or make any
other noise.
A. No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed
or rendered inoperative or less effective than originally equipped, or
modified in any manner to be less effective than originally equipped,
other than for purposes of maintenance, repair, or replacement, any
device or element of design incorporated in any motor vehicle for the
§ 311-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-8
1:419
§ 311-9. Exemptions.
§ 311-10. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
purpose of noise control. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or
motorcycle which has been so modified. A vehicle not meeting these
requirements shall be deemed in violation of this provision if it is
operated stationary or in motion in any public space or public right-ofway.
B. No motorcycle shall be operated stationary or in motion unless it has a
muffler that complies with and is labeled in accordance with the
Federal Noise Regulations under 40 CFR Part 205.
C. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that is plainly
audible at a distance of 25 feet in any direction from the operator
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
D. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that it is plainly
audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
A. Except as provided in §§ 311-7 and 311-8 above, the provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to the exceptions set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.5.
B. Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound-level
limits set forth in Tables I, II and III except as provided for in § 311-7
above.
C. Sound-production devices required or sanctioned under the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA), FEMA or other government agencies to the
extent that they comply with the noise requirements of the enabling
legislation or regulation. Devices which are exempted under N.J.A.C.
7:29-1.5 shall continue to be exempted.
D. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be constructed to apply to:
(1) The use of bells, chimes or sound amplifiers by churches in church
activity.
(2) Activities of the municipal departments in the performance of their
duties, drills or public demonstrations.
(3) Activities in the public parks, playgrounds or public buildings
under the permission or authority of the municipal officials, or
schools and/or school functions.
(4) The playing by a band or orchestra in a hall or building or in the
open air, provided the playing does not continue beyond 10:00 p.m.
Sundays through Thursdays and 11:00 p.m. on Fridays and
Saturdays, subject to the provisions of § 311-6.
§ 311-8 HAMILTON CODE § 311-10
1:420
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for a notice of
violation (NOV) or a notice of penalty assessment (NOPA) document to
be issued to the violator by the noise control officer or noise control
investigator.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a civil penalty for each offense of not more than the maximum penalty
allowed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, which is $2,000 as of December
2014. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it
occurs shall constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
[Amended 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 15-008]
C. Upon identification of a violation of this chapter, the noise control
officer or noise control investigator shall issue an enforcement
document to the violator. The enforcement document shall identify the
condition or activity that constitutes the violation and the specific
provision of this chapter that has been violated. It shall also indicate
whether the violator has a period of time to correct the violation before
a penalty is sought.
D. If the violation is deemed by the noise control officer or noise control
investigator to be a minor violation (as defined in § 311-1) a NOV shall
be issued to the violator.
(1) The document shall indicate that the purpose of the NOV is
intended to serve as a notice to warn the responsible party/violator
of the violation conditions in order to provide them with an
opportunity to voluntarily investigate the matter and voluntarily
take corrective action to address the identified violation.
(2) The NOV shall identify the time period (up to 90 days), pursuant to
the Grace Period Law, N.J.S.A. 13:1D-125 et seq., where the
responsible party's/violator's voluntary action can prevent a formal
enforcement action with penalties issued by the Township of
Hamilton. It shall be noted that the NOV does not constitute a
formal enforcement action, a final legal determination that a
violation has occurred. Therefore, the NOV may not be appealed or
contested.
E. If the violation is deemed by the noise control officer or noise control
investigator to be a nonminor violation, the violator shall be notified
that if the violation is not immediately corrected a NOPA with a civil
penalty of no more than the maximum penalty allowed pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, which is $2,000 as of December 2014, will be issued. If
a nonminor violation is immediately corrected, a NOV without a civil
penalty shall still be issued to document the violation. If the violation
occurs again (within 12 months of the initial violation), a NOPA shall be
issued regardless of whether the violation is immediately corrected or
not. [Amended 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 15-008]
§ 311-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-10
1:421
§ 311-11. Injury or damages.
No provision of this chapter shall be constructed to impair any common law
or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for
injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or from other
law.
Chapter 317
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution control — See Ch. 90.
Unfit or abandoned buildings — See Ch. 146.
Housing standards — See Ch. 268.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 362.
§ 317-1. Scope.
An ordinance defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or
acts and each of them as a nuisance, authorizing the inspection of premises
by an enforcing official, providing for removal or abatement of certain
F. The violator may request from the noise control officer or noise control
investigator an extension of the compliance deadline in the
enforcement action. The noise control officer or noise control
investigator shall have the option to approve any reasonable request for
an extension (not to exceed 180 days) if the violator can demonstrate
that a good faith effort has been made to achieve compliance. If an
extension is not granted and the violation continues to exist after the
grace period ends, a NOPA shall be issued.
G. The recipient of a NOPA shall be entitled to a hearing in a Municipal
Court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
H. The noise control officer or noise control investigator may seek
injunctive relief if the responsible party does not remediate the
violation within the period of time specified in the NOPA issued.
I. Any claim for a civil penalty may be compromised and settled based on
the following factors:
(1) Mitigating or any other extenuating circumstances;
(2) The timely implementation by the violator of measures which lead
to compliance;
(3) The conduct of the violator; and
(4) The compliance history of the violator.
§ 311-10 HAMILTON CODE § 317-1
1:422
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Township in removing
or abating such nuisances, and prescribing penalties for violations.
§ 317-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BEE — Any of several winged, hairy-bodied, usually stinging insects of the
superfamily Apoidea in the order Hymenoptera, including both solitary and
social species and characterized by sucking and chewing mouthparts for
gathering nectar and pollen.
ENFORCING OFFICIALS — Includes the Health Officer or other officials
authorized by the Division of Health to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
PERSON — Includes an individual, firm, corporation, association, society,
partnership, and their agents and/or employees.
§ 317-3. Nuisances defined and prohibited.
A. The following matters, things, conditions or acts and each of them are
hereby declared to be a nuisance and injurious to the health of the
inhabitants of this municipality:
(1) Pollution or existence of a condition or conditions which cause or
threaten to cause pollution of any waters in this municipality in
such manner as to cause or threaten to cause injury to any of the
inhabitants of this municipality either in health, comfort or
property.
(2) The growth, existence or presence of ragweed on any plot of land,
lot, highway, right-of-way or any other public or private place or
premises.
(3) The growth, existence or presence of poison ivy within 20 feet of
any property line.
(4) The existence or presence of any water or other liquid in which
mosquito larvae breed or exist.
(5) The existence or presence of any accumulation of garbage, refuse,
manure, or animal or vegetable matter which may attract flies and
to which flies may have access, or in which fly larvae or pupae
breed or exist.
(6) Depositing, accumulating, or maintaining any matter or thing
which serves as food for insects or rodents and to which they may
have access or which serves or constitutes a breeding place or
harborage for insects or rodents in or on any land, premises,
building or other place.
§ 317-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-3
1:423
(7) Bees when they interfere with the normal use of private or public
property or have shown unusual aggressive behavior toward a
person or animal.
(8) The disinterment or removal of animal remains buried in land used
or intended to be used for the burial of the remains of pet animals
and dedicated for such purpose.
(9) No person shall abandon or permit the abandonment on public or
private property within the Township, or on any public street, of
any motor vehicles owned by him or under his control or in his
possession at the time of the abandonment, or cause any
abandoned vehicles or vehicles in a state of substantial disrepair to
be stored in the open, provided that motor vehicles in a temporary
state of disrepair shall be allowed to remain for a period not
exceeding 10 days, provided that the same are not abandoned
vehicles as defined in this section. For purposes of this section the
following term has the meaning indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Includes any motor vehicle, automobile,
omnibus, road tractor, trailer, truck, truck trailer and vehicle
which:
Has been continuously parked on any public street for a period
of seven days; or
(a)
Is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic, and
the driver or person owning or in charge thereof neglects or
refused to move same to a place where it will not obstruct
traffic; or
(b)
Is found to be mechanically inoperative and is allowed to
remain inoperative for a period of seven days; or
(c)
Is parked for any period of time without the current year's
registration, license plates, or inspection markers as required
by law.
(d)
(10)No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property
owned or operated by the Township, any wildlife, excluding
confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or
rehabilitation centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental
education centers). The following words, terms and phrases, when
used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing
wildlife. Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish
and/or game.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 317-3 HAMILTON CODE § 317-3
1:424
§ 317-4. Inspection of premises.
§ 317-5. Abatement of nuisances.
§ 317-6. Recovery of costs.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, maintain or allow any
nuisance, as declared and described in this section.
A. All places and premises in this municipality shall be subject to
inspection by the Division of Health or the enforcing official if the
Division or that official has reason to believe that any section of this
chapter is being violated.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct, delay, resist or
prevent the Division of Health or the enforcing official from having full
access to any place or premises upon which violation of this chapter is
believed to exist.
A. Whenever a nuisance, as declared by this chapter, is found on any plot
of land, lot, right-of-way, or other private premises or place, notice in
writing shall be given to the owner thereof to remove or abate the same
within such time as shall be specified therein. The notice shall be sent
by regular mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, directed to
the last known address of the owner, tenant or occupant in possession
of the lands, and may be served upon the owner, tenant or occupant
personally, or by leaving it at his usual place of abode. If the owner
resides out of state or cannot be notified speedily, such notice shall be
left at the place or premises with the tenant or occupant thereof, or
posted on the premises and such action shall be considered proper
notification to the owner, tenant or occupant thereof.
B. Whenever a nuisance, as declared by this chapter, is found on any
public property or on any highway or other public place or premises,
notice in writing shall be given to the person in charge thereof to
remove or abate same within such time as shall be specified therein.
The notice shall be sent by regular mail and certified mail, return
receipt requested, directed to the last known address of the person in
charge and may be served upon the person in charge personally, or by
leaving it at his usual place of business. If such person fails to comply
with such notice within the time specified therein, the Township may
remove or abate such nuisance in the manner as hereinafter provided in
the case of a like condition existing on a private place or premises.
C. If the owner, tenant or occupant, upon being notified as provided by the
chapter, shall not comply with such notice within the time specified
therein and fails to remove or abate such nuisance, the Township shall
proceed to abate the nuisance or may cause it to be removed or abated
in a summary manner by such means as the Township shall deem
proper.
§ 317-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-6
1:425
§ 317-7. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Division of Health or
other enforcing officials within the Township.
§ 317-8. Violations and penalties.111
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
§ 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Township Code, per violation.
Chapter 323
OBSCENE MATERIALS
§ 323-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
A. If the owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands in question
shall refuse or neglect to abate or remedy the condition complained of
within such time as specified therein pursuant to this chapter, the
enforcing official shall issue a summons to the owner, tenant or person
in possession for violation of this chapter and/or shall cause the
condition complained of to be abated and remedied by the Department
of Public Works, which shall certify the cost thereof to the Department
of Finance, who shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged
against the lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien
upon the such lands and shall be added to become and form part of the
taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, and such amount
shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and
enforced by the same official and in the same manner as taxes. Costs
shall be in addition to any penalties imposed for any violation of this
chapter.
B. When the owner, tenant or person in possession of the property in
question or person having possession or control of the abandoned
vehicle has failed to remove same after being sent or provided with the
notice described in § 317-5, then the enforcing official shall be
authorized to arrange for the prompt removal of the vehicle. The owner
or tenant or person having possession or control of the abandoned
vehicle shall pay and be responsible for all towing and removal costs,
including reasonable overhead, incurred by the Township in effecting
such removal.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 317-6 HAMILTON CODE § 323-1
1:426
OBSCENE MATERIALS — Any description, narrative account, display or
depiction of a specified anatomical area or specified sexual activity
contained in or consisting of a picture or other representation, publication,
sound recording, live performance or film, which by means of posing,
composition, format or animated sensual details emits sensuality with
sufficient impact to concentrate prurient interest on the area of activity.
RETAILER — Any person who operates a store, newsstand, booth,
concession or similar business with unimpeded access for persons under
18 years old, who makes sales of periodicals or other publications at retail
containing pictures, drawings or photographs.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA — Less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts below a
point immediately above the top of the areola; or human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — Human genitals in a state of sexual
intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse, or fondling or other erotic
touching of covered or uncovered human genitals, pubic region, buttock or
female breast.
§ 323-2. Retail displays to be covered and placed at a height of five
feet or greater.
Any retailer who displays or permits to be displayed at his business
premises any obscene material shall display such material with a blinder
or other covering placed or printed on the front of the material displayed.
In addition, any obscene material shall be placed at a height of five feet or
greater on the display rack in question.
§ 323-3. Presumption regarding violations.
The public display of obscene material shall constitute presumptive
evidence that the retailer knowingly made or permitted the display.
§ 323-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who displays obscene materials in violation of this section is a
petty disorderly person and shall be subject to the penalties contained in
N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3d and N.J.S.A. 2C:43-8.
Chapter 334
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 345.
§ 323-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-1
1:427
§ 334-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE, SAFETY AND MORALS —
Includes but is not limited to the following violations: muggings, assaults,
assault and battery, consumption of alcoholic beverages on a public street,
drunkenness, begging, and the sale and use of narcotics or other drugs.
SUPERVISION — The exercise of control over a minor child, knowing his
whereabouts, and knowing with whom he associates and in what activities
he may engage which could affect or offend the public peace, safety and
morals.
§ 334-2. Proper supervision of minors required.
§ 334-3. Violation of curfew.
The fact that a child under the age of 18 years is apprehended while on any
public street, highway, alley or park during the hours of any curfew shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter on the part of the parents,
legal guardian or other person having custody or care of the minor.
§ 334-4. Procedure upon apprehension of minor.
A. It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person
having the care or custody of a minor child under 18 years of age, by
any act or word or the failure to act, or by the lack of supervision and
control over the minor child, to encourage, contribute toward, cause or
tend to cause the child to become delinquent by reason of the activity of
the minor child within the Township.
B. It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person
having custody and care of any minor child under the age of 18 to
assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage the minor to violate the
provisions of this chapter or any other statute of the state or ordinance
of the Township, either by overt act, by failing to act or by lack of
supervision and control of such minor child.
A. The procedure contained in this section is established as a deterrent to
juvenile acts of vandalism and to parental neglect of child supervision
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:53A-14.
B. Any person under the age of 18 years apprehended for the violation of
the statutes of the state or any ordinances of the Township shall be
brought forthwith before a judge of the Juvenile Division of the County
Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court. Upon the Court's determination
that the minor is a delinquent, the Chief of Police or his designated
agent shall forthwith serve written notice of the conviction upon the
parents, legal guardian or other person having custody or care of such
§ 334-1 HAMILTON CODE § 334-4
1:428
§ 334-5. Violations and penalties.
Any parent who shall violate the terms of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished in accordance with Chapter 1, General Provisions,
§ 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton.
§ 334-6. Remedies cumulative.
The remedy provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative, not exclusive,
and the state or any other person shall have the right to proceed under any
other legally available remedies.
§ 334-7. Financial responsibility.
juvenile, together with a written warning, in a form approved by the
Township Attorney, of the penalties and other provisions of this chapter
with respect to the conviction for a second offense by such minor. A
record of such notification shall be kept by the Police Division. The
failure to provide supervision by the parent, legal guardian or other
person having custody of such minor child, as evidenced by a finding of
delinquency on a second offense, shall cause the parent, legal guardian
or other person having custody of the minor child to be subject to
the provisions of this chapter as well as to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
2A:53A-15 and 2A:53A-16.
A. In addition to those procedures established as a deterrent to juvenile
acts of vandalism and to parental neglect of child supervision pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 2A:53A-14, and upon the conviction of any juvenile under the
age of 18 years for any high misdemeanor, misdemeanor or violation of
any statutes of the state or ordinances of the Township, which acts
include vandalism and destruction or damage to realty, personalty, pets,
animals, livestock or other chattel, the parent or lawful guardian of
such juvenile shall be responsible for financial reimbursement to the
victim of such crime or offenses.
B. A complaint shall issue and, upon determination by the court that there
in fact have been financial losses suffered by the victim, the court shall
determine the amount of restitution to be made within a prescribed
time but not longer than 30 days.
C. Any person who fails to comply with an order for restitution as set forth
in this section shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2,
Violations; penalties, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton.
D. Imposition of restitution pursuant to this section shall not preclude civil
recovery as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2A:53A-14 et seq.
§ 334-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-7
1:429
Chapter 340
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Criminal history background checks for
volunteers for youth-serving
organizations — See Ch. 24, Art. I.
Boats and boating — See Ch. 130.
Fees — See Ch. 215.
Gangs — See Ch. 246.
Hunting and firearms — See Ch. 270.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 285.
§ 334-7 HAMILTON CODE § 334-7
1:430
ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted as Ch. 98, §§ 98-1 through 98-7, of the 1994 Code of
Ordinances]
§ 340-1. Prohibited activities.
A. No person in a public park or recreation area shall:
(1) Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or
remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railing,
pavings or paving materials, waterlines or other public utilities or
parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other
boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or
park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal.
(2) Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a
neat and sanitary condition. No person above the age of five years
shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite
sex.
(3) Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or plants
or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool,
equipment, blasting or other means or agency.
(4) Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public
service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special
written permit.
(5) Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or
injure the bark or pick flowers or seeds of any tree or plant, or dig
in or otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure the
natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
(6) Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases,
planters, fountains, railings or fences or upon any other property
not designated or customarily used for such purposes.
(7) Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant.
(8) Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot
or throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird, or remove
or have in his possession the young of any wild animal or the eggs
or nest or young of snakes. However, any snake known to be deadly
poisonous or deadly reptiles may be killed on sight.
(9) Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in
or adjacent to any park, or any tributary stream, storm sewer or
§ 340-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-1
1:431
drain flowing into such water, any substance, matter or thing,
liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such
waters.
(10) Have brought in or dump in, deposit or leave any bottles, broken
glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage,
refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any
waters in or contiguous to any park or be left anywhere on the
grounds thereof, but such materials shall be placed in the proper
receptacles.
(11) Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or
parking areas or such areas as may on occasion be specifically
designated as temporary areas.
(12) Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking
area, and such shall be in accordance with posted directions
thereat and with the instruction of any attendant who may be
present.
(13) Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in established parking
areas or elsewhere in the park area.
(14) Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is
provided and there is space available.
(15) Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of others.
(16) Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or set against a tree
or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be
injured by it.
(17) Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to
any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided
therefor and in compliance with such regulations as are set forth in
this article or as may be hereafter adopted; nor shall any person
frequent any waters or places customarily designated for the
purposes of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, when
such activities are prohibited by the Department of Health,
Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services upon a finding that such
use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable. This
prohibition is applicable, but not limited to, lakes, streams, creeks
and fountains. [Amended 9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-065]
(18) Bring into or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether
motor-powered or not, upon any waters, except at places
designated for boating. Such activity shall be in accordance with
applicable regulations as are now or hereafter may be adopted.
(19) Navigate, direct or handle any boat in such a manner as to
unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or endanger the
occupant of any other boat.
§ 340-1 HAMILTON CODE § 340-1
1:432
§ 340-2. Conduct.
While in a public park or recreation area, all persons shall conduct
themselves in a proper and orderly manner; and in particular, no person
shall:
(20) Launch, dock or operate any boat of any kind on any water between
the closing hour of the park at night and the opening hour of the
park the following morning or be on or remain on or in any boat
during the closed hours of the park.
(21) Fish in any area where bathing is permitted.
(22) Carry or possess firearms of any description, or air rifles, spring
guns, bows and arrows, slings or any other form of weapons
potentially harmful to wildlife and dangerous to human safety, or
any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or
any kind of trapping device. Shooting into park areas from beyond
park boundaries is forbidden.
(23) Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that
purpose.
(24) Use any portion of the picnic area or any of the buildings or
structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons, or use such areas and facilities for an
unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
(25) Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and
before all trash is placed in the disposal receptacles, where
provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then trash
shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be
properly disposed of elsewhere.
(26) Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or
otherwise propelled stones, arrows, javelins, horseshoes, quoits,
model airplanes or other unmanned aircraft systems, including
drones, except in those areas set apart for such forms of recreation.
The flying of model airplanes or other unmanned aircraft systems,
including drones, shall be prohibited during Township special
events. [Amended 7-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-026]
(27) Use any grill except those permanently located within a public park
or recreation area. Charcoal grills may be brought and used.
Propane grills are strictly prohibited. [Added 9-16-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-065]
(28) Smoke or vape in or within 25 feet of the athletic stands located in
any Township-owned or -leased park or recreation area. [Added
9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-065; amended 2-19-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-009]
§ 340-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-2
1:433
A. Bring alcoholic beverages or drink alcoholic beverages at any time,
except for the distribution and consumption of alcoholic beverages
pursuant to a lawfully issued Township permit allowing alcoholic
beverages. [Amended 3-18-2014 by Ord. No. 14-015112]
B. Have in his possession, or set or otherwise cause to explode or
discharge or burn, any firecrackers, torpedo rockets or other fireworks,
firecrackers or explosives of flammable material, or discharge them or
throw them into any such areas from lands or highways adjacent
thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or
article that, in conjunction with any other substance or compound,
would be dangerous from any of such standpoints.
C. Appear at any place in other than proper clothing.
D. Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such
regulations as may be designated. No person shall drop, throw or
otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars,
tobacco paper or other flammable material within any park or on any
highways, roads or streets abutting or contiguous thereto.
E. Enter an area posted as closed to the public or use or abet in the use of
any area in violation of posted notices.
F. Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance except in such
areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the
Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services..
G. Go onto the ice on any of the waters except such areas as are
designated as skating fields, and provided a safety signal is displayed.
H. Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other areas, or
engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent
language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to
breach the public peace.
I. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying
any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.
J. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or
inscription whatever, or erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever,
on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park.
K. Play music in the vicinity of the Veterans Park north, east and west
entrance areas that may disturb other persons using the park. Music
played on personal devices and audible only within 10 feet of the person
possessing such device shall be permitted to be played in these areas.
Music shall be permitted to be played in the vicinity of the Veterans
Park south entrance pavilion areas. Hamilton Township sponsored
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 340-2 HAMILTON CODE § 340-2
1:434
§ 340-3. Hours.
§ 340-4. Permits for group use. [Amended 3-18-2014 by Ord. No.
14-015]
Permits for group use of parks and park facilities, including but not limited
to pavilions and athletic fields, shall be obtained by application to the
Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services in
accordance with the following procedure:
events or special permitted events may be exempted from these
restrictions. [Added 9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-065]
L. Place or attach any decoration to any tree, post or any other structure
located in a public park or recreation area by using nails, tacks or
similar fastening devices. Decorations may only be placed or attached
to structures that are being used pursuant to a permit, and must be
placed according to the provisions set forth in the permit. [Added
9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-065]
A. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year during the designated hours. No person
shall remain in any park or playground or recreation area after dusk, or
remain in any park, playground or recreation area 30 minutes
subsequent to the conclusion of any regularly scheduled Township or
Township-authorized event. The regulation set out in this subsection
shall be posted for public information.
B. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public at
any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular
and stated intervals (daily or otherwise), and either entirely or merely
for certain uses.
A. Application. A person or organization seeking issuance of a permit
under this section shall file an application, at least 14 days in advance,
when practical, of the proposed group use with the Department of
Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services, stating:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the person sponsoring the activity, if any.
(3) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(4) The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
Permits for park and park facility use shall be required if the group
using such park or park facility shall be 15 or more in number.
[Amended 9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-065; 7-21-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-026]
(5) An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
(6) The type of activity to be conducted.
§ 340-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-4
1:435
(7) Whether the applicant is a resident or nonresident of the Township.
Applicants may be required to provide a roster of participants with
their application, including the name and home address of each
participant. League and tournament play on all athletic fields shall
be restricted to Township residents only.
(8) Any other information which the Department of Health, Recreation,
Senior and Veterans Services shall find reasonably necessary to
attain a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued
under this article.
(9) Permits cannot be transferred or assigned.
B. Standards for issuance. Standards for issuance of a use permit by the
Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services shall
include the following findings:
(1) That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment or the
park.
(2) That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety
and recreation.
(3) That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated
will not include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
(4) That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the Township.
(5) That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the date and hour requested in the application.
(6) Priority of applicants.
(a) The affairs of the Township shall take precedence over all other
users of the parks and park facilities.
(b) Resident applicants will be given priority over other users for
the use of Township parks and park facilities, based upon
availability.
(c) Nonresident applicants will be given priority over commercial
applicants for the use of Township parks and park facilities,
based upon availability.
(d) Commercial applicants will be given the lowest priority for the
use of Township parks and park facilities, based upon
availability.
(e) In the event of a conflict between requesting applicants, the
request received earlier will be honored first. In the event of a
conflict between similarly classified applicants, such as athletic
§ 340-4 HAMILTON CODE § 340-4
1:436
teams and/or groups, priority will be given to the applicant
that is "in season" and/or the applicant that serves the higher
percentage of Township residents, as determined by the
Director of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services.
C. Appeal. Whenever in the opinion of the Director of Health, Recreation,
Senior and Veterans Services the granting of a group use permit will
violate any of the standards listed in Subsection B above, he or she shall
refuse to issue a said permit. Whenever the Director of Health,
Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services has refused to issue a group
use permit, the applicant may appeal from such determination in
accordance to Chapter 285, Licenses and Permits, of the Code.
D. Use of a park or portion thereof shall be restricted to the facilities,
areas, dates and times expressly requested on the permit application. A
permittee must be present at all times during use of the permit.
[Amended 9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-065]
E. Compliance with park rules. A permittee shall be bound by all park
rules and regulations and applicable ordinances fully as though the
rules, regulations and ordinances were inserted in the permits.
F. When required by the Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and
Veterans Services due to the size of the group use, the services of a law
enforcement officer or officers shall be obtained to maintain order. The
services of such officers shall be obtained pursuant to § 5-66 of the
Code.
G. Liability of permittee. The person or organization to whom the permit is
issued shall be liable for all loss, damage or injury sustained by any
person whatever by reason of the negligence of the person or
organization to whom such permit shall have been issued. The
Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services shall
have the right to require any permittee to submit evidence of liability
insurance covering injuries to members of the general public arising
out of such permitted activities, in such amounts as may be from time to
time determined by the Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and
Veterans Services, prior to the commencement of any activity for which
any permit is issued and shall also have the right to require that the
certificate of insurance name the Township of Hamilton as an additional
insured.
H. Fee. The fee for a permit for group use shall be as set forth in Chapter
215, Fees.113
I. There shall be a deposit paid to the Township in the amount set forth in
Chapter 215, Fees, to assure that the park grounds and facilities will be
left in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The Department of Health,
Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services will examine the grounds
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 340-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-4
1:437
§ 340-5. Enforcement. [Amended 3-18-2014 by Ord. No. 14-015]
following use by such group and, upon determining that all of the rules
have been complied with, the deposit will be returned to the permittee.
If the rules have not been complied with, the deposit will be forfeited.114
J. Revocation. The Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and
Veterans Services shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a
finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good cause shown,
including but not limited to the falsification of any information required
on the permit application.115
A. The Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services
and park attendants shall, in connection with their duties imposed by
law, diligently enforce the provisions of this article.
B. The Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services
and any park attendant shall have the authority to eject from the park
area any person acting in violation of this article.
C. The Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services
and any park attendant shall have the authority to seize and confiscate
any property, thing or device in the park or used in violation of this
article.
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
115. Editor's Note: Former § 98-5, Permits for group use at Veterans Park, and § 98-6, Permit
for group use of Switlik Park, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances, which immediately followed
this section, were repealed 3-18-2014 by Ord. No. 14-015.
§ 340-4 HAMILTON CODE § 340-5
1:438
ARTICLE II
Dog Park
[Adopted 7-1-2004 by Ord. No. 04-028 (Ch. 98, § 98-15, of the 1994
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 340-6. Promulgation of rules and regulations. [Amended
3-18-2014 by Ord. No. 14-015]
The Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services shall
promulgate rules and regulations concerning the use of the Township's dog
park in Veterans Park.
§ 340-7. Enforcement.
The Township's Police Division shall have the authority to enforce the dog
park's rules and regulations.
§ 340-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-7
1:439
Chapter 345
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Gangs — See Ch. 246.
Graffiti — See Ch. 254.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 334.
§ 340-7 HAMILTON CODE § 340-7
1:440
ARTICLE I
Public Urination and Defecation
[Adopted 5-2-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017 (Ch. 86, § 86-28, of the 1994
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 345-1. Unlawful acts.
It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on a public street,
sidewalk or in any other public place or in any other places opened to
or used by the public, other than when using a toilet, urinal or commode
located in a restroom, bathroom or other structure enclosed from public
view.
§ 345-2. Exceptions.
The enforcement provisions of this article shall not apply to the following
individuals who may not be able to adequately control the bodily functions
that control urination or defecation:
§ 345-3. Violations and penalties.116
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations;
penalties, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton, as same may be
amended.
A. Children nine years of age or younger;
B. Persons of any age who violate this article due to a verified medical and/
or psychiatric condition.
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 345-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-3
1:441

ARTICLE II
Public Nudity
[Adopted 5-2-2012 by Ord. No. 12-018 (Ch. 86, § 86-29, of the 1994
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 345-4. Unlawful acts.
No person shall appear or travel on any street, avenue, highway or road
located in the Township or appear in any public place, store or any business
open to the public in said Township in a state of nudity. A person shall be
found in a state of nudity when clothing or absence of clothing completely
exposes to public view a person's anus, genitals, pubic area or female
breasts. No person shall dress or undress in any public place or in public
view within the Township.
§ 345-5. Violations and penalties.117
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations;
penalties, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton, as same may be
amended.
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 345-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-5
1:443

ARTICLE III
Violent Disturbances
[Adopted 5-2-2012 by Ord. No. 12-019 (Ch. 86, § 86-30, of the 1994
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 345-6. Unlawful acts.
No person or persons shall, within the limits of the Township, create any
disturbance by violence.
§ 345-7. Violations and penalties.118
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations;
penalties, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton, as same may be
amended.
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 345-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-7
1:445

ARTICLE IV
Malicious Injury or Destruction of Property
[Adopted 5-2-2012 by Ord. No. 12-020 (Ch. 86, § 86-31, of the 1994
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 345-8. Unlawful acts; vandalism.
No person or persons shall, within the limits of the Township, maliciously
destroy, damage or injure any property.
§ 345-9. Violations and penalties.119
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations;
penalties, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton, as same may be
amended.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 345-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-9
1:447
Chapter 349
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS AND TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 215.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 285.
Sales — See Ch. 373.
§ 345-9 HAMILTON CODE § 345-9
1:448
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 349-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prevent fraud, crime and unethical and
dishonest business practices and for the general protection, health and
welfare of the residents of the community and to deter the use of peddling,
soliciting, and canvassing to gain access to homes for criminal purposes and
for the preservation of the quiet and privacy for residents of the Township.
§ 349-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CANVASSER — A person who circulates a petition or seeks contributions
for a cause, charitable or otherwise, or distributes literature, pamphlets,
handbills and the like for the purpose of distributing information or seeking
support for any legal purpose, from a stationary location on a street or other
public place, or by going from house to house, place to place or street to
street.
CANVASSING — The circulation of a petition or the seeking of contributions
for a cause, charitable or otherwise, or the practice of distributing
literature, pamphlets, handbills and the like for the purpose of distributing
information or seeking support for any legal purpose, from a stationary
location on a street or other public place, or by going from house to house,
place to place or street to street.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police for the Township of Hamilton.
MOBILE VENDING UNIT — A person or persons engaged in mobile vending
and who may be approved to utilize designated parking spaces dedicated
for their use in municipal parks.
NON-PROFIT-MAKING VENDORS — A person who sells or collects goods
or services, the proceeds of which are devoted exclusively to the purposes
of the philanthropic, charitable or religious society on whose behalf he/she
acts as an agent.
PEDDLER, CLASS 1 — A person or persons engaged in peddling in and
on public streets. This term may also be referred to as "mobile vendor,"
"hawker," or "huckster."
PEDDLER, CLASS 2 — A person or persons engaged in peddling in and
on public streets with the additional ability to access Hamilton Township
municipal parks at designated mobile parking spaces for a period of time.
PEDDLING — The practice of selling services or carrying goods, wares or
merchandise, for the purpose of selling and delivering to consumers, either
from traveling by foot, automotive vehicle or any other form of travel, from
§ 349-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-2
1:449
house to house, place to place or street to street. This meaning may also be
referred to as "hawker" or "huckster."
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, voluntary
association, church, religious denomination, society, organization, political
association, incorporated association, or agent thereof.
ROAD SHOWS — A transient merchant, whether an individual, corporation
or other business entity, that travels to different locations offering to buy
or sell items from or to the public at or from temporary locations for short
periods of time. They are typically advertised events held at hotels, banquet
halls, convention centers, armories and other similar facilities.
SOLICITING — The traveling by a person, either by foot, wagon,
automobile, motortruck or any other type of conveyance, from place to
place, house to house or street to street, taking or attempting to take orders
for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise or personal property of any
nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or
performed in the future, whether or not the person has, carries or exposes
for sale a sample of the subject of the sale, with or without accepting an
advance payment for the goods.
SOLICITOR — A person or persons engaged in soliciting.
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS — Shall mean and include persons, commonly
referred to as either "transient merchants" or "itinerant vendors," who
engage in a merchandising business, including the sale or purchase of
goods and merchandise, in the Township of Hamilton with the intent to
close out or discontinue such business within one year from the date of
commencement, including those who, for the purpose of carrying on such
business, hire, lease or occupy any building, hotel room/banquet facility,
lot, or structure for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and
merchandise, provided that nothing herein shall be construed to affect the
sale of fruit, vegetables and farm products, such as meats, poultry, butter
and eggs.
§ 349-2 HAMILTON CODE § 349-2
1:450
ARTICLE II
Peddling, Soliciting and Canvassing
§ 349-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, or other person to engage
in peddling or soliciting within the Township of Hamilton without first
obtaining a license therefor as provided in this section. Transient merchants
must also be licensed pursuant to the provisions of this section, as well as
N.J.S.A. 45:24-1 et seq. The Township Clerk shall issue all licenses pursuant
to the provisions of this section.
A. Application fee. At the time an application is filed, the applicant must
pay a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of
the Township Code for the processing and investigation of said
application.
B. The following fees shall be charged if said application is granted in
addition to the application fees:
(1) Transient merchants: as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the
Township Code.
(2) Solicitors: as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.
(3) Peddler, Class 1: as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township
Code.
(4) Peddler, Class 2. Licenses shall be issued according to the bid
process prescribed by the New Jersey Local Public Contract Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq. The minimum bid shall be as set forth in
Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code. Specifications for the bid
and lottery process shall be available at the Municipal Clerk's
office.
C. The following persons are expressly exempt from this license
requirement:
(1) Non-profit-making vendors.
(2) Any person honorably discharged from the military service of the
United States, possessing a peddler's license issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and N.J.S.A. 24-10, except such person shall not be
exempt if the application is to obtain a transient merchant's
license.
(3) Any person who is an exempt firefighter, rescue squad member or
other individual possessing a license in conformity with N.J.S.A.
45:24-9 and N.J.S.A. 24-10, except such person shall not be exempt
if the application is to obtain a transient merchant's license.
(4) Any public utility or its employees, which said public utility is
subject to regulation by the State Board of Public Utilities;
§ 349-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-3
1:451
§ 349-4. Application for license.
provided, however, that such employees shall display the
identification badge or card issued by their employer.
(5) Any person engaged in the delivery of goods, wares or merchandise
or other articles or things, in the regular course of business, to the
premises or persons who had previously ordered the same or were
entitled to receive the same by reason of prior agreement.
(6) Charitable, religious, cultural and historical societies as defined in
and subject to the conditions of N.J.S.A. 45:24-7.
(7) Nonprofit sports teams and organizations, senior citizen clubs and
organizations, school organizations, and scouting organizations.
(8) Canvassers.
D. All canvassers intending to canvass within the Township shall register
with the Municipal Clerk prior to commencing any canvassing
activities. Such registration shall consist of providing the Municipal
Clerk with the name of the person that will be canvassing, the proposed
dates for which the person seeks to canvass, and the route(s) or
neighborhood(s) in which the person intends to canvass. All nonprofit,
religious, or political groups canvassing exclusively door-to-door and
not in the streets are exempt from this registration requirement.
A. Any person seeking a license under this chapter shall file an application
with the Municipal Clerk on a form supplied by said Clerk.
B. The application form shall contain the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. The
applicant and each representative to be licensed must provide a
passport, photo driver's license, or a photo identification card,
together with a birth certificate and/or social security card.
(2) Date(s) on which soliciting or peddling is to commence and end.
(3) The number of representatives of the applicant that will be
conducting such activities.
(4) Nature of goods or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale or the
nature of the services to be furnished.
(5) Whether the applicant, or any of its representatives who will be
soliciting or peddling, has been convicted of a crime, disorderly
persons offense or violation of any ordinance relating to soliciting
or peddling, and, if so, when, where and the nature of the offense.
(6) The names of other municipalities in New Jersey where the
applicant has been issued a permit to solicit or peddle in the past
two years.
§ 349-3 HAMILTON CODE § 349-4
1:452
§ 349-5. Investigation of applicant for license; issuance or denial of
license.
(7) The route planned to be taken or neighborhood(s) in which the
applicant plans to visit and the corresponding list of days the
applicant will be soliciting or peddling along that route or in that
neighborhood.
C. The application shall be accompanied by a letter or other written
statement from the individual, firm or corporation employing the
applicant certifying that the applicant is authorized to act as the
representative of the individual, firm or corporation.
D. If the applicant intends to go from house to house or place to place, the
application must be accompanied with three passport-size photographs
for each person who will be soliciting or peddling for the applicant.
Upon approval of the license, one such photograph shall be affixed to a
badge issued by the Municipal Clerk; one such photograph shall be
affixed to the license issued; and one such photograph shall be retained
by the Municipal Clerk.
A. When the application for a license under this article is properly filled
out and signed by the applicant, the Municipal Clerk shall refer the
application to the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police or his designee
shall perform a background check of the applicant and investigate the
information available as to the good moral character of the applicant,
and approve or disapprove the application within 14 days. Reasons for
the disapproval shall be set forth on the reverse side of the application.
The application shall thereafter be filed with the Municipal Clerk's
office.
(1) If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of
Police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his
reasons therefor, and shall return the application to the Municipal
Clerk. Any determination by the Chief of Police that an application
is unsatisfactory shall be based on one or more of the following
findings with respect to the applicant:
(a) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude.
(b) Prior violation of an ordinance or law pertaining to solicitors
and canvassers.
(c) Previous fraudulent acts or conduct.
(d) Record of breaches of solicited contracts.
(e) Concrete evidence of bad character.
B. Upon approval by the Chief of Police and upon payment of the required
fees, the Municipal Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license which
§ 349-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-5
1:453
§ 349-6. Suspension or revocation of license.
shall be in writing, bearing the name of the licensee, the purpose for
which the license was issued, the date of expiration and the signature
of the Municipal Clerk.
C. If an application is found unsatisfactory by the Chief of Police and he
has endorsed his disapproval upon the application, the Municipal Clerk
shall notify the applicant by mail that the application is disapproved,
and shall deny the applicant a license.
D. Appeal of denial of license. If the application for a license under this
section has been disapproved, the applicant may appeal the decision to
the Township Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the
Municipal Clerk within 14 days after the notice of disapproval. The
Township Council shall hold its hearing within 14 days thereafter, and
the decision of the council shall be final.
E. Every person licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
carry the license with him/her at all times while engaged in his trade or
occupation in the Township. Every licensee shall produce his/her
license at the request of any officer of the Township.
F. To every peddler or mobile vendor granted a license or licenses
pursuant to this chapter, the Municipal Clerk shall also issue for each
automobile, vehicle or wagon used in peddling, a medallion bearing the
words "Licensed Peddler, Township of Hamilton," together with the
number of the license and the year for which it is issued. In addition,
each automobile, wagon, or other vehicle used for such peddling shall
have affixed thereon a copy of the license.
G. All licenses and badges shall be valid for the period of May 1 through
April 30, and, if issued, shall not be transferable or assignable to any
person. All licenses and badges must be surrendered after cessation of
use or the end of the calendar year, whichever comes first.
A. Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Chief of
Police, after notice and a hearing, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in application for
license:
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the licensed business or solicitation in the Township:
(3) Any violation of this chapter;
(4) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude or of a violation of
any ordinance concerning soliciting, peddling, panhandling or
canvassing. In the case of transient merchants, a conviction of a
crime involving moral turpitude or violation of any of the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 45:24-1 et seq. or this chapter.
§ 349-5 HAMILTON CODE § 349-6
1:454
§ 349-7. Expiration and renewal of license.
Licenses issued under this article shall expire April 30 each year at 11:59
p.m., local time. Applications for the renewal of licenses shall be made not
later than April 1 of the year of issue. Licensees are required to surrender
their previous year's license at the time of renewal.
§ 349-8. Badges.
The Municipal Clerk shall issue to each licensee under this article, at
the time of delivery of his/her license, a badge, which shall contain the
words "Licensed Solicitor," the period for which the license is issued and
the number of the license, in letters and figures easily discernible from
a distance of 10 feet. The Municipal Clerk shall issue to each registered
canvasser under this article, at the time of delivery of his/her registration,
a badge, which shall contain the words "Registered Canvasser," the period
for which the registration is issued and the number of the registration, in
letters and figures easily discernible from a distance of 10 feet. Such badges
shall, during the time such licensee is engaged in canvassing, peddling or
soliciting, be worn constantly by the licensee or registered canvasser on the
front of his or her outer garment in such a way as to be conspicuous.
§ 349-9. Hours of operation. [Amended 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
18-041]
No peddling, soliciting or canvassing activities shall be conducted between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
§ 349-10. Location of operation; requirements.
(5) Conducting the licensed business or solicitation in the Township in
an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a menace to
the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds for the complaint and the
time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be given personally or
by certified mail to the licensee at his/her last known address at least
five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
C. Such license may, pending revocation proceedings, be suspended for
not more than 10 days by the Chief of Police, if, in his or her opinion, the
conduct of the licensee is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare
of the Township.
D. The Chief of Police or his designee shall serve as the hearing officer for
any hearing pursuant to this section.
A. Peddling, soliciting and canvassing within any roadway is strictly
prohibited. Mobile peddlers, such as ice cream trucks/vendors, must
pull over all the way to the curbline and sell only from the curbside.
§ 349-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-10
1:455
Said activities are permitted on sidewalks and street corners only. Only
one group or organization may engage in such activities at a given
time. Reflective outerwear must be worn by all persons engaging in
said activities. No person under the age of 16 shall conduct peddling,
soliciting or canvassing activities anywhere in the Township. Persons
under the age of 18 must be accompanied by an adult. There shall be
one adult for every four or fewer minors.
B. Peddlers (Class 1 and Class 2).
(1) Peddlers cannot stop within 1,000 feet of a transient merchant or
another peddler.
(2) Peddlers cannot stop within 1,000 feet of any entrance to a school
building, unless such school is closed.
(3) Peddlers shall conduct sales from the curbside of the vehicle and
only to pedestrians.
(4) Peddlers cannot conduct sales to any individuals remaining in
another motor vehicle.
(5) Parking in any no-parking area, handicapped-reserved area or
yellow-curbed area, even temporarily, is prohibited.
(6) Parking in any fixed location for more than three minutes from the
completion of the last sale is prohibited.
(7) No sales of glass containers shall be permitted from mobile units.
(8) All units shall be required to provide trash containers.
(9) The restrictions upon time and place listed above shall not apply to
peddlers/mobile vendors at a Township-sponsored or -approved
event.
C. Peddler (Class 2).
(1) Peddlers licenses shall be limited to six.
(2) Sales shall only be conducted from the following designated vendor
parking in the following parks:
(a) Veterans' Park: east side entrance.
(b) Veterans' Park: west side entrance.
(c) Veterans' Park: north side entrance.
(d) Veterans' park: south side entrance.
(e) Kuser Park.
D. Peddler, Class 2 licenses shall be issued according to the bid process
prescribed by the New Jersey Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A.
§ 349-10 HAMILTON CODE § 349-10
1:456
§ 349-11. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Township to require any
person seen peddling, soliciting or canvassing, and who is not known by
such officer to be duly licensed or registered, to produce his or her license
or registration, and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any
person found to be violating this chapter.
§ 349-12. Receipts for contributions.
Any person or organization receiving money or any other thing for a value
of $1 or more from any contributor as a result of canvassing done pursuant
to this chapter shall give to the contributor a written receipt signed by the
canvasser, showing the date and the amount received; provided, however,
that this section shall not apply to any contribution collected by means of a
closed box or receptacle used in canvassing where the use thereof has been
approved by the Township Council, where it is impractical to determine the
amount of each contribution.
§ 349-13. Inspection of equipment used by vendors of food or
beverages.
The equipment used or employed by peddlers of ice cream, foods,
beverages, confections and other related commodities shall be maintained
in a clean and sanitary manner and shall be subject to the inspection by
the Division of Health or its authorized agents. Any violation found and not
immediately corrected shall be grounds for revocation of the license.
§ 349-14. Posted property.
No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall enter onto any property on which is
located a sign or signs stating "No Solicitors" or "No Peddlers" or carrying
a similar message forbidding the entry of any person onto the property.
This shall include any signage located at the entrance of any housing
development on behalf of the occupants of any condominium/townhouse or
age-restricted community.
§ 349-15. "Do Not Solicit" list.
40A:11-1 et seq. The minimum bid shall be as set forth in Chapter
215, Fees, of the Township Code. Specifications for the bid and lottery
process shall be available at the Municipal Clerk's office.
A. All residents of the Township may register their name, address and/or
unit/apartment number with the Municipal Clerk to be placed on the
"Do Not Solicit" list, indicating that they do not want peddlers,
solicitors or canvassers to approach their homes and/or seek personal
contact with the occupants of the registered home. All nonprofit,
religious, or political groups canvassing exclusively door-to-door shall
be exempt from the prohibitions of this section.
§ 349-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-15
1:457
§ 349-16. "Do Not Drop" list.
B. Residents shall remain on the "Do Not Solicit" list for a period of four
years. If a resident wishes to be removed from the list, it shall be in
writing, addressed to the Municipal Clerk, at which time said residence
will be removed from the list.
C. The Municipal Clerk shall maintain a copy of the "Do Not Solicit" list,
which shall be provided to all persons or organizations required to
obtain a license or register pursuant to § 349-3 or those persons or
organizations within the scope of § 349-19. In accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5, the Municipal Clerk shall charge a fee for
a copy of the "Do Not Solicit" list.
D. The Municipal Clerk shall also maintain a copy of the "Do Not Solicit"
list on the township website, which shall be updated on or about
January 1, April 1, July 1, and October 1 of each year. The updated list
shall also be forwarded to the Chief of Police in order to provide up-todate
information of registrants for licenses.
E. It shall be unlawful for peddler, solicitor or canvasser to approach and/
or seek personal contact with the occupants thereof if that residence is
registered on the "Do Not Solicit" list. Anyone violating this subsection
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $100 for
each violation.
F. Upon completion of registration on the "Do Not Solicit" list the
subscriber will receive a decal stating "DO NOT SOLICIT — Registered
on the 'Do Not Solicit' list with Hamilton Township Municipal Clerk's
Office. VIOLATORS WILL BE PROSECUTED," which must be displayed
in a clearly visible location (i.e., front door or window adjacent to the
front door).
A. Definition. An unsolicited circular shall be defined as a commercial
handbill, noncommercial handbill, leaflet, coupon brochure or other
writing, which the intended recipient did not request or authorize to be
placed on or about his or her property.
B. "Do Not Drop" list.
(1) There is hereby established a "Do Not Drop" list of residents of the
Township of Hamilton.
(2) Residents who do not wish to receive unsolicited circulars may do
so by completing a form established by the Municipal Clerk and
return it to the Municipal Clerk's office.
(3) The Municipal Clerk's office shall advise distributors of unsolicited
circulars that the resident does not wish to receive unsolicited
circulars by posting the list on the Township's website and
providing copies upon request, for which a fee shall be charged in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5. The "Do Not
§ 349-15 HAMILTON CODE § 349-16
1:458
§ 349-17. Solicitation of donations at local businesses.
A permit is required to solicit donations at the entrance or exit of any
business within the Township of Hamilton, subject to the adherence to the
following requirements:
§ 349-18. Solicitation of donations at intersections.
It shall be unlawful to solicit donations at an intersection or roadway within
the Township of Hamilton. Any such violation shall be subject to a fine as
provided for in § 349-15.
§ 349-19. Distribution of commercial advertising matter.
Drop" list shall be updated on or about January 1, April 1, July 1,
and October 1 of each year.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver, or any entity to cause
to be delivered, any unsolicited circular to a person registered on
the "Do Not Drop" list. Anyone violating this subsection shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $100 for each
violation.
A. The person or organization shall prepare on its official letterhead a
request to the local business to allow solicitation of donations which
shall include the date and time of the proposed solicitation(s).
B. The business shall approve the request by original signature and
affixing its store stamp to the request.
C. The person or organization shall then submit a letter to the Municipal
Clerk for placement on the agenda of the Township Council. All
requests must be submitted to the Municipal Clerk's office no later than
two weeks prior to the next scheduled Council meeting.
D. Upon approval by the Township Council, notification to the Chief of
Police shall be given by the Municipal Clerk.
E. Only one person or organization shall be approved to solicit at any one
business at any given time, and it shall be the responsibility of the local
business to ensure compliance with this section.
A. Definition. Commercial advertising matter, as used in this section, shall
mean any sample or device, dodger, bill or handbill, circular, pamphlet,
paper, booklet, picture or any other written, printed or reproduced
matter:
(1) Which advertises any merchandise, product, commodity, service or
other thing for sale; or
(2) Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or
commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of
§ 349-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-19
1:459
either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
or
(3) Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is
distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private
benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or
distributor.
B. Permit required. No person shall distribute commercial advertising
matter in the Township without first obtaining a permit therefor from
the Municipal Clerk as hereinafter provided in this section. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to require a permit for the distribution of
commercial advertising matter on or in any business premises by the
proprietor thereof or his agent, servants or employees.
C. Compliance with regulations required. The permit issued under this
section shall not be deemed to authorize the holder thereof to distribute
commercial advertising matter except in compliance with the
regulations hereinafter set forth in this section.
D. Application for and issuance of permit; investigation.
(1) Every applicant for a permit under this section shall file with the
Municipal Clerk, in duplicate, a written application signed and
verified by him, on a form supplied by the Municipal Clerk.
(2) The application shall state:
(a) Name and permanent home address of the applicant;
(b) Place of applicant's residence(s) during and for each of the
three years preceding the filing of the application;
(c) Name and address of the business or commercial enterprise
that has engaged the applicant to distribute the commercial
advertising matter;
(d) Number of days for which the applicant seeks a permit;
(e) Such other information as the Municipal Clerk may require.
(3) Upon filing of the application, the Municipal Clerk shall cause to be
forwarded to the Chief of Police the duplicate copy of the
application for his or her investigation. After due investigation, and
upon being satisfied that the applicant is of good moral character
and that the business or commercial enterprise for which the
applicant proposes to distribute commercial advertising matter is
free from fraud, the Chief of Police shall endorse on such
application his approval and return the application to the Municipal
Clerk, who shall thereupon issue the permit upon the payment of
the permit fee as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township
Code. The permit shall specify the number of days for which it shall
§ 349-19 HAMILTON CODE § 349-19
1:460
§ 349-20. Violations; penalties.
Unless otherwise specified in any other section of this chapter, any person
violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to
a penalty as set forth in § 1-2 of this Code.
be effective. The permitee shall carry the permit with him or her
while engaged in distributing any commercial advertising matter
and shall exhibit it to any policeman or any other person upon
request.
(4) Permit fee. The fee for a permit shall be as set forth in Chapter 215,
Fees, of the Township Code.
(5) Distribution on private premises; regulations and exceptions. No
person holding a permit issued under this section shall throw,
deposit or distribute any commercial advertising matter in or upon
private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or
transmitting same directly to the owner, occupant or other person
then present, except as hereinafter provided. A person, unless
requested by anyone upon the premises not to do so, may place or
deposit any such commercial advertising matter in or upon
inhabited private premises, if the premises are not posted as
provided in § 349-14 or § 349-15 and the commercial advertising
matter is placed or deposited so as to secure or prevent it from
being blown or drifted about the premises or sidewalks, streets or
other public places. Mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited
by federal postal law or regulations. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, or to
newspapers.
(6) Distribution prohibited where sign posted. No person shall throw,
deposit or distribute any commercial advertising matter in or upon
any private premises:
(a) If requested by anyone in or upon such premises not to do so;
or
(b) If there is placed on the premises a sign pursuant to § 349-14
or a decal pursuant to § 349-15.
§ 349-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-20
1:461
Chapter 354
PESTICIDES
§ 349-20 HAMILTON CODE § 349-20
1:462
ARTICLE I
Notification Prior to Spraying
[Adopted 11-7-2003 by Ord. No. 03-049 (Ch. 98, § 98-10, of the 1994
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 354-1. Responsible agency; mosquito control.
Mercer County Mosquito Control is the county agency responsible for the
spraying of pesticides in an effort to control and eliminate mosquitoes
and mosquito larvae in Mercer County. Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:30-9.10, the
mosquito control agency is required to provide notice to the public prior to
the actual spraying of pesticides.
§ 354-2. Posting signs on affected land; information on Township
website.
Upon the Township's receipt of twenty-four-hour notice from the Mercer
County Mosquito Control agency of the date, place and time of the spraying
of pesticides, the Township shall post said information on signs on the
identified Township lands at least 12 hours prior to the spraying. The
Township's posting shall also identify the pesticide(s) to be sprayed. In
addition, the Township shall place the information received from the
mosquito control agency on the Township's web page on the Internet.
§ 354-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-2
1:463
Chapter 362
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Buildings, unfit or abandoned — See Ch. 146.
Construction codes — See Ch. 167.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 228.
Graffiti — See Ch. 254.
Nuisances — See Ch. 317.
Solid waste — See Ch. 420.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 477.
§ 354-2 HAMILTON CODE § 354-2
1:464
ARTICLE I
Brush, Weeds and Trash
[Adopted as Ch. 110, Art. II, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 9-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-030]
§ 362-1. Responsibilities of owner and tenant; invasive plants;
bamboo.
A. It shall be the duty of any owner and tenant or person in possession of
any lands in the Township:
(1) To keep such lands free of brush, weeds, dead and dying trees,
stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, invasive plants, filth, garbage,
trash and debris where such items are inimical to the preservation
of public health, safety or general welfare of the Township or which
may constitute a fire hazard.
(2) Where the lands abut or border upon any public street, sidewalk or
public right-of-way in the Township, to remove all grass, weeds,
brush, invasive plants, and other debris from that part of the street,
sidewalk or public right-of-way bordering on their respective lands.
(3) To control the growth of invasive plants. Failure to control the
spread of such invasive plants beyond the boundaries of a
resident's property is a violation of this article.
B. For purposes of this article, the term "invasive plants" shall mean all
native and nonnative vines and vegetation that grow out of place and
are competitive, persistent and pernicious. These plants may damage
trees, vegetation or structures. Examples include but are not limited to
bamboo (spreading or running type), ragweed, multiflora rose, kudzu
vine and poison ivy or oak.
C. Bamboo.
(1) Regulation. Any bamboo that has been planted or otherwise
permitted to grow on any property within the Township shall
comply with the following:
(a) Bamboo shall not be planted, maintained or otherwise be
permitted to exist within 40 feet of the edge of the pavement or
traveled portion of any public roadway in the Township; and
(b) Each bamboo owner shall be required to take such measures
as are reasonably expected to prevent such bamboo from
invading or growing onto adjoining or neighboring properties.
Such measures shall include, but not be limited to, installation
of sheathing comprised of metal or other material
impenetrable by bamboo at a sufficient depth within the
property line or lines where the running bamboo is planted or
is growing to prevent the growth or encroachment upon
adjoining or neighboring property by the bamboo.
§ 362-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-1
1:465
§ 362-2. Authority to order cleaning of lot.120
Whenever the enforcement officer shall deem it necessary and expedient
for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare or the
elimination of a fire hazard, or upon investigation of a complaint of any
resident, officer or employee of the Township, he may order the owner,
tenant or person in possession of any lands on which any brush, weeds,
dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, invasive plants, filth,
garbage, trash or other debris is found to exist, to remove the brush, weeds,
dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, invasive plants, filth,
garbage, trash or other debris existing on such lands, or any adjoining or
neighboring lands to which any obnoxious growth or invasive plants have
spread from such lands, within 10 business days, or may cause the removal
thereof if the order is not complied with. The cost of abatement shall be
borne by the owner, tenant or other person in possession.
(2) For purposes of this article, the term "bamboo" shall mean any
monopodial (running) tropical or semitropical grasses from the
genera Bambusa, including but not limited to Bambusa,
Phyllostachys and Pseudosasa, as well as Common bamboo, Golden
bamboo and Arrow bamboo.
(3) For purposes of this article, the term "bamboo owner" shall mean
any property owner, tenant or person in possession who has
planted and/or grows bamboo, or who maintains bamboo on the
property, or who permits bamboo to grow or remain on the
property even if the bamboo has spread from an adjoining property.
Any property owner, tenant or person in possession at which
bamboo is found on the property will be considered a bamboo
owner, except any property owner, tenant or person in possession
who:
(a) Did not plant or grow or cause bamboo to be planted or grown
on his or her property; and
(b) Has provided satisfactory proof to the Township that, within a
reasonable period of time after discovering the encroachment
of bamboo onto the property from an adjoining or neighboring
property, he or she advised the owner, tenant or person in
possession of such property of his or her objection to the
encroachment of the bamboo; and
(c) Has initiated steps for the removal of the bamboo from the
property, including remedies at law.
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 362-1 HAMILTON CODE § 362-3
1:466
§ 362-3. Notice to remove plants and clean lot.121
After an investigation of any complaint of any resident, officer or employee
of the Township or upon his own motion, the enforcement officer shall notify
the owner or person in possession of the land complained of, in writing,
either personally or by registered mail, to remove such brush, weeds,
dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, invasive plants, filth,
garbage, trash or other debris within 10 business days after receipt of
notice to do so. The enforcement officer shall reinspect the lands in question
after the ten-business-day period shall have expired as to whether or not the
condition complained of has been abated or remedied.
§ 362-4. Cleaning of lot by Township; recovery of costs; violations
and penalties.122
If the owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands in question shall
refuse or neglect to abate or remedy the condition complained of within 10
business days after receipt of notice pursuant to § 362-3, the enforcement
officer shall issue a summons to the owner, tenant or person in possession
for violation of this article and/or shall cause the condition complained of
to be abated and remedied by the Department of Public Works, which shall
certify the cost thereof to the Department of Finance, which shall cause
the cost as shown thereon to be charged against the lands. The amount
so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be
added to and become and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and
levied upon such lands, and such amount shall bear interest at the same
rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same officer and
in the same manner as taxes. Costs shall be in addition to any penalties
imposed pursuant to § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code of the Township
of Hamilton for any violation of this article.
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 362-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-4
1:467

ARTICLE II
Commercial Property
[Adopted as Ch. 110, Art. III, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 362-5. Policy; purpose of article.
§ 362-6. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Director of the Township Department
of Community Planning and Compliance.
DETERIORATION — The condition of a structure or part thereof
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting
or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of maintenance or
excessive use.
A. Declaration of policy. It is hereby declared that there exist in the
Township structures used for commercial, business, industrial and
nonresidential purposes which are, or may become in the future,
substandard with respect to structure, equipment or maintenance and,
further, that such conditions, including but not limited to structural
deterioration, lack of maintenance and appearance of exterior of
premises, constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare and
reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants of the Township. It is
further declared that, by reason of lack of maintenance and progressive
deterioration, certain properties have the further effect of causing
blight; that if the conditions are not curtailed or removed, such
conditions may grow and spread and necessitate in time the
expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate
the conditions; and that by the adoption of the regulations and
restrictions contained in this article blight may be prevented and
neighborhood and property values may be maintained, upgraded
nonresidential uses and neighborhoods may be better maintained and
the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health,
safety, morals and welfare by establishing minimum standards
governing the maintenance, appearance and condition of
nonresidential premises; to fix responsibilities and duties upon owners,
operators and occupants; to authorize and establish procedures for the
inspection of commercial premises; to fix penalties for the violations of
this article; and to provide for the right of access to permit repairs when
necessary. This article is hereby declared to be remedial and essential
for the public interest, and it is intended that this article be liberally
construed to effectuate the purpose as stated in this section.
§ 362-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-6
1:469
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Building officials, health inspectors, housing
inspectors, health officers and zoning enforcement officers.
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Those portions of a building or structure
which are exposed to public view or are visible from adjoining or adjacent
properties, including all outside surfaces and appurtenances thereto, and
the open space on the premises outside any building or structure erected
thereon.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, or by poison, spraying,
fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest-elimination methods.
FIRE HAZARD — Any thing or any act which increases or may cause
any increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than
that customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service of
preventing, suppressing or extinguishing fire, or which may obstruct, delay
or hinder or may become the cause of an obstruction, delay, hazard or
hindrance to the prevention, suppression or extinguishment of fire.
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
NUISANCE — Any public or private condition that would constitute a
nuisance according to the statutes, laws and regulations of the state or any
of its agencies, or this Code; and any physical condition existing in or on
the exterior of any premises which is potentially dangerous, detrimental or
hazardous to the health or safety of persons on, near or passing in proximity
of the premises where such condition exists.
OCCUPANT — Any occupant, owner, agent, tenant, lessee, caretaker or
other person or corporation in charge of or residing, living or sleeping in
or on the premises of or having actual possession or use of a business,
commercial, industrial unit or other premises affected by this article.
OPERATOR — Any person, not the owner, who has charge, care or control
of a structure or a part thereof, with or without the knowledge, consent or
authority of the owner.
OWNER — Any person who has legal or equitable title in any form
whatsoever to any premises or part thereof, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof, or who shall have charge, care or control of any
lot, premises, building, structure or part thereof, as owner or agent of the
owner or as fiduciary, trustee, receiver, guardian, lessee or mortgagee in
possession, regardless of how such possession was obtained. Any person
who is a lessee, sublessee or assignee of a lessee of any part or all of
any building, structure or land shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the
lessor for the purposes of this article and shall have responsibility over that
portion of the premises so sublet, leased or assigned.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings,
structures and improvements thereon, which is used in any part for
business, commercial or industrial activity.
§ 362-6 HAMILTON CODE § 362-6
1:470
RUBBISH — All combustible and noncombustible waste materials other
than garbage; and the term shall include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and the residue from burning wood, coal,
coke or other combustible material, and solid commercial and industrial
waste. No chemicals such as those used in swimming pools, oil, gasoline
or any other chemical which could cause a fire, explosion or obnoxious gas
shall be considered rubbish.
§ 362-7. Standards.
A. General standards. There is hereby adopted by the Council, for the
purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions for
maintenance of commercial property, that certain code known as the
BOCA National Property Maintenance Code, being particularly the
1993 Edition thereof, and the whole thereof and the provisions thereof
shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the Township.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 et seq., such code, which is printed in
book form, is adopted by reference thereto, and a copy of the printed
code is annexed to this article and shall be a part of this article as fully
as though it had been set forth at length in this article.
B. Landscaping. All nonresidential properties shall be kept landscaped in
accordance with or equal to the original landscape site plan as
approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Bushes, lawns, hedges, detention basins, retention basins and all other
features included in the approved landscape plan shall be maintained
and kept from becoming overgrown or unsightly or from any state of
neglect or disrepair. Plantings required by site plan approval shall be
replaced when the plantings have died. Where site plan approval had
not been obtained, landscaping shall be maintained and kept from
becoming overgrown or unsightly or from any state of neglect or
disrepair.
C. Exterior of buildings and structures.
(1) All storefronts and the exterior of every building, structure or
appurtenance thereto shall be maintained in good repair, and all
exterior surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or otherwise
provided with a protective treatment where necessary for purposes
of preservation and appearance and maintained free from broken
or cracked glass or loose shingles or siding or broken cracks on
brick, crumbling masonry, excessively peeling paint or other
condition indicating deterioration or inadequate maintenance, to
the end that the property itself may be preserved, safety and fire
hazards eliminated and adjoining properties and the neighborhood
protected from blighting influence.
(2) The areas to be maintained and the maintenance required include
but are not limited to the following:
§ 362-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-7
1:471
(a) Exterior surfaces (foundations, walls and roofs). Every
foundation, exterior wall, roof and all other exterior surfaces
shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and
repair.
(b) Exterior walls. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes,
breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other
conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior
portion of the walls or to the occupied or unoccupied spaces of
the building. All exterior surface materials, including wood,
composition or metal siding, shall be maintained weatherproof
and shall be properly surface-coated when required to prevent
deterioration.
(c) Roofs and drainage. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight
and not have defects which might admit rain. Roof drainage
shall be adequate to prevent rainwater from causing dampness
or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the building.
Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a
nuisance to owners or occupants of adjacent premises or that
creates a public nuisance.
(d) Decorative features. All cornices, entablatures, belt courses,
corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative
features shall be maintained in good repair with proper
anchorage and in a safe condition.
(e) Signs, marquees and awnings. All canopies, marquees, signs,
metal awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust
ducts and similar overhang extensions shall be maintained in
good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a safe
and sound condition. They shall be protected from the
elements and against decay and rust by the periodic
application of a weather-coating material such as paint or
other protective treatment.
(f) Chimneys and towers. Exposed surfaces of all chimneys,
cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances shall
be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by
periodic application of weather-coating materials such as paint
or similar surface treatment.
(g) Stairs and porches.
1. Every stair, porch, fire escape and balcony and all
appurtenances attached thereto shall be maintained in
sound condition and good repair. Every stair, porch and
fire escape shall be maintained free of hazardous
conditions such as snow, ice, mud and other debris.
2. Every flight of stairs which is more than four risers high
shall have a handrail on at least one side of the stair, and
§ 362-7 HAMILTON CODE § 362-7
1:472
every open portion of a stair, fire escape, porch, landing
or balcony which is more than 30 inches (762 millimeters)
above the grade below shall have guardrails. Every
handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened and capable
of bearing normally imposed loads and shall be maintained
in good condition.
(h) Windows, doors and frames. Every window, door and frame
shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the
adjacent wall construction so as to be weathertight.
(i) Weathertightness. Every window and exterior door shall be
fitted reasonably in its frame and be weathertight. Weather
stripping shall be used to exclude wind or rain from entering
the dwelling or structure and shall be kept in sound condition
and good repair.
(j) Glazing. Every required window sash shall be fully supplied
with approved glazing materials which are without open cracks
and holes.
(k) Windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be
capable of being easily opened and shall be held in position by
window hardware.
(l) Doors. Every exterior door and its hardware shall be
maintained in good condition.
(m) Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be so
constructed and maintained as to prevent the entrance of rats,
rain and surface drainage water into the structure.
D. Structural standards. Every structure and accessory structure and
every part thereof shall be kept structurally sound and in a state of good
repair to avoid safety, health or fire hazards, including but not limited to
the following: All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to carry
safely the design and operating dead and live loads and shall be
maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks so as not to be
detrimental to public safety and welfare.
E. Site maintenance. The exterior of the premises or vacant land shall be
kept free of all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of occupants,
pedestrian and other persons utilizing the premises and free of
unsanitary conditions, and any of such conditions shall be promptly
removed and abated by the owner or operator. It shall be the duty of the
owner or operator to keep the premises free of hazards, which include
but are not limited to the following:
(1) Refuse such as broken glass, filth, garbage, trash, litter and debris.
(2) Natural growth such as brush, weeds, ragweed, stumps, roots and
obnoxious growths and dead and dying trees and limbs or other
§ 362-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-7
1:473
§ 362-8. Enforcement of article. [Amended 1-20-2004 by Ord. No.
04-002]
natural growth which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating
condition or storm damage, constitutes a hazard to persons in the
vicinity thereof. Trees shall be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent
such condition.
(3) Overhangs such as loose and overhanging objects and
accumulations of ice and snow which, by reason of location above
ground level, constitute a danger of falling on persons in the
vicinity thereof.
(4) Ground surface hazards or unsanitary conditions such as holes,
broken or missing pavement, loose stone, excavations, mud,
breaks, projections, obstructions, ice, uncleared snow and
excretion of pets and other animals on paths, walks, driveways,
parking lots and parking areas and other parts of the premises
which are accessible to and used by persons on the premises. All
such holes and excavations shall be filled and repaired, walks and
steps shall be repaired, and other conditions shall be removed
where necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary conditions with
reasonable dispatch upon their discovery. It shall be the
responsibility of owners and operators to take reasonable steps to
discover any such hazards or unsanitary conditions which may exist
on their premises.
(5) Recurring accumulations of stormwater. Adequate runoff drains
shall be provided and maintained to eliminate any recurrent or
excessive accumulation of stormwater.
(6) Sources of infestation or harborage of pests. Any extermination
shall be performed by a licensed professional pesticide applicator.
(7) Hazards in parking areas. Parking lots or parking areas, including
the entrances and exits thereto, shall be kept in a good state of
repair and maintained so as to comply with Subsection E(4) of this
section. Signing of ownership and use restrictions, such as the
identification of handicapped parking spaces, fire zones, etc., shall
be maintained in good repair, clearly visible to potential parkers.
Striping, where appropriate, shall indicate spaces, direction of flow
and entrances and exits, and be maintained so as to ensure
visibility. Parking shall be limited to nonpervious areas.
(8) Lighting hazards, such as inadequate or unsafe lighting.
F. Exhaust vents. A person shall not construct, maintain or operate pipes,
ducts, conductors, fans or blowers discharging gases, steam, vapor, hot
air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes so as to
discharge directly upon abutting or adjacent public and private
property or that of another tenant.
§ 362-7 HAMILTON CODE § 362-8
1:474
A. Enforcement officers. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the
building officials, housing inspectors, health officers, health inspectors
and Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Township to enforce the
provisions of this article as provided in this section.
B. Coordination of enforcement. The primary responsibility for the
inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection
therewith under the provisions of this article shall be the responsibility
of the Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Township. Whenever in the
opinion of the Zoning Enforcement Officer it is necessary or desirable to
have inspections of any condition by any other department, he shall
arrange for this to be done.
C. Right of entry. Any enforcement officer is authorized to enter upon any
premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of conducting
inspections and performing his duties under this article.
D. Enforcement procedure.123
(1) Whenever an enforcement officer determines that there is or has
been a violation of any provision of this article, he shall give notice
of such violation to the person responsible therefor under this
section. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly and sufficiently
served if a copy thereof is sent by regular mail to the last known
address of the person upon which the notice is served, as shown by
the most recent tax records of the Township, or a copy thereof is
handed to the person or a copy thereof is left at the usual place of
abode or office of the person. Notice shall be given as provided in
this subsection within or without the Township. The notice shall
also state that, unless the violation is abated, removed, cured,
prevented or desisted from within 30 days, or within 10 days for
violations regarding removal of grass, weeds, brush or other
debris, of the date of service of such notice, exclusive of the date of
service, a summons shall be issued for such violation.
(2) The enforcement officer may extend the period for compliance with
the requirements of this article in regard to the violation stated in
the notice, except for violations regarding removal of grass, weeds,
brush or other debris, for a period in excess of 30 days if, in his
judgment, the abatement, removal, prevention, cessation or cure of
the condition violated cannot reasonably be effected within the
thirty-day period. In such cases, the enforcement officer shall state
such reasonably required extended period in the notice, which shall
then be applicable instead of the thirty-day period. No extension of
the ten-day period for remediation of any violation regarding
removal of grass, weeds, brush or other debris shall be granted.
(3) If the violation is not abated, removed, cured, prevented or desisted
from or otherwise fully remedied within the thirty-day period or
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 362-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-8
1:475
§ 362-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article or
any order promulgated under this article shall be punished in accordance
with § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton.
§ 362-10. Abatement of violations regarding grass, weeds, brush or
other debris; recovery of costs by Township. [Amended 1-20-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-002124]
If the owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands served notice
pursuant to this article shall refuse or neglect to abate or remedy the
violation regarding grass, weeds, brush or other debris set forth in the
notice within 10 days after receipt of notice, the enforcement officer shall
cause the condition complained of to be abated and remedied by the
Department of Public Works, which shall certify the cost thereof to the
Department of Finance, which shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be
charged against the lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith become
and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands
and shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and
within such extended period as set forth in the notice, pursuant to
Subsection D(2) of this section, a summons shall be issued against
the person so notified. Any extension beyond 60 days must be
approved by the administrative officer.
(4) If the violation regarding removal of grass, weeds, brush or other
debris is not remediated within the ten-day period set forth in the
notice, a summons shall be issued against the person notified. In
addition, the enforcement officer may cause the removal thereof.
E. Emergency conditions. Whenever the enforcement officer finds that an
emergency condition in violation of this article exists, which condition
requires immediate attention in order to protect the public health or
safety, he may issue an order to protect the public health or safety by
service of notice as set forth in Subsection D of this section, reciting the
existence of such emergency condition and requiring that such action
be taken by the violator as soon as is reasonably necessary to meet the
emergency. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the
contrary, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom
such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but, upon
objection in writing to the enforcement officer, any such person shall be
afforded a hearing before the Council as soon as is reasonably possible.
After such hearing and decision by the Council as to the existence or
nonexistence of the emergency condition, the Council may continue
such order in effect or modify or withdraw it, subject to the issuance of
a summons for violation thereof if such order is continued.
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 362-8 HAMILTON CODE § 362-10
1:476
enforced by the same officer and in the same manner as taxes. Costs shall
be in addition to any penalties imposed for any violation of this article.
§ 362-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-10
1:477
Chapter 373
SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 215, § 215-1.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 285.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 349.
Land development — See Ch. 550.
§ 362-10 HAMILTON CODE § 362-10
1:478
ARTICLE I
Sale of Items
§ 373-1. License required; exceptions.
Any person who offers for sale any item shall be required to obtain a license
from the Municipal Clerk unless:
§ 373-2. Application for license.
Application for a license under this article shall be made to the Municipal
Clerk and shall include the following information:
§ 373-3. Inspection of premises; approval or disapproval of license
application.
A copy of the application for a license under this article shall be forwarded
to the Planning Division. The Planning Division shall investigate and
examine the proposed licensed premises. Within seven working days, it
shall send the Municipal Clerk's office its report, which shall indicate its
approval or disapproval of the application, based upon the requirements of
Chapter 550, Land Development. The Municipal Clerk shall abide by the
decision of the Division of Planning.
§ 373-4. License fee.
A. The person operates, year-round (12 months), an established place of
business in the Township.
B. The products produced on the vendor's land are sold from the
residential property of the vendor.
C. The products sold are personal items which have been in the vendor's
possession for a minimum of six months, from an established place of
residency, yet not beyond the limits of the vendor's property.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The address and a description of the area where the sale is to take
place.
C. A sales tax certificate issued by the State Division of Taxation for the
premises.
D. The days of the week and the hours of the day during which the licensed
activity will be conducted.
A. There shall be a fee as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township
Code, for a license issued under this article.125
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 373-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-4
1:479
§ 373-5. Expiration of license.
All licenses issued under this article shall expire November 30 of each year.
§ 373-6. Display of license.
The license issued under this article shall be prominently displayed at the
location of the sale.
§ 373-7. Revocation of license.
The Township may revoke a license issued under this article if it finds that
the licensee has violated the regulations enumerated in Chapter 550, Land
Development, or this article, or the provisions of § 285-10.
B. The following are exempt from paying the assigned fee:
(1) Civic leagues or organizations not organized for profit but operated
exclusively for the promotion of social welfare.
(2) Fraternal beneficiary societies, orders or associations.
(3) Religious and apostolic organizations.
§ 373-4 HAMILTON CODE § 373-7
1:480
ARTICLE II
Seasonal Sales
[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)126]
§ 373-8. Compliance required.
Annual sale of Mother's Day and Easter flowers and Christmas trees,
wreaths, blankets, flowers, laurel, poinsettias, etc. The annual sale of the
aforementioned items shall not be permitted at temporary locations unless
done in compliance with the following procedures and specifications.
§ 373-9. Application for license.
An application must be made to the Township Clerk for a license.
§ 373-10. Performance standards.
The applicant must sign an affidavit attesting to the fact that this site and
temporary business meets the following performance standards:
§ 373-11. Exceptions.
These procedures and specifications do not apply to any existing
continuously operated business, whose:
A. Adequate off-street parking of a dust-free nature is provided at a ratio
of one space per every 400 square feet of space devoted to the display
and sale of the aforementioned items.
B. Hours of operation will be limited to from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
C. No off-site sign will be erected directing the public to the place of sale.
D. Only one on-site sign six square feet in area will be erected. It shall be
located no closer than 10 feet to the right-of-way.
E. Sales will begin no sooner than two weeks prior to Easter and Mother's
Day and from December 1 to December 25 for Christmas.
F. Temporary sales will not occur at any other time of the year.
G. Cleanup and dismantling of temporary sales paraphernalia will be
completed within five days after the holiday is over.
H. There will be no adverse impacts to the health, safety or welfare of the
neighboring community as a result of the proposed activity.
126. Editor's Note: This article was previously codified as Sec. 160-312(l), Annual sale of
Mother's Day and Easter flowers and Christmas trees, wreaths, blankets, flowers, laurel,
poinsettias, etc., of the 1994 Code of Ordinances.
§ 373-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-11
1:481
§ 373-12. Violations and penalties.
Any nuisances associated with any approved site which jeopardize the
health, safety and welfare of the community shall be eliminated within
24 hours from the time the business is notified of the nuisances by the
Township. Violation of this or other conditions will result in a fine up to $500
per day for each violation and possible revocation of the license.
A. Principal permitted utilization of the land is associated with the raising
and/or sale of agricultural or nursery products.
B. Property received site plan approval from the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment for the indoor sale of commercial products similar
in nature to or permitted by this article.
C. Property has received conditional use approval from the Planning
Board as a roadside stand for farm and nursery products, which also
mentioned as part of the application the sale of the aforementioned
products.
§ 373-11 HAMILTON CODE § 373-12
1:482
Chapter 379
SCHOOL ENROLLMENT BY NONRESIDENTS
§ 379-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit and penalize any parent or other
person from enrolling a nonresident student in the Hamilton Township
School District.
§ 379-2. Prohibited conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person over the age of 18 to:
§ 379-3. Enforcement.
Sections 379-1 and 379-2 shall be enforced by the administrative officials of
the school district and/or school facilities where such prohibited activities
are undertaken and the attendance/residency officer and/or the attendance/
residency investigator. All residents hosting other families with a student
enrolled in the Hamilton Township School District in their residence must
register with the Hamilton Township School District and must notify the
Hamilton Township School District when such other families no longer
reside with the resident.
§ 379-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to make restitution to the
Hamilton Township Board of Education and pay a fine of not more than
$2,000. In determining the amount of restitution, the court shall include
amounts incurred by the Hamilton Township Board of Education, including
but not limited to tuition costs, investigation expenses and attorneys' fees.
A. Assist, aid, abet, allow, permit, suffer or encourage a student to register
or enroll in the Hamilton Township School District where the student is
ineligible to attend; or
B. Knowingly permit his or her name, address or other residencedesignating
documentation to be utilized in the registration or
enrollment of any nonresident student in the Hamilton Township School
District; or
C. Not notify or inform the Hamilton Township School District when a
student is no longer a resident in the household of that person who had
previously knowingly permitted his or her name, address or other
residence-designating documentation to be utilized in the registration
or enrollment of the student in the Hamilton Township School District.
§ 373-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-5
1:483
§ 379-5. Restitution.
Restitution ordered by the Municipal Court of the Township of Hamilton,
Mercer County, shall be converted into a lien against the property of the
offending party.
Chapter 385
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 167.
Fees — See Ch. 215.
Land development: subdivision and
zoning — See Ch. 550.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 577.
§ 379-5 HAMILTON CODE § 379-5
1:484
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 385-1. Purpose and policy.
§ 385-2. Administration.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director of the Department of
Water Pollution Control shall administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to, or duties imposed upon,
the Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control may be delegated
by the Director to the Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control
or to other Township personnel.
§ 385-3. Word usage and abbreviations.
A. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of sanitary
sewers and the water pollution control plant, a publicly owned
treatment works ("POTW") for the Township, and enables the Township
to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean
Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the general pretreatment
regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The objectives of this chapter are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with its operation;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving
waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;
(3) To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by
wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the
general public;
(4) To promote reuse and recycling of process wastewater by the
industrial user and sludge by the POTW.
(5) To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW; and
(6) To enable the Township to comply with its New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) permit conditions, sludge
use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws
to which the POTW is subject.
B. This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW. The chapter
authorizes the issuance of permits; establishes administrative review
procedures; requires user reports; and provides for the setting of fees
for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.
A. Word usage. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 385-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-3
1:485
§ 385-4. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
AMMONIA-NITROGEN (NH3-N) — The quantity of nitrogen measurable by
the procedures as described in "Standard Methods for Examination of Water
and Wastewater (latest edition)," or an equivalent method authorized by the
Township.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER —
B. Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
DEP New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
IWD Nondomestic (industrial) wastewater discharge
L Liter
mg Milligram
mg/L Milligrams per liter
N.J.A.C. New Jersey Administrative Code
N.J.S.A. New Jersey Statutes Annotated
NJPDES New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
O&M Operation and maintenance
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
SIC Standard industrial classification
SIU Significant industrial user
TSS Total suspended solids
U.S.C. United States Code
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the
user is a corporation.
A.
A general partner or proprietor if the user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively.
B.
§ 385-3 HAMILTON CODE § 385-4
1:486
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure as described in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Waste
and Wastewater" (latest edition) in five days at 20° C., expressed in
milligrams per liter (mg/L).
BUILDING SEWER — Any pipe and any necessary connections conveying
sewage from a single building of any kind to the sanitary sewer, also called
a "house connection."
BYPASS — The anticipated or unanticipated intentional diversion of waste
streams from any portion of a user's wastewater treatment works.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS (SOMETIMES TERMED "CATEGORICAL
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS") — Pretreatment standards specifying
quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may
be discharged or introduced to a POTW by existing or new industrial users
in specific industrial categories.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection or authorized representative.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample consisting of several portions collected
during a specific time period and combined to make a representative
sample.
CONNECTION — Any physical or operational change associated with an
increase in projected flow to a collection system of any building, facility or
other structure, either proposed or existing, for which a building permit
or other Township approval, including site plan or subdivision approval, is
required, and which connects directly or indirectly to any portion of the
POTW.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — Director of the Department of Water Pollution
Control.
COOLING WATER — Any water used for the purpose of carrying away
excess heat, and which may contain biocides used to control biological
growth.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control or
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations that is discharged to or otherwise enters a treatment works.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source which is not a new source, including
presently existing discharges which are not currently permitted.
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above
if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
C.
§ 385-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-4
1:487
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.
HAZARDOUS POLLUTANT —
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste that is defined or identified as
a hazardous waste pursuant to the Solid Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A.
13:1E et seq., N.J.A.C. 7:26-8, or 40 CFR Part 261.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of pollutants
from any nondomestic source, including those regulated under Section
307(a)(b) or (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) into the POTW.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any liquid, gaseous or solid substance, or a
combination thereof, resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing,
trade, commerce or business, from the development or recovery of any
natural resources as distinct from sanitary sewage, including but not limited
to those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a)(b) or (c) of the Act.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources:
A. Any toxic pollutant;
Any substances regulated as a pesticide under the Federal Insecticide,
Fungicide and Rodenticide Act, P.L. 92-516 (7 U.S.C. § 136 et seq.);
B.
Any substance used or manufactured which is prohibited under the
Federal Toxic Substances Control Act, P.L. 94-469 (15 U.S.C. § 2601 et
seq.);
C.
Any substance identified as a known carcinogen by the International
Agency for Research on Cancer;
D.
E. Any hazardous waste as designated pursuant to this chapter; or
Any hazardous substance as defined pursuant to § 3 of P.L. 1976, c. 141
(N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11b).
F.
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or
its sludge processes, use or disposal; or
A.
Is a cause of a violation of any requirements of the POTW's NJPDES
permit, (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or of the prevention of sludge (from the POTW) use or
disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and
regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or
local regulations): Section 405 of the Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act
B.
§ 385-4 HAMILTON CODE § 385-4
1:488
NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with
Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to industrial users. This term
includes prohibited discharge standards established pursuant to 40 CFR
403.5.
NEW JERSEY POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NJPDES)
— The state system for issuing, modifying, suspending, revoking and
reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing of discharge permits
pursuant to the state Act. The term also includes discharge permits
(NPDES) issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et
seq.).
NEW SOURCE —
(SWDA) [including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)], and Sections 2, 4 and 6 of
the state Act,127 and any regulations, criteria or guidelines developed
pursuant thereto, including but not limited to N.J.A.C. 7:14A-20 and the
statewide sludge management plan.
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is,
or may be, a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under Section 307(c) of the Act, which will be applicable to such source
if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
(1)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
The production of wastewater-generating process of the building,
structure, facility or installation is substantially independent of any
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors, such as the extent to which the
new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent
to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered.
(3)
A.
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of subsection (1)(a) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces
or adds to existing process or production equipment.
B.
Construction of a new source, as defined under this definition, is
commenced if the owner or operator has:
C.
127. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.
§ 385-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-4
1:489
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which does not
come in direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product or finished product.
NORMAL SEWAGE — Sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes, which
when analyzed show by weight the following characteristics:
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which alone, or in conjunction
with a discharge(s) from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirements of the POTW's NJPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERMIT —
PERSON — Any responsible corporate official for the purpose of
enforcement action under Section 10 of the state Act.128
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
(a)
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or
facilities, which is necessary for the placement, assembly or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(b)
(1)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used for its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial
loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do
not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition.
(2)
A. BOD: 3,300 pounds per million gallons (400 milligrams per liter) or less;
B. TSS: 3,300 pounds per million gallons (400 milligrams per liter) or less;
Ammonia nitrogen: 330 pounds per million gallons (40 milligrams per
liter) or less.
C.
A. An NJPDES permit; or
A control document issued by the Township to implement the
requirements of this chapter even where any or all of the conditions
of the permit have been stayed. The Wastewater Utility may issue
permits for sanitary sewer connections and the discharge of industrial
waste (nondomestic wastewater and non-SIU and noncategorical) into
its sanitary sewer system. A permit to discharge nondomestic
wastewater (IWD) includes a letter of agreement entered into between
the Township and a user of its POTW, setting discharge limitations and
other conditions on the user of the Township POTW.
B.
§ 385-4 HAMILTON CODE § 385-4
1:490
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions
in grams per liter of solution.
PLUMBING SUBCODE OFFICIAL — The Plumbing Subcode Official in the
Township Department of Community Planning and Compliance.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance, thermal waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal or agricultural waste or runoff or other
residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters or
surface waters or into the waters of the state or the POTW.
POTW — Publicly owned treatment works; Hamilton Township Department
of Water Pollution Control.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants'
properties in wastewater, including controlling peak flow rates (flow
equalization), prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into a POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, by process changes, or by other means, except by
diluting the concentration of the pollutants, unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT ACT — Pretreatment Standards for Sewerage, N.J.S.A.
58:11-49 et seq.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirements related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard,
imposed on a user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Any limitation on quantities, quality, rates
or concentrations of pollutants discharged into the POTW, adopted pursuant
to the Pretreatment Act, Section 4 of the state Act,129 or any applicable
national, state or local regulations (i.e., this chapter), including but not
limited to any prohibited discharge standards, categorical standards and
local limits.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with, or results from, the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water. This
definition includes the terms "commercial wastewater" and "industrial
wastewater," as used in 40 CFR Part 503.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works, as
defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned in this
instance by the Township. For the purposes of this chapter, "POTW" shall
128. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.
129. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.
§ 385-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-4
1:491
also include sanitary sewers or other conveyances that convey wastewaters
to the POTW from persons outside the Township who are, by contract or
agreement with Township, users of the Township POTW.
REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR — The Administrator of Region II of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency or an authorized
representative.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries domestic sewage and liquid
and water-carried industrial wastes together with minor quantities of
groundwaters, stormwaters and surface waters that are not admitted
intentionally
SERIOUS VIOLATION — An exceedance of an effluent limitation for a
discharge point source as set forth in a permit, administrative order or
administrative consent order, including interim enforcement limits, as
follows:
For discharge limitations for pollutants that are measured by
concentration or mass:
Violations of a discharge limitation that is expressed as a monthly
average:
(a) By 20% or more for a hazardous pollutant; and
(b) By 40% or more for a nonhazardous pollutant.
(1)
Violations of a discharge limitation that is expressed as a daily
maximum or daily minimum without a monthly average:
By 20% or more of the average of all daily maximum or
minimum values for hazardous pollutants; and
(a)
By 40% or more of the average of all daily maximum or
minimum values for a nonhazardous pollutant.
(b)
(2)
A.
The greatest violation of a pH effluent range in any one calendar day
which violation deviates from the midpoint of the range by at least
40% of the midpoint of the range (excluding the excursions specifically
expected by a permit with continuous pH monitoring), as determined
by the following formulas:
Example 1: If the allowed range is 5.5 to 9.0, M = 7.3, and F = 0.4
x 7.3 = 2.9.
(1)
Any reading at or above 10.2 (i.e., above 7.3 + 2.9, or M + F) is a
serious violation.
(2)
Any reading at or below 4.4 (i.e., below 7.3 - 2.9, or M - F) is a
serious violation.
(3)
B.
§ 385-4 HAMILTON CODE § 385-4
1:492
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE — Substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable,
or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
SEWAGE — Any wastes, including wastes from humans, households,
commercial establishments, industries and stormwater runoff, that are
discharged to or otherwise enter the POTW.
SEWER EXTENSION — Any sanitary sewer pipe, line, structure or
appurtenance used for the conveyance of domestic sewage or industrial
waste of a liquid nature, whether forced or by gravity, which:
SIGNIFICANT CHANGE — Changes in flow, production, etc., of 20% or
greater.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) —
E > M + F (if the greatest exceedance is above the allowed range)
or
E < M - F (if the greatest exceedance is below the allowed range)
Where:
M = the midpoint of the allowed range;
F = 0.4M, or 40% of the midpoint; and
E = the greatest exceedance above or below the allowed
range in that month.
A more stringent factor of exceedance to determine a serious violation
is if the Township states the specific reason therefor, which may include
the potential for harm to human health or the environment.
C.
Will extend along an easement through more than two properties, a
roadway or public right-of-way;
A.
B. Conveys flow from more than two buildings; or
Conveys, or will convey, 8,000 gallons per day or more of sewage
flow, determined in accordance with the criteria specified in N.J.A.C.
7:14A-23.3. This includes all sewer lines from a single building if the
building utilizes more than one sanitary sewer line to convey waste to
the wastewater facilities and the aggregate waste flow is 8,000 gallons
per day or more.
C.
A. A user subject to categorical standards; or
A user that:
Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process
wastewater to the POTW;
(1)
B.
§ 385-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-4
1:493
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — An industrial user is in "significant
noncompliance" if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:
Contributes a process wastewater which makes up 5% or more
of the average dry-weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW; or
(2)
Is designated as such by the control authority on the basis that
it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
(3)
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) above
has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement,
the control authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with
procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not
be considered a significant industrial user.
C.
Chronic violations of discharge limits, defined herein as those in which
66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same
pollutant of any amount;
A.
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by
the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2
for all other pollutants except pH);
B.
Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) that the Township believes
has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference
or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel
or the general public;
C.
Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Township's
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
D.
Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
E.
Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic selfmonitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
F.
§ 385-4 HAMILTON CODE § 385-4
1:494
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIER — In accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:14-8.2,
any person who commits a serious violation for the same pollutant at the
same discharge in any two months of any consecutive six-month period,
or who exceeds the monthly average or, in a case of a pollutant for which
no monthly average has been established, the monthly average of the
daily maximums for an effluent limitation for the same pollutant at the
same discharge by any amount in any four months of any consecutive
six-month period, or any exceedance of an effluent limitation for pH by
any amount, excluding the excursions specifically excepted by a NJPDES
permit with continuous pH monitoring, at the same discharge point source
in any four months of any consecutive six-month period, or who fails to
submit a completed discharge monitoring report in any two months of
any consecutive six-month period, or who commits any of the violations
described below, unless the Township uses, on a case-by-case basis, a more
stringent frequency or factor of exceedance to determine a significant
noncomplier and the Township states the specific reasons therefor, which
may include the potential for harm to human health or the environment.
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average twentyfour-
hour concentration of flows during normal operation and/or may
adversely affect the POTW.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the SIC Manual issued by the United States Office of
Management and Budget, latest edition.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STATE ACT — The New Jersey Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A.
58:10A-1 et seq., as amended.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) — The total nonfilterable residue as
determined by analytical procedures set forth in the Manual of Methods
for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes (USEPA, 18th Edition), and any
supplements and amendments thereto, and analyzed in accordance with an
approved test procedure.
TOWNSHIP — Township of Hamilton.
TOXIC POLLUTANT or TOXIC SUBSTANCE — Any pollutant identified
pursuant to the Act, or any pollutant or combination of pollutants, including
disease-causing agents, which after discharge and upon exposure,
ingestion, inhalation or assimilation into any organism, either directly or
indirectly by ingestion through food chains, may, on the basis of information
available to the NJDEP, cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities,
cancer, genetic mutations, physiological malfunctions, including
malfunctions in reproduction, or physical deformation, in such organisms or
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
Any other violation(s) which the Township determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of its Wastewater Utility.
H.
§ 385-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-4
1:495
their offspring. Toxic pollutants shall include, but are not limited to, those
pollutants identified pursuant to Section 307 of the Act or Section 4 of
the state Act,130 or in the case of "sludge use or disposal practices," any
pollutant identified pursuant to Section 405(d) of the Act.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving
water quality standards or interference with their designated uses.
USER — Any person, individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation,
association, group or society, mobile source, and includes political
subdivisions of this state and any federal, state or interstate agency
discharging to a POTW.
WASTEWATER — Residential, commercial, industrial or agricultural liquid
waste, septage, stormwater runoff, or any combination thereof, or other
residue discharged or collected.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment and processes
required to collect, carry away and treat sewage and dispose of the effluent
and the residuals. These shall include all pumping stations, interceptors,
trunks, sub-trunks, branches, laterals and all other sanitary sewer
appurtenances, either publicly or privately owned, except building sewers.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices and
structures for treating sewage and sludge. Sometimes used and
synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant"
or "water pollution control plant" or "sewage treatment plant."
WASTEWATER UTILITY — The Township Department of Water Pollution
Control (WPC).
130. Editor's Note: See the New Jersey Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.
§ 385-4 HAMILTON CODE § 385-4
1:496
ARTICLE II
Wastewater Utility
§ 385-5. Establishment of Wastewater Utility; disposition of
revenues.
§ 385-6. Master plan; wastewater management plan.
§ 385-7. Sewer extensions.
The Township may extend the sanitary sewer system of the Township if
deemed necessary. All sewer extensions shall conform in every respect to
the rules and regulations of the NJDEP. All sewer extensions for residential
development shall further conform to N.J.A.C. 5:25-6. No sewage shall be
permitted to discharge into the sanitary sewer system, and/or no permanent
connection shall be made to the sanitary sewer system, until the extension
is approved by the NJDEP and the line has been inspected and approved by
the Township. The fee for the television inspection of the sanitary sewer line
by the Township shall be $3 per linear foot subject to WPC equipment being
available.
A. There shall be a wastewater utility for the Township, which shall be
controlled by the Hamilton Township governing body.
B. All revenue and accounting therefor by the Wastewater Utility shall be
on a dedicated, utility basis pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:4-35. All moneys
derived from the operation of the Wastewater Utility and any other
moneys applicable to its support shall be segregated and kept in a
separate fund, which shall be known as the "Wastewater Utility Fund."
Disbursements for the operation and maintenance of the Wastewater
Utility shall be taken from the fund.
C. Budgets shall provide appropriations for operating expenses, capital
improvements, debt service for the payment of all sanitary sewer or
wastewater treatment works bonds, principal and interest and all other
deferred charges and statutory expenditures as may be required.
A. The original master plan for sewerage is the plan dated June 26, 1974,
prepared by Betz Environmental Engineers.
B. The wastewater management plan is the plan updated in January 1995
and March 2013, a copy of which is on file with both the NJDEP and the
Mercer County Planning Department. This plan is part of the Mercer
County Wastewater Management Plan pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:15. The
wastewater management plan defines the future service area of the
Township's sanitary sewer system.
§ 385-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-7
1:497

ARTICLE III
Connection to Sanitary Sewer Required; Exceptions
§ 385-8. Individual sewage disposal systems prohibited where
Township sanitary sewer available.
The construction or maintenance of any privy, cesspool, septic or other
individual sewage disposal system within areas of the Township adequately
serviced by the Township sanitary sewer system is declared to be a
nuisance.
§ 385-9. Connection to sanitary sewer required; owner to bear
costs.
§ 385-10. Notice to connect.
A. The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within
the Township and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located a sanitary sewer, is
hereby required, at the owner's expense, to connect the drainage of all
sources of sewage to the sanitary sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter within 30 days after date of official notice to
do so, provided that said sanitary sewer is within a reasonable distance.
B. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall
indemnify the Township from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
A. Notice to connect required. The Director of the Department of Water
Pollution Control shall give at least 30 days' notice to the owner of
property affected before proceeding to award a contract for the making
of the connection or causing it to be made by the Township.
B. Contents of notice. A notice given under this section shall contain a
description of the property affected, sufficient to identify it, and a
statement that, if the connection is not made within 30 days after the
service of the notice, the Township shall make it or cause it to be made
at the owner's expense.
C. Service of notice. Notices under this section shall be served as follows:
(1) Upon owners residing in the Township, notice may be served
personally or by leaving it at their usual place of residence with
some member of their family above the age of 14 years.
(2) Upon owners not resident in the Township, notice may be served
personally or by mailing it to the owner's last known post office
address or to an agent in charge of the property.
§ 385-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-10
1:499
§ 385-11. Connection by Township – awarding of contracts.
§ 385-12. Recovery of costs by Township.
(3) Where service cannot be made under Subsection C(1) and (2), the
notice may be served by publishing it once in a newspaper
circulating in the Township. One published notice may relate to
several different properties.
(4) Owners who are infants or of unsound mind or the beneficiaries of
trusts shall be given notice by service upon their guardians or
trustees.
(5) Where there is more than one owner of the same piece of property,
service upon one owner shall be notice to all.
D. Proof of service. Proof of service shall be filed with the officer having
charge of the record of tax liens in the Township.
E. Defective notice. Failure to file proof of service, misstatement of the
same to the property owner, or similar errors or omissions in the giving
of notice shall not invalidate any charge for a sanitary sewer connection
where an actual benefit to the property results.
F. Notwithstanding the aforementioned, any issues related to matters of
public health shall be the sole determination of the Township Health
Officer.
A. If any property owner fails to make the required connection with the
sanitary sewer system within 30 days after being served with notice to
do so, the Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control may
cause the connection to be made or may award one or more contracts to
make it.
B. Contracts for the making of sanitary sewer connections shall be
awarded in the same manner and after the same advertising as any
other municipal contract. In lieu of awarding separate contracts for the
making of each connection, the Township may award one contract for
the making of all connections which the Wastewater Utility may desire
to have made.
A. When any sanitary sewer connection is made by the Township or under
a contract awarded by the Township, an accurate record of all expenses
shall be kept. Where several properties are involved, the expense shall
be portioned among them. Upon completion of the work, a statement as
to the expenses incurred shall be filed by the Director of the
Department of Water Pollution Control with the Director of Finance,
who shall cause the costs as shown to be charged against the property
involved. The sanitary sewer connection charge shall be recorded in the
same manner in which assessments are recorded.
§ 385-10 HAMILTON CODE § 385-12
1:500
§ 385-13. Connection fee; permit.
B. Every sanitary sewer connection charge shall, from the time of its
confirmation, be a first lien upon the property affected and shall bear
interest and be collected in the same manner as assessments for local
improvements.
A. Each applicant for a permit for each connection from a single-family
residential dwelling to the sewer system shall pay a fee as set forth in
Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code for a permit to make the
connection. The fee shall be payable at the time of the issuance of a
permit.
B. Each applicant for each connection from a nonresidential source to the
sewer system shall pay the Township a fee as set forth in Chapter 215,
Fees, of the Township Code. For purposes of computing the fee, a unit
shall be measured to the following schedule:
One Unit for Every 300 Gallons per Day
Type of Establishment Units
Gallons per Day per
Unit
Residential dwellings (including single-family homes, duplex
units, townhouses, condominiums, and apartments)
1 bedroom Per dwelling 150
2 bedroom Per dwelling 225
3 bedroom or larger Per dwelling 300
1 bedroom - age
restricted
Per dwelling 110
2 bedroom - age
restricted
Per dwelling 170
3 bedroom or larger -
age restricted
Per dwelling 225
Transit dwelling units
Hotels (additional uses
calculated separately)
Bedroom 75
Lodging houses and
tourist homes, motels
and tourist cabins
Bedroom 75
Boardinghouses
(maximum permitted
capacity)
Boarder 50
Camps
Campground mobile
recreational vehicle tent
Site 100
Parked mobile trailer site Site 200
§ 385-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-13
1:501
One Unit for Every 300 Gallons per Day
Type of Establishment Units
Gallons per Day per
Unit
Children's camps Bedroom 50
Labor camps Bedroom 40
Day camps - no meals Person 15
Restaurants (including washrooms and turnover)
Restaurant Seat or lawful
occupancy,
whichever is
greater
35
Bar/cocktail lounge
(limited food service)
Seat or lawful
occupancy,
whichever is
greater
20
Fast-food restaurant Seat or lawful
occupancy,
whichever is
greater
15
24-hour service
restaurant
Seat or lawful
occupancy,
whichever is
greater
50
Curb service drive-in
restaurant - take out
Car space 50
Dinner theater Seat or lawful
occupancy,
whichever is
greater
20
Catering/banquet hall Seat or lawful
occupancy,
whichever is
greater
20
Meat or fish department Per 100 square feet
of floor space
75
Specialty food stand or
kiosk
Per 100 square feet
of floor space
50
Delicatessen Per 100 square feet
of floor space
40
Mini-mart with deli Per 100 square feet
of floor space
40
Mini-mart without deli Per 100 square feet
of floor space
30
§ 385-13 HAMILTON CODE § 385-13
1:502
One Unit for Every 300 Gallons per Day
Type of Establishment Units
Gallons per Day per
Unit
Bakery Per 100 square feet
of floor space
10
Clubs, assemblies and organizations
Residential clubhouse Member or lawful
occupancy,
whichever is
greater
75
Nonresidential Member or lawful
occupancy,
whichever is
greater
35
Churches (worship area
only - additional uses will
be calculated separately)
Member or lawful
occupancy,
whichever is
greater
3
Community center Lawful occupancy 3
Funeral homes Lawful occupancy 3
Movie theater Lawful occupancy 3
Sports stadium Lawful occupancy 3
Tennis racquet ball Per court per hour 50
Athletic facility without
shower
Per person or lawful
occupancy,
whichever is
greater
10
Athletic facility with
shower
Per person or lawful
occupancy,
whichever is
greater
25
Multi member swimming
pool (pool area)
Per person or lawful
occupancy,
whichever is
greater
200
Bowling alleys Alley 200
Recreation facilities,
including but not limited
to fitness, karate,
exercise or dance center,
yoga, skating rink
including and general
recreational facilities
Per 100 square feet
of floor space
50
§ 385-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-13
1:503
One Unit for Every 300 Gallons per Day
Type of Establishment Units
Gallons per Day per
Unit
Batting cages and
driving range
Per lawful
occupancy
250
Medical institutions (including staff)
Hospitals Bed 175
Rehabilitation/physical
therapy
Exam room, lab,
and treatment room
225
Medical/patient service
area
Exam room, lab,
and treatment room
225
Assisted living facility -
additional uses
calculated separately
Bed 100
Nursing homes -
additional uses
calculated separately
Bed 175
Other institutions Bed 125
Dental offices Patient service area 225
Veterinary office Patient service area 225
Veterinary hospital,
kennels, animal boarding
facilities
Per pen, cage,
kennel or stall
50
Schools (including staff)
School - no showers or
cafeteria
Student or lawful
occupancy,
whichever is
greater
10
School - no showers and
with cafeteria
Student or lawful
occupancy,
whichever is
greater
15
School - with showers
and with cafeteria
Student or lawful
occupancy,
whichever is
greater
20
School - with showers,
cafeteria and
laboratories
Student or lawful
occupancy,
whichever is
greater
25
§ 385-13 HAMILTON CODE § 385-13
1:504
One Unit for Every 300 Gallons per Day
Type of Establishment Units
Gallons per Day per
Unit
Boarding school Student or lawful
occupancy,
whichever is
greater
75
Day-care center Per person based
upon lawful
occupancy
15
Automobile service stations
Service station Per filling position 125
Repair shop with service
bays and no fuel service
Per bay 50
Dealerships Per employee 25
Car wash System specification
Mini-market with fueling
service
Per square foot 0.1
Commercial and office buildings
Stores and shopping
centers
Per square foot 0.1
Offices Per square foot 0.1
Factories/warehouses
(add process
wastewater)
Per employee 25
Factories/warehouses
with showers (add
process wastewater)
Per employee 40
Manufacturing Per employee 25
Barber shops Per chair 50
Beauty shops Per booth or bowl 675
Nail salons Per pedicure station 40
Animal grooming Per tub 125
Commercial laundry Per machine 580
C. Sewer connection fees shall be valid for a period of five years from the
date of issuance.
D. No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any sanitary sewer or appurtenances
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Department of
Water Pollution Control of the Township of Hamilton and after payment
of the required connection fee. It is required that permits shall be kept
§ 385-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-13
1:505
§ 385-14. Individual sewage disposal systems where sanitary sewers
are not available. [Amended 7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-027]
on hand during the progress of the work to which they relate and shall
be exhibited whenever required by the Plumbing Subcode Official or
designated representative. Failure to obtain or pay for the permit shall
entitle the Township to disconnect any improper line from the sewer
system.
E. In the event that an application is made for sewer service to a
nonresidential building or unit for which the types or sizes of the uses
therein have not been determined by the applicant, or are subject to
change in the future, a connection fee shall be assessed based upon the
maximum potential estimated sewer usage in the building or unit. The
Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control, in his discretion,
may enter into a deferred connection fee agreement under which an
initial connection fee would be imposed only for those uses that are
initially contemplated, and which would defer the payment of the
balance of the connection fee until such time as a use for which the
initial connection was paid is changed to a use that will generate
additional sewer usage. Any connection fee paid under a deferred
connection fee agreement shall be paid at the connection fee rate then
prevailing at the time that payment is made.
F. A nonresidential user shall be entitled to use the amount of sewer
capacity, in gallons per day, that was obtained though the payment of
connection fees, as well as such additional capacity actually used by its
building or unit without having undergone a physical or operational
change for which a building permit, site plan, subdivision, variance or
other municipal approval was required. An application for additional
capacity shall be made by any existing nonresidential user whenever
there is an increase in the estimated projected sewer usage for any
existing building or unit resulting from any physical operational change
for which a building permit, site plan, subdivision, variance or other
municipal approval is required. A connection fee shall be charged to the
user based upon the increase in estimated sewer usage associated with
the aforesaid physical or operational change.
A. Individual sewage disposal systems to conform to state standards. The
location, construction, use, maintenance of and emptying or cleaning of
individual sewage disposal systems shall conform in every respect to
the rules and regulations of the N.J.A.C. 7:9A, Standards for Individual
Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems. A reserve individual sewage
disposal system shall also be shown on plans. Septic tank size shall be a
minimum of 1,250 gallons.
B. Permit required for individual sewage disposal systems. No person shall
locate, construct or alter any individual sewage disposal system until a
permit for the location, construction or alteration of said sewage
disposal system has been issued by the Division of Health. The fee for
said permit shall be as specified in § 215-6.
§ 385-13 HAMILTON CODE § 385-14
1:506
§ 385-15. Holding tanks where sanitary sewers are not available.
Holding tanks may be installed by a commercial or industrial establishment
in areas of Hamilton Township which are not serviced by the sanitary sewer
system, subject to the following restrictions:
C. Certificate of compliance required for individual sewage disposal
systems. New individual disposal systems shall not be placed in
operation, nor shall new dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be
sold or occupied, which must rely on such a system for sewage disposal,
until the Division of Health shall have issued a certificate indicating that
said disposal system has been located and constructed in compliance
with the terms of the permit issued and the requirements of the
aforesaid regulations. Issuance of such certificate shall not be required
for alterations to an existing individual sewage disposal system.
D. Stop-work orders. The Division of Health may order all further work in
and about any individual sewage disposal system which is being erected
or installed in violation of the Code to be stopped forthwith, except such
work as shall be necessary to remedy such violation, and thereafter the
work continued without any violation of any of the provisions of the
Code, and after issuance of any such order and the service of a copy
thereof upon any person connected with or working in and about the
erection or installation of any such disposal system or any part thereof,
no further work shall be done thereon except as aforesaid.
A. Tanks shall be of the highest quality obtainable for purposes of sewage
disposal, particularly in relation to corrosion and ability to hold sewage
intact under varying soil or outdoor conditions. Tank quality must be
approved by the Division of Health.
B. There shall be a gauge to indicate amount of effluent in the tank and a
mechanism for automatically shutting off the water to all facilities
connected to the tank should the content of the tank reach a critical
level.
C. A certificate describing the holding tank system, its maintenance and
the terms and conditions of the approval must be recorded as a deed in
the office of the County Clerk. All terms and conditions will be binding
upon subsequent property owners. Proof of recording shall be furnished
before final approval and a certificate of occupancy is issued.
D. Prior to the sale of a property with holding tank sewage facilities, the
potential buyer must be advised by the seller of the presence of the
tank, its maintenance and cost of same, and all other provisions
outlined in this article. Evidence must be furnished to the Division of
Health of such notification to a potential buyer.
E. The owner of the property shall file annually with the Division of Health
a copy of the current pumping contract with a licensed collector. A
backup collector should also be available to empty the tank if necessary.
§ 385-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-15
1:507
§ 385-16. Licensing of septic tank cleansers.
Persons shall not engage in the business of emptying or cleaning septic
tanks, cesspools, privies or any place used for the reception or storage of
human excrement who do not hold a license to engage in such business,
issued by the Division of Inspections. Such licenses shall be valid for a
period of one year from the date of issuance but may be renewed by the
Division of Inspections. Said license may be revoked for failure of the
licensee to comply with the provisions of any rule or regulation of the
Township or DEP. The fee for the issuance or renewal of license said shall
be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, for each vehicle and conveyance.
§ 385-17. Denial of license; hearing.
In case any license required by § 385-14, 385-15 or 385-16 is denied by the
Division of Inspections, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Director
of Community Planning and Compliance within 15 days after request
thereof is made by the applicant, and upon such hearing the Director
of Community Planning and Compliance shall affirm, alter or rescind the
determination of the Division of Inspections and take action accordingly
within 15 days after the date of such hearing.
F. Establishments approved for sewage disposal by holding tanks must
use this form of sewage disposal until sanitary sewers are provided.
G. Should the holding tank system malfunction, it must be repaired
immediately, or there may be a loss of certificate of occupancy.
H. Records of quantities and disposal dates shall be kept by the owner, the
collector, and the disposal site operator for review of the Health Officer.
I. The Division of Health may require other provisions for holding tanks
which it deems necessary to protect the public health.
J. A bond, the sufficiency of which shall be determined by the Director of
Public Works, must be posted to guarantee pumping and/or repairs by
the Township which may be necessitated to ensure the health and
safety of the public.
§ 385-15 HAMILTON CODE § 385-17
1:508
ARTICLE IV
Building Sewers
§ 385-18. Building sewers.
§ 385-19. Construction and connection of building sewers.
A. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, and for this article each side of a double house shall be
considered a separate property.
B. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new or old
buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the
Plumbing Subcode Official, to reasonably conform in all respects to the
requirements governing new sanitary sewers.
C. No person(s) shall make connection of sump pumps, roof leaders or
downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of
surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a sanitary sewer.
D. A properly arranged grease trap shall be placed between each building
sewer and the kitchen and pantry sinks of every hotel, eating house,
restaurant, cafe, food-handling facility or public cooking establishment.
A. Construction of the building sewer, including alignment, materials in
construction and the methods in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, and connection of the
building sewer into the sanitary sewer, shall all conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the Township. In the absence of code provisions
or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing and
Materials and Water Environmental Federation Manual of Practice No.
FD-5 shall apply. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the Plumbing Subcode Official before
installation.
B. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Plumbing
Subcode Official when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the sanitary sewer. The connection and testing shall be
made under the supervision of the Plumbing Subcode Official or his
representative.
C. All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Township.
§ 385-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-19
1:509
D. In the process of installing and connecting a building sewer to a
sanitary sewer, no sanitary sewer shall remain open to inflow of
groundwater, surface water and/or stormwater for more than 10 hours.
E. Where any connection from any building would require cutting the
pavement of a street paved with concrete or having a concrete base, a
single opening to the curb may be made from the sanitary sewer to the
curb. If the connection is made for a double house, independent
connection to the main sewer from each side of the double house must
be made.
F. No building sewer shall be connected to a manhole on the sewer system
unless approved by the Director of the Department of Water Pollution
Control. Inside drop connections to manholes are not permitted within
the sewer system.
G. Sanitary sewers installed with unused points of connection for building
sewers shall have said points of connection capped for watertight
integrity prior to connection of the building sewer. The method of
capping shall be one approved by the Director of the Department of
Water Pollution Control.
H. All sewer design and improvements, including sewer lines, manholes
and other appurtenances, shall conform with N.J.A.C. 7:14A-23 et al.
and Township construction standards that are on file with the Township
Engineer.
§ 385-19 HAMILTON CODE § 385-19
1:510
ARTICLE V
Sanitary Sewer Use Requirements
§ 385-20. Water conservation devices.
Water conservation devices shall be installed on all new or replacement
fixtures in conformance with the Uniform Construction Code.
§ 385-21. Garbage disposal units prohibited.
No garbage disposal unit or garbage grinding or chopping device shall
be attached to any pipe, conduit or otherwise in a manner allowing the
effluent, sediment or residue from the unit or device to be discharged into
the sanitary sewer system.
§ 385-22. Prohibitions on discharges (prohibited discharge
standards).
A. General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the
POTW, whether or not they are subject to categorical standards or any
other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
B. Specific prohibitions. No user shall discharge, deposit or cause or allow
to be discharged or deposited into the POTW the following substances,
pollutants or wastewaters:
(1) Wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, products of mineral
oil origin, oil, greases or fats of an animal or vegetable origin.
Substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32° F. and 150° F. are also prohibited.
(2) Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, gases,
vapors or fumes in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals,
causing acute worker health and safety problems, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
wastewater facilities.
(3) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the
Wastewater Utility. Prohibited materials include, but are not
limited to, concentrated acids, alkalis, sulfide, chloride and fluoride
compounds, and substances which will react with water to form
acidic or alkaline products which have a pH value outside the range
of 5.5 to 9.5 standard units.
§ 385-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-22
1:511
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sanitary sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities,
such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole
blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper
dishes, cups or milk containers.
(5) Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, COD,
etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which will cause interference with the POTW.
(6) Any polluted or unpolluted waters, such as stormwater, surface
water, sump water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate or
deionized water.
(7) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(8) Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes.
(9) Medical wastes, including but not limited to disinfected tissue fluid,
diseased human or animal organ tissue, disinfected whole blood, or
other contaminated solid waste related to the transmission of
disease from human or veterinary hospitals, medical facilities,
pharmaceutical/research, animal shelters or related licensed
facilities.
(10)Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.
(11) Detergents, surface-active agents, non-biodegradable detergents,
or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the
POTW.
(12) Any industrial waste containing a noxious or odor-producing
substance which, either singularly or by interaction with other
waste, is capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or
which prevents entry into sanitary sewers for their inspection,
maintenance and repair.
(13) Quantities of flow, wastes, or both, which constitute a slug.
(14)Wastewater or industrial wastes which, by interaction with other
water or wastes in the sanitary sewer system, release obnoxious
gases, develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids
which obstruct the POTW, or create a condition deleterious to
structures and treatment processes.
(15) Any wastes containing viable pathogenic bacteria other than those
normal to domestic sewage.
§ 385-22 HAMILTON CODE § 385-22
1:512
§ 385-23. Limitations of discharge.
The Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control is authorized to
impose any conditions, requirements or terms in a permit as, in the Director
of the Department of Water Pollution Control's discretion, are necessary to
(16) Any discharge in excess of 65° C. (150° F.). Heat in the amounts
which will inhibit biological activity resulting in interference, but in
no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the
wastewater treatment works exceeds 40° C. (104° F.).
(17) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the POTW,
such as dye and pigments, which consequently imparts color to the
treatment plant's effluent.
(18) Any pollutants, including liquids, solids or gases, in wastewater
causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of
discharge into the POTW or at any point in the POTW, of more than
10%, or any single reading over 25% of the lower explosive limit of
the meter. Those materials, by reason of their nature or quantity,
may, either alone or by interaction with other substances, cause fire
or explosion or be injurious in any other works. Such materials
include but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene, naphtha,
benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes,
peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides
and sulfides. Also includes any wastewater which creates a fire or
explosion hazard, including, but not limited to, waste streams with
a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. or 60° C. using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(19) Any trucked or hauled pollutant or septage.
(20) Liquids, solids or gases in wastewater causing two readings on an
explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the POTW or
at any point in the POTW, of more than 10%, or any single reading
over 25% of the lower explosive limit of the meter.
(21) Any effluent, sediment or residue from any garbage disposal unit or
garbage grinding or chopping device.
(22) Nonresidential wastewater containing floatable oils, fat or grease.
(23)Washings from vehicles, without pretreatment approval by the
Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control.
(24)Wastewater from floor drains serving vehicle maintenance or
service, manufacturing or chemical-handling facilities.
(25) Any hazardous waste.
C. General pretreatment standards. General pretreatment standards, 40
CFR 403.1 et seq., are hereby incorporated by reference, including all
supplements and amendments thereto.
§ 385-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-23
1:513
assure compliance with all applicable federal, state and local requirements
and to protect the POTW.
§ 385-24. Existing categorical industrial users.
Within 90 calendars days after the promulgation by the EPA of a categorical
pretreatment standard, existing industrial users subject to such standards
shall apply to the NJDEP for an industrial discharge permit. The Director
of the Department of Water Pollution Control, or his designee, shall review
the NJDEP Industrial Wastewater Discharge Draft Permit and submit any
comments concerning the information in this document to the NJDEP.
A. The following substances shall be limited in discharges to the sanitary
sewer system to concentrations or quantities which will not harm the
POTW, will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or
consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation
to flows and velocities in the sanitary sewers, materials of construction
of the sanitary sewers, protection against pass-through and
interference and other pertinent factors. The following limitations on
wastewater at the point of discharge (i.e., end-of-pipe) to the POTW
shall not be violated as a monthly average unless alternate limits or
restrictions are specified in a Township-issued IWD permit:
Substance
Local Limit Concentration
(milligrams per liter)
Copper 3.61
Chromium 3.06
Nickel 2.53
Lead 2.30
Zinc 1.88
Cadmium 0.355
Mercury 0.18
Arsenic 0.074
B. The following limitations on wastewater at the point of discharge (i.e.,
end-of-pipe) to the POTW shall not be violated as a monthly average
unless alternate limits or restrictions are specified in a Township-issued
IWD permit:
Substance
Concentration
(milligrams per liter)
Ammonia 40.0
§ 385-23 HAMILTON CODE § 385-25
1:514
§ 385-25. State standards.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this chapter.
§ 385-26. Dilution.
Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment
standard or requirement, no user shall ever increase the use of process
water or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for inadequate treatment to achieve compliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement. Mass limitations may be imposed on
users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.
§ 385-27. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors.
A. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided where required by
the Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control for the
proper handling of wastewaters containing floatable oil in excess of
amounts specified herein, except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units.
B. All new commercial or industrial users, including but not limited to
restaurants, motels, hotels, cafeterias, hospitals, nursing homes,
schools and food-handling facilities including fast food services, shall
provide an appropriately sized external oil and grease interceptor.
Included in this category are commercial and industrial customers that
will occupy an established facility.
C. Any existing commercial or industrial users, as defined above,
operating without an external grease interceptor, will be required to
install an external grease interceptor if it is determined by the Director
of the Department of Water Pollution Control or his designee that there
exists a violation of the prohibition in § 385-22B(1) and/or 385-22B(22).
D. Such interceptors shall not be considered "pretreatment facilities," as
used in this chapter.
E. All interceptors shall be properly sized for the flow and load from the
establishment, with a minimum capacity of 750 gallons. The
interceptors must be approved by the Township and located outside the
structure to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(1) Restaurants, cafeterias, hospitals, nursing homes and other
commercial kitchens with varied seating capacity. The Grease
Interceptor Sizing Worksheet shall be used to determine the
minimum size required for those grease interceptors.131
§ 385-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-27
1:515
F. In no case shall a grease interceptor serving a restaurant, cafeteria or
other commercial kitchen be smaller than 750 gallons in capacity. If the
formula determines that the external grease interceptor is more than
2,000 gallons, a site-specific engineering review shall be completed by
the Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control or his
designee.
G. In maintaining these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for
the proper removal and disposal of the captured material and shall
maintain records of the dates and means of disposal, which are subject
to review by the Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control.
All grease traps shall be cleaned after 75% of the storage capacity is
reached. Grease retention capacity is defined as the amount of grease
(pounds) that the trap can hold before its average efficiency drops
below 90%.
H. The minimum requirements for construction, materials and foundations
of grease traps shall be the same as those required for septic tanks, as
prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-8.2.
I. The inlet and outlet of the grease trap shall be provided with "T" baffles
extended to a depth of 12 inches above the tank floor and well above the
liquid level.
J. To facilitate maintenance, manholes extending to finished grade shall
be provided. Covers shall be of gastight construction and shall be
designed to withstand expected loads and prevent access from the
public.
K. The inlet and outlet lines to an external interceptor shall have cleanouts
that extend to finished grade, and all plugs should be brass countersunk
at grade. The effluent pipe of the external grease trap shall also contain
a backwater flow check valve.
L. For any commercial or industrial facilities that are found to have grease
interceptor systems which are inadequate in accordance with this
section, or where a sewer blockage has occurred or is occurring due to
a failing system, and which are connected to the Township's sanitary
sewer system, and/or are in the process of changing owners, lessor or
renter, the fee-simple owner will be required to: 1) submit to an
inspection of grease retention equipment by the Township to determine
adequacy of system sizing; 2) update the system before the new
operator can initiate business; 3) obtain all necessary approvals and
provide evidence of installation. Failure to comply will be treated as a
violation in accordance with this chapter.
M. Where automobiles are serviced, greased, repaired, washed or where
gasoline is dispensed, separators shall have a minimum capacity of six
cubic feet for the first 100 square feet of area to be drained plus one
131. Editor's Note: The Grease Interceptor Sizing Worksheet is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 385-27 HAMILTON CODE § 385-27
1:516
cubic foot for each additional 100 square feet to be drained into the
separator. Oil separators shall have a depth of not less the two feet
below the invert of the discharge drain. The outlet opening of the
separator shall have not less than an eighteen-inch water seal.
(1) Grease collected from a grease interceptor must not be introduced
into any drainage piping, public or private sewer.
(2) No grease interceptor, interior or exterior, shall have any enzyme
or other opening for similar chemicals, nor shall it use automatic or
manual solvent dispensers.
(3) Grease interceptors and separators must be maintained in efficient
operating condition by the periodic removal of accumulated grease.
Evidence of proper removal and disposal will be required.
N. Failing systems. Any commercial or industrial facility that is currently
operating a grease retention system and experiences a blockage due to
a failing system, will be required to:
(1) Refund the Township for any service-related activity required to
remove the blockage; and
(2) If the current system is found to be undersized or otherwise
inadequate, upgrade the system within a specified time period
agreed to between the fee-simple owner and the Township.
(3) Failure to comply will be treated as a violation in accordance with
§ 385-22, Prohibitions on discharges (prohibited discharge
standards).
O. Retrofitting. Any commercial or industrial facility that is found to be
generating grease and operating without a grease interceptor system,
even though there has been no history of blockages from their location,
shall be required to install a grease retention facility within a specified
time period agreed to between the fee-simple owner of the property and
the Township.
P. Termination or curtailment of service. In cases where grease
interceptor systems are found to be inadequate due to undersizing,
where blockages have occurred more than once, or where the systems
are not in place, the Township shall have the option to discontinue or
curtail sewer service to the responsible establishment. Following
reasonable notice of discontinuance or curtailment of service for failure
to eliminate an impermissible discharge and until such time that an
inspection by the Township determines the installation or completion
for repairs to the grease interceptor system is satisfactory using the
flow parameters outlined in this section, the Township may not renew
sewer service. Failure to comply will be treated as a violation in
accordance with this chapter.
§ 385-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-27
1:517

ARTICLE VI
Pretreatment of Wastewater
§ 385-28. Pretreatment.
Dischargers shall provide wastewater pretreatment, if required, to comply
with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all applicable federal
and state pretreatment standards, categorical standards and local
standards. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level
acceptable to the Township shall be provided, operated and maintained
at the user's expense. Pretreatment facilities shall be maintained in good
working order and operated efficiently by the owner or operator at its own
costs and expense, subject to the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable state and federal codes, ordinances and laws.
§ 385-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-28
1:519

ARTICLE VII
Accidental and Slug Discharges
§ 385-29. Accidental discharge/slug control plan.
A. At least once every two years the Township shall evaluate whether each
industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The
Township may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and
implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. Alternatively, the
Township may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental
discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the Township of any
accidental or slug discharges;
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic pollutants, including
solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response;
and
(5) Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall
not relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the user's
facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
B. In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine episodic nature, a noncustomary
batch discharge, or a slug load that may cause potential problems for
the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the Director
of the Department of Water Pollution Control of the incident. This
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the
user. Within 24 hours thereof, the user shall provide the Township with
such additional information on the discharge as may be required by the
Township, including an elimination of the danger posed by the
discharge, whether the discharge is continuing, any actions taken or
being taken to correct the problem, remediate any damage to the POTW
and environment, and to avoid a repetition of the problem.
C. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall
submit to the Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control a
detailed written report describing the date, time and cause of the
discharge, the quantity and characteristics of the discharge and
corrective action taken at the time of the discharge, and the measures
§ 385-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-29
1:521
to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person(s) or property; nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other
liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.
D. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of
a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who
may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of
the emergency notification procedure.
§ 385-29 HAMILTON CODE § 385-29
1:522
ARTICLE VIII
Permits to Discharge Nondomestic Wastewater (IWD Permits)
§ 385-30. Permit required.
§ 385-31. Permit applications.
A. The following nondomestic dischargers must apply for an NJDEP
industrial wastewater discharge permit:
(1) Dischargers subject to federal categorical pretreatment limitations
and/or defined as "categorical industrial users."
(2) Dischargers defined as "significant industrial users."
B. The Township reserves the right to permit any nondomestic industries
that are not subject to federal categorical standards. The Director of
the Department of Water Pollution, or his designee, will determine if the
nondomestic discharger may have the potential to discharge waste that
has a potential impact to the proper operation of the treatment works.
A. Application procedure. Users required to obtain a Township IWD permit
shall complete and file with the Township an application in the form
prescribed by the Township. Proposed new users shall apply at least 90
days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. The user shall
submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, all information
required on the permit application.
B. Notice of complete application.
(1) Upon receipt of an application for an IWD permit or for a
modification, withdrawal or transfer of a permit, the Township will
notify the applicant whether the application is complete or whether
additional information is required.
(2) The Township is not obligated to process any incomplete
application.
(3) The Township may require any additional information which, in the
discretion of the Township or the Director of the Department of
Water Pollution Control, is deemed necessary to make the
application complete in order to review and act upon the
application for a permit. Failure of the applicant to provide such
additional information upon request will cause the application to be
deemed incomplete.
(4) If the Township requests that the applicant provide any additional
information before the application is deemed complete, the
applicant shall have an additional 30 days from the date of receipt
of such request to provide such information, unless the Township
expressly designates a longer or shorter time. If the requested
information is not provided within 30 days (or such longer or
§ 385-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-31
1:523
§ 385-32. Signatory requirements.
shorter time as the Township expressly allows), the Township may
reject and return the application to the applicant and will not be
obligated to process the application.
C. Final action. The Township shall review a complete application for a
permit or for the renewal, modification or withdrawal of a permit and
shall determine whether to grant, deny, grant upon condition, modify or
revoke a permit as a final action.
A. Permit applications. All IWD permit applications shall be signed as
follows:
(1) For a corporation, by a principal executive officer of at least the
level of vice president; or
(2) For a partnership or sole proprietorship, by a general partner or
the proprietor, respectively.
B. Reports. All reports required by permits and other information
requested by the Township shall be signed by a person described in
Subsection A or by a duly authorized representative only if:
(1) The authorization is made in writing by a person described in
Subsection A;
(2) The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having
responsibility for the overall operation of the regulated facility or
activity, such as a position of plant manager, Director of Water
Pollution Control or person of equivalent responsibility; and
(3) The written authorization is submitted to the Township.
C. Changes in authorization. If authorization under Subsection B is no
longer accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of this facility, notification must
be made to the Township prior to ownership or position transfer. A new
authorization satisfying the requirements of Subsection B shall be
submitted to the control authority prior to or together with any reports,
information or application to be signed by an authorized representative.
The facility will be required to provide a copy of the existing control
mechanism to the new owner or operator.
D. Certification. Any person signing any document under Subsections A
and B shall make the following certification: "I certify under penalty of
the law that I have personally examined and am familiar with the
information submitted in this document and all attachments and that,
based on my inquiry of those individuals immediately responsible for
obtaining the information, I believe the submitted information is true,
accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties
§ 385-31 HAMILTON CODE § 385-32
1:524
§ 385-33. IWD permit duration.
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years.
A permit may be issued for a period of one year or less or may be slated to
expire on a specific date.
§ 385-34. Conditions contained within IWD permits.
IWD permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions established by the
Township. The Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control or
his designee is authorized to impose any conditions, requirements or terms
in a permit, at his discretion, in order to assure compliance with local
requirements and to protect the POTW.
for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and/or
imprisonment."
E. Delegation of authority. The authorized representative of the user may,
in his absence, authorize another responsible high-ranking official to
sign a monthly monitoring report if a report is required to be filed
during the period of time. The authorized representative of the user
shall, however, be liable in all instances for the accuracy of all the
information provided in the monitoring report; provided, however, that
the authorized representative of the user may file, within seven days of
his return, amendments to the monitoring report in accordance with
this subsection, which shall not be considered a late filing of a report for
purposes of subsection d of § 6 of P.L. 1990, c. 28, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-10.1,
or for purposes of determining an SNC.
A. Permits may contain the following:
(1) Effluent limits on the average and maximum wastewater
constituents and characteristics based upon § 385-23, as
appropriate;
(2) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type;
(3) Requirements for prompt notification of the Township of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any significant change
in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being
introduced into the POTW and for applying for a new permit if the
new or increased discharge would violate any discharge limits or
other requirements specified in the permit;
(4) The development of a slug/spill control plan or other special
conditions, including management practices necessary to
adequately provide for notification of slug discharges;
§ 385-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-34
1:525
(5) Requirements regarding entry and inspection by the Township that
may be more expansive than those slated for other users;
(6) A waste-minimization plan for the reduction of pollutant loadings
discharged into the Department of Water Pollution Control
treatment system.
(7) The submittal to, and approval by, the Township Department of
Water Pollution Control of plans and specifications for any of the
facilities and equipment required to meet pretreatment standards
and requirements.
B. Permits may require that a permittee:
(1) Achieve effluent limitations based upon guidelines or standards
established pursuant to the Sewer Use Ordinance (SUO);
(2) Where appropriate, meet schedules for compliance with the terms
of the permit and interim deadlines for progress or reports of
progress towards compliance;
(3) Ensure that all discharges are consistent at all times with the terms
and conditions of the permit and that no pollutant will be
discharged more frequently than authorized or at a level in excess
of that which is authorized by the permit;
(4) Install, use and maintain such monitoring equipment and methods
to sample in accordance with such methods, to maintain and retain
such records of information from monitoring activities, and to
submit to the Director or his designee reports of monitoring results
for surface waters as may be stipulated in the permit or required by
the Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control;
(5) At all times, maintain in good working order and operate as
effectively as possible any facilities or systems of control installed
to achieve compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit
and affording the Township access thereto;
(6) Report to the Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control
or his designee any exceedance of an effluent limitation that causes
injury to persons or damage to the environment or poses a threat to
human health or the environment, within two hours of its
occurrence or of the permittee becoming aware of the occurrence.
Within 24 hours of an exceedance or of becoming aware of an
exceedance of an effluent limitation for a toxic pollutant, a
permittee shall provide the Director or his designee with such
additional information on the discharge as may be required by the
Director or his designee, including an estimate of the danger posed
by the discharge to the environment or POTW, whether the
discharge is continuing, and the measures taken or being taken to
remediate the problem and any damage to the environment or
POTW and to avoid a repetition of the problem. The user shall also
§ 385-34 HAMILTON CODE § 385-34
1:526
repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the Director or his designee within 30 days after
the exceedance or becoming aware of the exceedance, except the
user is not required to resample, if:
(a) The Township performs sampling at the user's facility at a
frequency of at least once per month; or
(b) The Township performs sampling at the user's facility between
the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the
time when the user receives the results of this sampling;
(7) Report to the Director or his designee any serious violation within
30 days of the violation; the permittee shall explain the nature of
the serious violation and the measures taken to remedy the cause
or prevent a recurrence of the serious violation.
C. Notwithstanding the reporting requirements stipulated in a permit for
discharges to the POTW, a permittee shall be required to file monthly
reports with the Director if the permittee exceeds an effluent limitation
for the same pollutant at the same discharge point source by any
amount for four out of six consecutive months. The Director or his
designee may restore the reporting requirements stipulated in the
permit if the permittee has not committed any of the violations
identified in this subsection for six consecutive months.
§ 385-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-34
1:527

ARTICLE IX
Sewage from Other Municipalities
§ 385-35. Robbinsville Township.
Users in Robbinsville Township, Mercer County, New Jersey, shall be subject
to the provisions of this chapter, and the Township shall enforce this chapter
in accordance with the multimunicipal sewage system agreement between
the Township and Robbinsville Township dated April 28, 1976, and all its
amendments.
§ 385-36. West Windsor Township.
Users in West Windsor Township, Mercer County, New Jersey, shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter, which shall be fully enforceable.
§ 385-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-36
1:529

ARTICLE X
Right of Entry; Inspections
§ 385-37. Right of entry to easements.
The Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control and other duly
authorized employees of the Township bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the Township holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of,
but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair
and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be
done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement.
§ 385-38. Compliance monitoring.
§ 385-39. Search warrants.
If the Township has been refused access to a building, structure or property,
or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe
that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to
inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
of the Township designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
A. The Township may randomly sample and analyze the effluent from
users and conduct surveillance activities in order to identify,
independent of information supplied by users, occasional and
continuing noncompliance with pretreatment standards and other
provisions of this chapter. Sampling for the purpose of compliance
determinations with respect to Articles V and VIII will be done at such
intervals as the Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control,
the Commissioner and/or the Regional Administrator may designate.
B. All users proposing to connect to or continue to discharge nondomestic
wastewater to the POTW must make available a sampling point
representative of the discharge which is acceptable to, and approved
by, the Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control. This point
must be available to the Township, the DEP or EPA for purposes of
conducting sampling inspections, compliance monitoring and/or
metering operations. No user shall discharge any nondomestic
wastewater directly into a sanitary sewer. All discharges from users
shall be through a manhole built by the owner at the time the
connection is made, located between the sidewalk and the curb.
C. All costs for enforcement monitoring, directly related to a particular
user, shall be charged against that particular user. The Director of the
Department of Water Pollution Control shall keep an accurate record of
all costs. Upon completion of the work, the Director of the Department
of Water Pollution Control shall file a tabulation of expenses with the
Director of Finance, who shall cause the costs to be charged against the
user involved.
§ 385-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-39
1:531
permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the Director of the Department
of Water Pollution Control may seek issuance of a search warrant from the
municipal court having jurisdiction.
§ 385-39 HAMILTON CODE § 385-39
1:532
ARTICLE XI
Administrative Enforcement Remedies
§ 385-40. Notification of violation, order to comply or cease and
desist.
Whenever the Township finds that any person or user has violated, or
is violating, this chapter, an IWD permit or any prohibition, limitation or
requirement contained herein, the Township may serve upon such person
or user a written notice of violation. Whenever the Township finds that
any user is in violation of any provision of this chapter, the Township may
issue an order requiring such user to comply, specifying the provision or
provisions of the chapter, New Jersey Water Pollution Control Act, or the
rule, regulation, water quality standard, effluent limitation, or permit of
which the user is in violation, citing the action which caused such violation;
requiring compliance with such provision or provisions within a reasonable
time, not to exceed 30 days; and giving notice to the person or user of his
right to a hearing on the matters contained in the order.
§ 385-41. Administrative consent orders.
A. The Township may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with
any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include
specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance
within a time period specified by the document.
B. The Township shall afford an opportunity to any person to comment on
a proposed administrative consent order prior to final adoption if the
administrative consent order would establish interim enforcement
limits that would relax pretreatment standards established in an IWD
permit or a prior administrative order. The Township shall provide
public notice of the proposed administrative consent order and
announce the length of the comment period, which shall not be less
than 30 days, commencing from the date of publication of the notice. A
notice shall also include a summary statement describing the nature of
the violation necessitating the administrative consent order and its
terms or conditions, shall specify how additional information on the
administrative consent order may be obtained, and shall identify to
whom written comments are to be submitted. At least three days prior
to publication of the notice, a written notice, containing the same
information to be provided in the published notice, shall be mailed to
the mayor or chief executive officer and governing body of the
municipality and county in which the violation occurred, and to any
other interested person, including any other governmental agencies.
The Township shall consider the written comments received during the
comment period prior to final adoption of the administrative consent
order. Not later than the date that final action is taken on the proposed
order, the Township shall notify each person or group having submitted
written comments of the main provisions of the approved
§ 385-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-41
1:533
§ 385-42. Show cause hearing.
administrative consent order and respond to the comments received
therefrom.
C. The Township, on its own initiative or at the request of any person
submitting written comments pursuant to Subsection B, may hold a
public hearing on a proposed administrative order or administrative
consent order prior to final adoption if the order would establish
interim enforcement limits that would relax for more than 24 months
pretreatment standards established in an IWD permit or a prior
administrative order or administrative consent order. Public notice for
the public hearing to be held pursuant to this section shall be published
not more than 30 days and not less than 15 days prior to the holding of
the hearing. The hearing shall be held in the municipality in which the
violation necessitating the order occurred. The Township may recover
all reasonable costs directly incurred in scheduling and holding the
public hearing from the person requesting or requiring the interim
enforcement limits.
D. If any user or person is found discharging sewage into the POTW in
violation of the provisions of the Act, this chapter, or any other
applicable regulations, the Township may, in addition to any other
remedies outlined in this chapter, take such steps as may be necessary
to seal or close off such sewerage connections from the POTW until it is
satisfied that adequate measures have been taken to prevent the
recurrence of such violation.
A. If the violation is not corrected by timely compliance, the Township may
order any person who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to
show cause why service should not be terminated. A notice shall be
served on the offending party, specifying the time and place of a hearing
to be held regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be
taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the offending
party to show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least 10 days
before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a
corporation.
B. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing and take the evidence or
may designate any employee of the Department of Water Pollution
Control to:
(1) Issue notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony
of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter
involved in any such hearings.
(2) Take the evidence.
§ 385-41 HAMILTON CODE § 385-42
1:534
§ 385-43. Emergency suspensions.
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts/records and other evidence, together with
recommendations for action thereof.
C. At any public hearing, testimony taken must be under oath and
recorded either by the hearing officer in a summary manner or
stenographically. In the latter case, the transcript, so recorded, will be
made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing
upon payment of the usual charges therefor.
D. After the hearing officer has reviewed the evidence, he/she may issue
an order to the party responsible for the discharge, directing that,
following a specified time period, the sanitary sewer service be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other
related appurtenances shall have been installed, or existing treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly
operated, and such further orders and directives as are necessary and
appropriate.
A. The Township may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after
informal notice to the users, whenever such suspension is necessary to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to
present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons. The Township may also immediately
suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond,
that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW or which
presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of the user's failure
to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Township may take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or
minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The Township may allow the user
to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Township that the period of endangerment
has passed.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and
the measures taken to prevent any further occurrence to the
Township prior to the date of any show cause or termination
hearing under §§ 385-42 and 385-44 of this chapter.
B. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior
to any emergency suspension under this section.
§ 385-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-44
1:535
§ 385-44. Termination of discharge.
In addition to the provisions in § 385-40, any user who violates the following
conditions is subject to discharge termination:
A. Violation of IWD permit conditions;
B. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
C. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
D. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
E. Violation of the pretreatment standards in Article V.
§ 385-44 HAMILTON CODE § 385-44
1:536
ARTICLE XII
Judicial Enforcement Remedies
§ 385-45. Civil action.
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes to the
POTW contrary to this chapter or any order or permit issued pursuant to
it, the Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control may cause to
be commenced a civil action for appropriate injunctive relief in the Superior
Court of this county. Such relief may include, singly or in combinations:
§ 385-46. Civil penalties.
Any person who violates this chapter or an administrative order issued
pursuant to § 385-41 or a court order issued pursuant to § 385-45 or who
fails to pay a civil penalty or to make a payment pursuant to a payment
schedule entered into with the Township shall be subject, upon order of a
court, to a civil penalty not to exceed $50,000 per day of such violation, and
each day's continuance of the violation shall constitute a separate violation.
Any penalty incurred under this section may be recovered with costs and,
if applicable, interest charges, in a summary proceeding pursuant to the
Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.). In addition to any
civil penalties, costs or interest charges, the court, in accordance with
§ 385-45D, may assess against a violator the amount of any actual economic
benefits accruing to the violator from the violation. The Superior Court shall
have jurisdiction to enforce the Penalty Enforcement Law in conjunction
with this chapter.
A. A temporary or permanent injunction.
B. Assessment of the violator for the reasonable costs of any investigation,
inspection or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the
violation and for reasonable costs of preparing and litigating the case
under this section.
C. Assessment against the violator of compensatory damages for any loss
or destruction of wildlife, fish or aquatic life, or other natural resources,
and for any other actual damages caused by an unauthorized discharge.
D. Assessment against a violator of the actual amount of any economic
benefits accruing to the violator from a violation. Economic benefits
may include the amount of any savings from avoided capital or
noncapital costs resulting from the violation; the return earned or that
may be earned on the amount of avoided costs; any benefits accruing to
the violator as a result of a competitive market advantage enjoyed by
reason of the violation; or any other benefits resulting from the
violation.
§ 385-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-47
1:537
§ 385-47. Criminal prosecution.
Whenever the Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control finds
that any person is in violation of any provision of this chapter, the Director
of the Department of Water Pollution Control may, in accordance with the
Township enforcement response plan (§ 385-54), petition the prosecutor of
this county or the Attorney General of the state to bring a criminal action
and seek penalties in accordance with N.J.S.A. 58:10A-10f.(1)(a).
§ 385-47 HAMILTON CODE § 385-47
1:538
ARTICLE XIII
Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
§ 385-48. Upset.
A. For the purpose of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
effluent limitations because of factors beyond the reasonable control of
the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused
by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or
careless or improper operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance with effluent limitations if the requirements of
Subsection C below are met.
C. The user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs or other relevant evidence, that:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and
(3) The user has submitted the following information to the Township
within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset; if this information
is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days to include the following:
(a) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
(b) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time any noncompliance is
expected to continue; and
(c) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
D. In any enforcement proceedings the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination of any claim
of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
effluent limitations.
F. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary
to maintain compliance with effluent limitations upon reduction, loss or
failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an
§ 385-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-48
1:539
§ 385-49. Prohibited discharge standards.
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with general prohibitions in § 385-22A or the
specific prohibitions in § 385-22B(1), (2), (4), (5) or (16) if it can prove that
it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through
or interference and that either:
§ 385-50. Bypass.
alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies
in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
A. A discharge limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was
in compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the passthrough
or interference; or
B. No discharge limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge
when the Township was regularly in compliance with its NJPDES permit
and, in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable
sludge use or disposal requirements.
A. Anticipated bypass.
(1) A user may assert an anticipated bypass as an affirmative defense
which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to
be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure
efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision
of Subsections B and C; and
(2) A user may assert an anticipated bypass as an affirmative defense if
a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass and submits prior
notice to the Township for approval, at least 10 days before the
date of the bypass, if possible, and if the user is able to demonstrate
that the bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage.
B. Unanticipated bypass.
(1) A user shall submit oral notice to the Township of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass; or
(2) A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the
time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission
shall contain the following in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:14A-6.10(f), as amended:
§ 385-48 HAMILTON CODE § 385-50
1:540
(a) All properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence on the circumstances of the noncompliance;
(b) The reasons that the unanticipated bypass occurred, including
the circumstances leading to the unanticipated bypass;
(c) Evidence that the permittee was properly operating the facility
at the time;
(d) Evidence that the permittee submitted notice of the
unanticipated bypass as required above, including the name,
title, address and telephone number of the individual who
satisfied this requirement, the date and specific time the
individual notified the Township for the permittee, the specific
method that the individual used to notify the Township, and the
name and title of the individual within the Township to whom
the permittee gave such notice;
(e) Evidence that the permittee complied with all remedial
measures the Township required;
(f) The permittee's rationale for and all supporting documentation
that the bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury, or severe property damage, including the
name, title, address and telephone number of the individual
that made the determination of the permittee, the data and
information upon which that individual made the
determination, and any other information the Township
requests;
(g) Evidence that there was no feasible alternative to the
unanticipated bypass, including, but not limited to, the use of
auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during periods of downtime;
(h) Evidence that the unanticipated bypass did not occur during
normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive
maintenance when backup equipment should have been
installed to avoid the unanticipated bypass; and
(i) Evidence that the permittee submitted notice of the
unanticipated bypass as required in Subsection B(1) above.
C. Affirmative defense. The user may assert an unanticipated bypass as an
affirmative defense, if:
(1) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or
severe property damage; or
(2) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use
of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should
§ 385-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-50
1:541
§ 385-51. Testing or laboratory error.
Except as provided in Subsection A below, a violator may be entitled to
an affirmative defense to liability for a violation of an effluent limitation
occurring as a result of a testing or laboratory error, only if, in the
determination of the Township, the violator has satisfied the provisions of
this section.
have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering
judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal
periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
(3) The user submitted notices as required under Subsection B(1) and
(2).
A. A violator shall not be entitled to an affirmative defense based on an
alleged testing or laboratory error to the extent that the violation is
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or
careless or improper operation.
B. A violator shall be entitled to an affirmative defense only if, in the
determination of the Township, the violator satisfies the following:
(1) The violation occurred as a result of testing or laboratory error;
(2) The violator complied with all of the requirements in N.J.A.C.
7:14A-6.10;
(3) The violator complied with N.J.A.C. 7:14-8.3; and
(4) A violator asserting a testing or laboratory error as an affirmative
defense shall also have the burden to demonstrate that a violation
involving the exceedance of an effluent limitation was the result of
unanticipated test interferences, sample contamination, analytical
defects or procedural deficiencies in sampling, or other similar
circumstances beyond the violator's control.
§ 385-50 HAMILTON CODE § 385-51
1:542
ARTICLE XIV
Sewer Rental Rates
§ 385-52. Establishment of rates.
A. Rental rates and charges. Each and every property or premises within
the Township which is or shall be connected with any portion of the
sewer system of the Township shall, from and after the date of the
permit for the connection, be subject to sanitary sewer rental rates and
charges as set forth by the Township.
B. Semiannual payment. Sewer rates shall be payable to the Division of
Revenue Collection in equal semiannual installments due on the first
day of March and the first day of October.
C. Charges for additional services. The Township shall have the power to
fix any just and reasonable monthly or annual rate or charge in addition
to the above rates and charges for the disposal of large volumes of
water or trade waste, if this disposal shall be permitted.
D. Rates and changes. The Township expressly reserves the right to
change by ordinance at any time any of the rates, charges or
impositions set forth in this section or hereafter fixed or established.
E. Council to set interest rates. Each sewer rate or charge shall, from the
time it shall become due and payable and during the period within
which it shall remain unpaid, draw or bear interest thereon at a rate
established by the Council.
F. Lien. Each sewer rate or charge shall, from the time it shall become due
and payable and during the period within which it shall remain unpaid,
be and remain a lien upon and against the property or premises; each
sewer rate or charge shall, after the same shall have become due and
remain unpaid, be collected, together with interest thereon, in the same
manner as is or shall be provided by law for the collection of taxes upon
or against real estate.
G. Disconnection. In addition to, and exclusive of, any other remedy
provided in this section, if any sewer rate shall become due and remain
unpaid, the facilities of the Wastewater Utility or any portion thereof
may be disconnected from the property or premises upon or against
which the rate or charge shall have been imposed, and when any
disconnection shall have been made, the facilities of the Wastewater
Utility or a portion thereof shall not be reconnected to any property or
premises until the amount of the delinquent rate or charge, with
interest thereon, together with the charges for the disconnection and
reconnection, shall have been paid.
H. Tabulation of fees.
(1) Residential.
§ 385-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-52
1:543
§ 385-53. Surcharges.
(Reserved)
(a) Single-family, per year: $312.
(b) Multifamily (apartments, duplexes, mobile home parks and
motels), per unit, per year: $312.
(2) Commercial. Each separate office, store or similar place of
business with separate restrooms is to be considered a separate
commercial unit: $156 per year per unit plus $5.24 per 1,000
gallons of metered water used, based upon metered water
consumption, with a minimum annual fee of $312 per unit.
(3) All others: same as Subsection H(2) above.
§ 385-52 HAMILTON CODE § 385-53
1:544
ARTICLE XV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 385-54. Enforcement response plan.
The Township has developed an enforcement response plan, which is
incorporated into this chapter as Appendix A132 and shall be subject to
modification as needed in order to keep it consistent with federal and/
or state laws and regulations. This plan contains detailed procedures
indicating how the Township will investigate and respond to instances of
nondomestic wastewater user noncompliance. The plan, at a minimum:
§ 385-55. Township's right of revision.
The Township may without notice amend any or all articles and/or sections
of this chapter if deemed necessary to keep said chapter in conformance
with federal, state, regional or local statutes, regulations, codes or
directives.
§ 385-56. Availability of information and data.
A. Describes how the Township will investigate instances of
noncompliance;
B. Describes the types of escalating enforcement responses the Township
will take in response to all anticipated types of nondomestic wastewater
user violations and the time periods within which responses will take
place;
C. Identifies (by title) the official(s) responsible for each type of response;
and
D. Adequately reflect the Township's primary responsibility to enforce all
applicable pretreatment requirements and standards, as detailed in 40
CFR 403.8(f)(1) and (f)(2).
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction, unless the user specifically requests and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township that the release
of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
B. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available upon written request to the EPA and/or the DEP for uses
related to this chapter, the NJPDES and/or the state or federal
pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a
132. Editor's Note: Appendix A is attached to this chapter.
§ 385-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-56
1:545
§ 385-57. Director of Department of Water Pollution Control to be
held harmless.
The Director of the Department of Water Pollution Control and/or his
authorized agent(s) shall be held harmless for injury, death and/or liability
in the event of malfunction of wastewater facilities and damages caused
thereby.
§ 385-58. Remedies nonexclusive.
§ 385-59. No waiver.
Acceptance by the Township into the POTW of sewage or other wastes
in volume or at a rate or with characteristics exceeding or violating any
pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirements provided for, by or
pursuant to the foregoing changes in one or more instances or under one
or more circumstances shall not constitute a waiver of such pretreatment
standards or pretreatment requirements or of any of the provisions of the
foregoing chapter and shall not in any way obligate the Township thereafter
to accept or make provision for sewage or wastes delivered into the POTW
in a volume or at a rate or with characteristics exceeding or violating any
such pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirements in any other
instance or under any other circumstances.
report shall be available for use by the state in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information.
C. Information accepted by the Township as confidential shall not be
transmitted to any governmental agency by the Township until and
unless a ten-day notification is given to the user.
D. Township nonconfidential files on users and pretreatment programs are
open for inspection during normal office hours. Arrangements to review
these files must be made in advance by contacting the Department of
Water Pollution Control. All requests to review the files or obtain
nonconfidential information shall be in writing.
A. Remedies nonexclusive. The provisions of Articles XI and XII are not
exclusive remedies. The Township reserves the right to take any, all or
any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. The
Township is empowered to take more than one enforcement action
against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken
concurrently.
B. Enforcement options. Nothing in this article is to be construed as
barring the Township from seeking any other form of enforcement,
relief or remedy to which it is legally entitled, including any other
remedies available to it under statute or common law.
§ 385-56 HAMILTON CODE § 385-60
1:546
§ 385-60. Headings.
The headings used herein are for convenience only and are not intended to,
nor do they, confer any substantive rights on any person.
§ 385-61. References to other laws and regulations.
Reference herein to laws, regulations, forms and other official documents
shall be deemed to include amendments or modifications to those
documents hereinafter adopted or promulgated.
§ 385-62. Unauthorized entry to sanitary sewer system prohibited.
No unauthorized person(s) shall open, use, alter or disturb any sanitary
sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining written permission
from the Department of Water Pollution Control of the Township. This
prohibition includes, but is not limited to, the lifting of sewer manhole
covers and opening of sewer cleanouts. Any ordinance or ordinances in
conflict with the provisions of this chapter are repealed to the extent of
such conflict. This chapter shall become effective immediately upon final
adoption and publication thereof according to law.
§ 385-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-62
1:547
Chapter 394
SHOPPING CARTS
§ 394-1. Purpose and intent.
§ 394-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARKING AREA — A parking lot or other property provided by a retailer
for the use of a customer for parking an automobile or other vehicle. The
parking area of a retail mercantile establishment located in a multistore
complex or shopping center shall include the entire parking area used by
the complex or center.
SHOPPING CART — A push cart of the type or types which are commonly
provided by grocery stores, drugstores or other retail mercantile
A. Whereas, wheeled shopping carts (hereafter "carts") supplied by
grocery stores and merchandisers are in common use in the Township
of Hamilton, Mercer County, New Jersey; and
B. Whereas, shoppers, patrons and users sometimes remove from
shopping centers, grocery stores, premises and the parking lots the
carts provided for shoppers for their own convenience or for other
reasons and then abandon them and fail to return them to the premises
from which they were taken; and
C. Whereas, abandoned carts taken off premises can and do create
hazards to pedestrians, vehicles and users of the public streets and bike
path; are dangerous attractive nuisances to children who find them and
climb on them; are unsightly clutter to private and public property
where they are left; and are detrimental to the public safety, health and
welfare; and
D. Whereas, Township Council has attempted to encourage volunteer
programs designed to alleviate the problems caused by abandonment of
carts but with unsatisfactory results; and
E. Whereas, it is the intent and purpose of this action by Township Council
to establish and enact regulations governing the abandonment of carts
and to provide penalties for violations;
F. Whereas the Township Council of the Township of Hamilton wishes to
comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.65, enacted in July 2008,
regulating shopping carts;
G. All clauses above are incorporated herein as statements of explanation,
purpose and intent.
§ 385-62 HAMILTON CODE § 394-2
1:548
establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in
stores and markets and their parking areas.
§ 394-3. Shoppers, patrons and users.
All shoppers, patrons and users of carts who remove a cart for their
convenience or any other reason from the store, shopping centers, grocery
stores, premises or parking lot adjacent to where the cart belongs shall have
the affirmative duty and obligation to return the cart forthwith. Any person
who does not fulfill that duty and obligation, or who abandons the cart, has
violated this chapter.
§ 394-4. Owners and operators of stores supplying carts.
All owners and operators of stores or other facilities owning and/or
supplying carts for the convenience of shoppers, patrons or users shall:
§ 394-5. Municipal impoundment.
A. Clearly label, in a visible manner restrictive of removal of same, the
name, address and phone number of the store or facility owning or
responsible for supplying the carts.
B. Be responsible for retrieval of any of its carts as soon as possible and
not more than three business days from notification by the Township or
any official thereof of a request to do so by fax, letter, e-mail or verbal
notification. Any that do not do so have violated this chapter.
C. Create internal procedures to comply with this chapter, which
procedures shall be written and in place within 30 days after the
effective date of this chapter, and which shall be supplied to the
Township when requested by the Township from time to time.
D. Said procedures shall identify the name of the person, title, address of
the store or facility, phone number, fax number and e-mail address
where and to whom the Township may send notices.
E. At its option and expense, create signage on its premises notifying
shoppers, patrons and users of the existence of this chapter and the
penalties for violations thereof by them in a form substantially the same
as that which follows:
NOTICE
Shoppers, patrons and users of shopping carts who remove carts from
these premises and do not return them forthwith, or abandon them,
shall be subject to a fine not less than $25 for the first conviction and
$100 for each subsequent conviction.
A. The Township shall not impound a shopping cart that has a sign or
notice identifying the owner of the cart or the retailer who has written
consent from the owner to use the cart, and listing a valid telephone
§ 394-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-5
1:549
number or address through which the owner or retailer can be
contacted, unless the following conditions are met:
(1) The shopping cart is located outside the premises or parking area
of a retail mercantile establishment;
(2) The Township will notify the owner or retailer of the location of the
cart and allow three business days from the date of such
notification for the owner, retailer or an authorized agent to
retrieve the shopping cart, unless the immediate removal is
necessary to prevent a danger to public safety;
(3) The Township will notify the owner or retailer upon impoundment
of a shopping cart and include information as to how the cart may
be retrieved;
(4) The Township will hold the impounded shopping cart at a location
that is reasonably convenient to the owner, retailer or authorized
agent and is open for business at least six hours of each business
day;
(5) Any fine imposed upon the owner or retailer for an impounded
shopping cart shall not exceed $50 for each occurrence for failure
to retrieve shopping carts. An occurrence includes all shopping
carts impounded in accordance with this section during a twentyfour-
hour period; and
(6) The Township will allow the owner or retailer a minimum of five
business days following receipt of notice that a shopping cart has
been impounded to retrieve the cart before the Township may sell
or otherwise dispose of the cart.
B. The Township may impound a shopping cart that has a sign or notice
identifying the owner of the cart or the retailer who has written consent
from the owner to use the cart, and lists a valid telephone number or
address through which the owner or retailer can be contacted, without
meeting the conditions required by Subsection A(1) through (5) of this
section if the Township:
(1) Notifies the owner or retailer within 24 hours of impounding the
shopping cart and includes information on how the cart may be
retrieved;
(2) Releases the cart to the owner, retailer or authorized agent without
any charge or fine whatsoever, if the owner, retailer or authorized
agent attempts to retrieve the cart within five business days of
notice.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall preclude or otherwise limit the
Township from impounding a shopping cart that does not have a sign or
notice identifying the owner of the cart or the retailer who has written
consent from the owner to use the cart and lists a valid telephone
§ 394-5 HAMILTON CODE § 394-5
1:550
§ 394-6. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 408
SMOKING AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
number or address through which the owner or retailer can be
contacted.
A. A shopper, patron or user of a cart convicted in Municipal Court of a
violation of this chapter shall be fined $25 for the first conviction and
$100 for each subsequent conviction.
B. An owner or retailer of an impounded shopping cart convicted in
Municipal Court of a violation of this chapter shall be fined $50 for each
occurrence for failure to retrieve shopping carts. An occurrence
includes all shopping carts impounded in accordance with this chapter
during a twenty-four-hour period.
§ 394-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-6
1:551

ARTICLE I
Use by Minors at School Facilities
[Adopted 8-21-1996 by Ord. No. 96-037; amended in its entirety
9-18-1996 by Ord. No. 96-044 (Ch. 86, § 86-5.1, of the 1994 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 408-1. Use and possession prohibited.
Smoking and the use or possession of tobacco products at any school facility
or property situated within the Township by students and/or minors is
prohibited as of September 1, 1996.
§ 408-2. Violations and penalties.
Any individual guilty of smoking and/or the use or possession of tobacco
products at any school facility or property will be subject to a fine of up to
$100 and/or community service as determined by the court.
§ 408-3. Enforcement.
Section 408-1 shall be enforced by the administrative officials of the school
districts and/or school facilities where such prohibited activities are
undertaken.
§ 408-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 408-3
1:553

ARTICLE II
Youth Athletic and Recreational Events
[Adopted 2-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-001 (Ch. 86, § 86-5.2, of the 1994
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 408-4. Smoking at youth events on Township property.
The smoking of tobacco products at any youth athletic or recreational event
held on property or facilities owned or leased by the Township is prohibited.
§ 408-5. Smoking at youth events on school property.
The smoking of tobacco products at any youth athletic or recreational event
held on any school property or facility is prohibited.
§ 408-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 408-5
1:555

ARTICLE III
Ecological Facility No Smoking Policy
[Adopted 7-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-029]
§ 408-6. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ECOLOGICAL FACILITY — The Hamilton Township Ecological Facility
located at 1360 Kuser Road, Hamilton Township, Mercer County, New
Jersey.
SMOKING — The burning or inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked.
§ 408-7. Prohibition.
There shall be no smoking of any kind by any persons while on the premises
of the ecological facility.
§ 408-8. Signage.
"No smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed throughout the
ecological facility.
§ 408-9. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Director of Public Works or his/her
designee through the issuance of a summons.
§ 408-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to the
penalties provided in Chapter 1, § 1-2, Violations; penalties.
§ 408-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 408-10
1:557
Chapter 420
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 362. Land development — See Ch. 550.
§ 408-10 HAMILTON CODE § 408-10
1:558
ARTICLE I
Garbage Receptacles; Private Collection
[Adopted as Ch. 122, Art. II, Secs. 122-33 through 122-38, of the
1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 420-1. Suitable receptacles required; use of receptacles.133
§ 420-2. Placement of receptacles for collection.
All receptacles awaiting collection shall be stored or kept in such places so
as not to become a nuisance.
§ 420-3. Collection vehicles.
A. The owner, agent, lessor or landlord of every dwelling, apartment,
hotel, rooming house, store, business, building, market, restaurant or
other premises in the Township where garbage, rubbish, paper or trade
waste is accumulated and privately collected shall provide and keep on
such premises sufficient and suitable metal receptacles or metal
dumpsters, or metal cans or metal barrels, with tight-fitting covers for
these containers, for receiving and holding such materials.
B. All receptacles used for the purposes described in this article at no time
shall be filled higher than one inch below the top and, when so filled,
shall be promptly emptied or removed by the private collector. All
receptacles shall be kept covered at all times and in an upright position.
All receptacles shall be disinfected and deodorized after each and every
collection with such disinfectant and deodorizer as prescribed by the
Division of Health.
A. Standards. All vehicles used in the private collection of garbage,
rubbish, paper or trade waste traveling through the streets of the
Township shall have a good and tight body and, when loaded, shall be
securely covered with a type of cover approved by the Township
Division of Health so as to prevent their contents from being scattered
upon the streets. Each vehicle shall be equipped to disinfect and
deodorize all receptacles upon each and every collection.
B. Storage. When not in use, all vehicles and all implements used in
connection therewith shall be stored and kept in some place where no
needless offense shall be given to any of the inhabitants of the
Township.
133. Former § 122-31, pertaining to purpose of article, and former § 122-32, pertaining to
definitions, which immediately preceded this section, were repealed 12-22-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-067. See now Art. III, Collection, Transportation and Disposal of Solid Waste and
Recyclable Materials, of this chapter.
§ 420-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-4
1:559
§ 420-4. Prohibited receptacles.
Receptacles which have an actual internal volume of one cubic yard or
greater and tip over when tested under conditions as set forth in § 420-5
and using procedures described in § 420-6 are a banned hazardous product.
§ 420-5. Testing of refuse bins; test conditions.
Test conditions for refuse bins are as follows:
§ 420-6. Test procedures.
Refuse bins shall be tested by applying forces as described in Subsections
A and B of this section one after the other.
A. The refuse bin shall be empty and have its lids or covers in a position
which would most adversely affect the stability of the bin when tested.
B. The refuse bin shall be tested on a hard, flat surface. During testing, the
bin shall not be tilted from level in such a way as to increase its stability.
C. Those refuse bins equipped with casters or wheels shall have the
casters or wheels positioned in a position which would most adversely
affect the stability of the bin and shall be chocked to prevent movement.
D. The stability of the refuse bin shall be tested without dependence upon
nonpermanent attachments or restraints such as chains or guys.
E. For purposes of enforcement, bins will be tested by the Township in that
position which most adversely affects their stability.
A. A horizontal force of 70 pounds (311 N) shall be applied at a point and
in a direction most likely to cause tipping.
B. A vertically downward force of 191 pounds (850 N) shall be applied to a
point most likely to cause tipping.
§ 420-4 HAMILTON CODE § 420-6
1:560
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted as Ch. 122, Art. IV, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 420-7. Purpose of article.
Pursuant to the Recycling Act,134 each resident of the Township shall be
required to comply with the recycling plan of the Township adopting the
county recycling plan to meet the state-mandated recycling goals. To
effectuate and implement the Township recycling plan, the requirements of
this article are adopted.
§ 420-8. General policy; duties of Township.
A. The Township hereby adopts this article to provide for recycling within
its borders pursuant to the Recycling Act, adopting in this article the
county recycling plan as its official municipal recycling program.
B. All municipal contracts for solid waste collection or disposal within the
Township shall be consistent with this article and the county recycling
plan.
C. Leaves.
(1) All persons occupying residential premises within the Township
shall, for the period from September 1 to December 31 of each
year, source-separate leaves from solid waste generated at those
premises and, unless leaves are stored or recycled for composting
or mulching by the generator, place the leaves for collection in the
manner provided for in this section. All leaves shall be either
bagged or raked into the street gutter in accordance with the
Township Resident Leaf Recycling Program. The Township will
collect the leaves in accordance with the schedule contained in the
Township Resident Leaf Recycling Program.
(2) Stormwater management regulations (N.J.A.C. 7:8). Municipalities
are required to follow strict guidelines for minimizing nonpointsource
pollution. These regulations require that all
noncontainerized leaves be placed in the gutter no more than seven
days prior to its scheduled pickup, and leaves cannot be closer than
10 feet to the storm drain.135
D. The Township may deliver tires to the existing transfer station or such
site as designated by the County Improvement Authority for transfer to
a tire recycler.
E. The Township shall, at a minimum, within 30 days after the adoption of
this article and at least once every six months thereafter, notify all
134. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-213 et seq.
135. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 420-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-8
1:561
§ 420-9. Residential premises. [Amended 12-22-1993 by Ord. No.
93-067]
persons occupying residential, commercial and institutional premises
within its municipal boundaries of recycling opportunities and the
source-separation requirements of this article and the county recycling
plan. In order to fulfill the notification requirements of this subsection,
the Township may, in its discretion, place an advertisement in a
newspaper circulating in the Township; post a notice in public places
where public notices are customarily posted; include a notice with
other official notifications periodically mailed to residential taxpayers;
or any combination thereof, as the Township deems necessary and
appropriate. At least once annually, the County Improvement Authority
shall be informed, in writing, of the manner in which residents were
notified.
F. The Township shall, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16c, within 30 days of
the effective date of this article and at least once every 36 months
thereafter, conduct a review and make the necessary revisions to the
Master Plan and development regulations adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., which revisions shall reflect changes in state, county
and municipal policies and objectives concerning the collection,
disposition and recycling of designated recyclable materials. The
revised Master Plan shall include provisions for the collection,
disposition and recycling of recyclable materials within any
development proposal for the construction of 50 or more units of singlefamily
residential housing or 25 or more units of multifamily residential
housing, and any commercial or industrial development proposal for
the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more of land. Permits for
construction and demolition work, as well as road opening permits,
shall be required to specify the quantity of materials recycled, where
they will be taken and how they will be handled.
A. Duties of residents. On and after the official commencement date of the
County recycling system within the Township, each person residing in
areas designated for recycling collection shall separate for curbside
collection on designated collection days and such additional days as
may be designated by the County Improvement Authority those
materials designated in the county recycling plan, as listed in this
section, and shall do so in the manner as set forth in this article.
B. Recyclable materials; collection.
(1) All residents shall recycle or cause to be recycled, at a minimum,
the following categories of recyclables:
(a) Acceptable glass containers.
(b) Acceptable metal containers.
(c) Acceptable plastic containers.
§ 420-8 HAMILTON CODE § 420-9
1:562
(d) Acceptable mixed paper.
(e) Tires.
(f) White goods.
(g) Leaves.
(h) Batteries.
(i) Used motor oil.
(j) Ferrous automotive scrap.
(k) Grass clippings.
(l) Corrugated cardboard.
(2) The following materials are collected through the County
Improvement Authority's residential collection programs: glass,
aluminum, plastic, tin-plate steel and bimetal containers and paper.
Private contractors servicing multifamily complexes within the
Township are required to collect for recycling, at a minimum, the
same materials as collected through the County Improvement
Authority's residential collection programs.
(3) As part of the County source-separation and recycling plan, the
Township shall provide all residents a means to recycle items
designated in this plan not collected at curbside by the County
Improvement Authority.
C. Violations. Any and all persons having been found to have violated the
provisions of the recycling plan of the Township will be assessed
warnings, penalties and fines pursuant to § 420-14.
D. Materials placed for collection to become property of County. At the
time of placement of recyclable materials designated for collection by
the recycling plan of the Township at the curb or streetside of
residential units, the material shall be considered the sole property of
the County Improvement Authority and shall be considered a conscious
contribution by that resident to the County recycling system for
collection by the County Improvement Authority or its agent.
E. Donation or sale of materials to persons other than County. Any
resident within the Township may donate or sell designated recyclable
materials to any person, whether operating for profit or not for profit,
provided that the receiving person may not perform curbside collection
under any circumstances unless that person has registered with the
County Improvement Authority as a private recycler.
F. Disposal of batteries. Household batteries shall be part of the curbside
recycling program. Auto batteries shall be recycled at dropoff locations
established by the Township.
§ 420-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-9
1:563
§ 420-10. Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments.
[Amended 12-22-1993 by Ord. No. 93-067]
G. Multifamily complexes.
(1) Materials collected from multifamily complexes by private
contractors shall be the property of the private contractors. Private
contractors servicing multifamily complexes shall provide monthly
reports to the Township on total tonnages recycled from all
multifamily complexes serviced by the private contractor within the
Township. On or before January 31 of each year, private contractors
shall file tonnage reports with the County Improvement Authority,
giving annual totals for tonnages recycled and markets for
individual materials, along with documentation for those tonnages
and markets.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the landlord, building owner,
property manager or private association to ensure that recycling
collection services are provided to residents of multifamily
complexes and that sufficient space is provided for collection and
storage of materials designated for recycling.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the landlord, building owner,
property manager or private association to inform both current and
new residents, at a minimum annually, of the manner, time and
place for collection of recyclable materials.
A. Recyclable materials. All commercial, industrial and institutional
establishments located within the Township shall recycle or cause to be
recycled, at a minimum, the following categories of recyclables:
(1) Paper, including but not limited to the following:
(a) Acceptable mixed paper.
(b) Corrugated cardboard.
(c) Office paper.
(2) Acceptable glass containers.
(3) Acceptable metal containers.
(4) Tires.
(5) White goods.
(6) Batteries.
(7) Vehicle batteries.
(8) Acceptable plastic containers.136
(9) Leaves.
§ 420-9 HAMILTON CODE § 420-10
1:564
(10) Grass.
(11) Used motor oil.
(12) Ferrous automotive scrap.
B. Recycling plan required; contents. All commercial, industrial or
institutional establishments located within the Township shall submit a
source-separation recycling plan to the County Improvement Authority
to meet the state recycling mandates, identifying or incorporating the
following:
(1) All waste material generated, listed by type.
(2) All volumes of the waste categories currently recycled.
(3) Any agreement with any solid waste hauler or with a separate
entity for the recycling of source-separated designated materials as
defined within the county recycling plan.
(4) A description of current or proposed recycling efforts for
designated materials.
(5) The name of the person responsible for the recycling plan.
C. Schedule for submission of plans; waste audit. The schedule for
submittal of these commercial, industrial and institutional recycling
plans to the County Improvement Authority shall be as follows:
(1) All commercial, industrial or institutional establishments whose
waste is collected by private haulers and which are not serviced by
municipal collection shall submit the plan within four months of
enactment of this article and shall implement the plan within two
months following approval of the plan by the County Improvement
Authority.
(2) All commercial, industrial or institutional establishments whose
waste is collected through a municipal collection system shall be
part of the municipal collection system of recyclables.
(3) All commercial, industrial or institutional establishments shall
submit updated recycling plans, including a waste audit, to the
County Improvement Authority according to the following
schedule:
(a) Facilities with more than 500 employees, by December 31,
1992.
(b) Facilities with 250 to 499 employees, by December 31, 1993.
(c) Facilities with 100 to 249 employees, by December 31, 1994.
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 420-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-10
1:565
(d) Facilities with fewer than 100 employees, by December 31,
1995.
(4) Recycling plans shall be updated once every two years from the
date of approval of the waste audit.
D. Joint recycling plans. All commercial, industrial or institutional
establishments required to submit a recycling plan under this article
may, at their option, submit a joint recycling plan with any other entity
whereby a common hauler or collection point for common pickup is set
forth. However, each commercial, industrial or institutional
establishment shall submit a plan identifying that they are part of this
joint plan and shall attach a copy of the plan, incorporating it by
reference. All joint plans must name all plan participants and designate
a coordinator for the joint plan. If a joint plan is filed, the person serving
as coordinator shall be required to file tonnage reports with the County
Improvement Authority. It shall be the responsibility of the joint plan
coordinator to update the list of participants, if necessary, at the time of
filing of recycling tonnage reports.
E. Violations. Any such commercial, industrial or institutional recycling
plan shall be consistent with those terms, conditions and goals set forth
in the county recycling plan and this article. The failure to submit the
plan or comply with the plan shall subject the commercial, industrial or
institutional establishment to penalties as set forth in this article.
F. Extension of time for compliance. An extension of the time for plan
submittal or plan implementation of up to 90 days may be requested
from the County Improvement Authority, depending upon the size of the
establishment. Justification for such a request shall be submitted to the
County Improvement Authority, in writing, and shall be verified as
necessary or justified.
G. Provision of service by County. Pursuant to the County Recycling
Ordinance, Ordinance No. 89-19, upon failure of a commercial,
industrial or institutional establishment to meet the source-separation
recycling provisions of this article or the source-separation and
recycling provisions of the Recycling Act, if not exempted pursuant to
Subsection H of this section, the County Improvement Authority shall
provide such recycling service, and all fees and costs for providing the
recycling service shall be assessed at rates to be established by the
County Improvement Authority through the State Board of Public
Utilities and the County's solid waste franchise, and penalties shall be
assessed as provided for in this article.
H. Exemptions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16, the Township shall have
the right to exempt persons occupying commercial and institutional
premises within the municipal boundaries from the source-separation
requirements of this article if those persons have otherwise provided
for the recycling of the recyclable materials designated in the county
recycling plan from solid waste generated at those premises. The
§ 420-10 HAMILTON CODE § 420-10
1:566
Township shall annually submit to the County Improvement Authority
a list of those commercial, industrial or institutional establishments
requesting exemptions under this subsection and the results of its
determination, with an explanation for the action. To be eligible for an
exemption pursuant to this subsection, a commercial or institutional
solid waste generator shall annually provide written documentation
to the Township and the County Improvement Authority of the total
number of tons recycled. Persons occupying commercial and
institutional premises exempted under this subsection shall not be
exempted from the reporting provisions of Subsection C of this section.
I. Disposal of batteries. Household batteries shall be part of the curbside
recycling program. Auto batteries shall be recycled at dropoff locations
established by the Township.
J. New establishments. New commercial, industrial or institutional
establishments commencing operations in the Township after January
1, 1991, shall submit a recycling plan within six months of
commencement of operations. An extension of time for plan submittal
or plan implementation of up to 90 days may be granted by the County
Improvement Authority on request. Justification for such a request shall
be submitted to the County Improvement Authority in writing and shall
be verified as necessary or justified.
K. Tonnage reports. Commercial, industrial or institutional establishments
shall file tonnage reports with the County Improvement Authority
annually, with documentation on materials claimed for recycling.
Reports are due on or before January 31 of the year following the end of
the reporting period, which is December 31. The County Improvement
Authority reserves the right to establish more frequent reporting
periods should the state Department of Environmental Protection
require more frequent reporting.
L. Notification to tenants. All persons leasing commercial, industrial or
institutional space to tenants shall annually inform such tenants of their
responsibilities for recycling under the terms of this plan.
M. Materials placed for collection to become property of county. At the
time of placement of recyclable materials designated for collection by
the plan at the curbside or streetside of commercial, industrial or
institutional establishments, the material shall be considered the sole
property of the County Improvement Authority and shall be considered
a conscious contribution to the County recycling system for collection
by the County Improvement Authority or its agents.
N. Violations. Any commercial, industrial or institutional recycling plan
shall be consistent with those terms, conditions and goals set forth in
the county recycling plan and this article. The failure to submit the plan
or comply with the plan or any regulations therein shall subject the
commercial, industrial or institutional establishment to penalties as set
forth in this article.
§ 420-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-10
1:567
§ 420-11. Collections by private recyclers.
§ 420-12. Enforcement of Township recycling plan.
The enforcement of the recycling plan of the Township shall be provided
individually and severally by the Township, with regard to enforcement of
this article, the County Improvement Authority, and the state Department
of Environmental Protection. The Township hereby designates the Director
of the Township Department of Public Works as liaison with the County
Improvement Authority for the enforcement of this article.
§ 420-13. Registration of private recyclers; violations by private
recyclers.
O. Provision of service by county. Upon failure of a commercial, industrial
or institutional establishment to meet the source-separation recycling
provisions of this article or the provisions of the enacting ordinance of
the County Board of Chosen Freeholders, or the provisions of the
Mandatory Recycling Act,137 if not otherwise exempted, the Township
or the County Improvement Authority shall cause to be provided such
recycling service, and all fees and costs for providing the recycling
service shall be paid to the Township.
A. Any person or group of persons wishing to collect recyclable materials
shall register with the County Improvement Authority as a private
recycler.
B. No private recycler shall conduct recycling collection activities within
the Township on designated County collection days.
C. Upon registration, each private recycler shall receive an identification/
registration decal from the County Improvement Authority, and the
recycler shall prominently display the decal on recycling vehicles when
collecting recyclables within the Township.
D. An ongoing condition of collection activities within the Township shall
be the submittal of certified weight tickets to the County Improvement
Authority for material sold, to quantify levels for state-mandated
recycling goals. The tickets shall be submitted to the County
Improvement Authority no later than 30 days following the date of sale
of the subject material.
A. No person shall collect recyclables within the Township unless such
person has registered with the County Improvement Authority and the
requisite fee has been paid, unless an exemption has been granted by
the County Improvement Authority in accordance with Ordinance No.
88-19 of the County. The identification/registration decal of each person
so registered shall be prominently displayed on each recycling vehicle
at all times while collecting recyclables within the Township.
137. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-213 et seq.
§ 420-10 HAMILTON CODE § 420-13
1:568
§ 420-14. Violations and penalties generally. [Amended 5-4-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-016]
B. Failure to register or to display the identification/registration decal on
vehicles while collecting recyclables within the Township shall subject
such private recycler to a fine of up to $250 per offense.
C. Any person conducting recycling collection activities within the
Township on designated County recycling collection days shall be
assessed a penalty of $250 per offense.
A. Residents.
(1) Any resident of the Township who is found to have violated the
provisions of this article shall be subject to any or all of the
following procedures and penalties:
(a) A warning on the first occasion that this article is violated; and
thereafter
(b) A cessation in the collection of garbage which contains
recyclable materials from that household; and
(c) A fine of up to $500 per day of violation, depending upon the
extent of and circumstances of the violation, to be assessed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-9 by the County Improvement
Authority, as authorized by this article and pursuant to the
inclusion of this article within the County Solid Waste
Management Plan.
(2) The terms and provisions of this article may be enforced
individually and severally by the Township, the County
Improvement Authority and the state Department of Environmental
Protection.
B. Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments.
(1) Failure to submit the plan or have an approved plan in place as
required by this article shall subject the commercial, industrial or
institutional establishment to a fine of up to $100 per day until plan
submittal requirements are met.
(2) Any commercial, industrial or institutional establishment located
within the County found to have violated its required recycling plan
as submitted to the County pursuant to § 420-11 shall be subject to
the following procedures and penalties:
(a) A warning on the first occasion that the plan is violated; and
thereafter
(b) A fine up to $1,000 per day of violation, depending upon the
extent of and circumstances of the violation and the size of the
violating establishment, to be assessed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
§ 420-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-14
1:569
§ 420-15. Adoption of county plan.
This article shall constitute the adoption and approval of the County Source-
Separation and Recycling Plan as set forth in the amendment to the County
District Solid Waste Management Plan.
13:1E-9 by the County Improvement Authority, as authorized
by this article.
C. Enforcement of terms and provisions. The terms and provisions of this
article may be enforced individually and severally by the Township, the
County Improvement Authority and the state Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 420-14 HAMILTON CODE § 420-15
1:570
ARTICLE III
Collection, Transportation and Disposal of Solid Waste and
Recyclable Materials
[Adopted 12-22-1993 by Ord. No. 93-067 (Ch. 123 of the 1994 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 420-16. Definitions and word usage.
A. The following words and terms shall have the meanings set forth
hereafter when utilized in this article. The word "shall" is always
mandatory, and not merely discretionary, and is to be so applied in all
instances.
ASHES — The residual from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible materials.
BAGS — Plastic or fiber sacks designed to store solid waste with
sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the
top. Total weight of a bag shall not exceed 50 pounds. If bag breaks
while being lifted, such bag shall not be considered of appropriate
strength as to be used for containment of solid waste.
BUILDING MATERIALS — Any material such as lumber, brick, plaster,
gutters, roofing shingles or other substances accumulated as a result of
repairs or additions to existing buildings, construction of new buildings
or demolition of existing structures.
BULKY WASTE — Large items such as concrete, tree stumps, heavy
wood items, iron and steel.
BUNDLES — Normally loose items that would be collected if organized
into bundles of not more than four feet in length and tied with twine.
"Bundles" would be organized as to be conveniently handled by one
person. No "bundle" would exceed 50 pounds in weight.
BUSINESS TRASH — Any waste accumulation of dirt, dust, food, paper,
cardboard, excelsior, rags or other accumulations other than household
trash, which is usually attendant to the operation of stores, offices or
similar businesses.
CHLOROFLUOROCARBON (CFC) — Also known as
hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC) and registered as Freon A family of
chemical substances, used as solvents, accelerant, blowing or
refrigerant agent used in cooling appliances, refrigerators and air
conditioners. CFC/HCFCs are not allowed to leak into the air or
atmosphere, but are required to be contained, cleansed and recycled as
of July 1, 1992, under federal regulations and N.J.A.C. 7:26A subchapter
1, because CFC/HCFCs are widely believed to be associated with
depletion of the Earth's ozone layer. Therefore, before any of the
appliances utilizing CFC/HCFC can be recycled as white goods, the
refrigerant would be removed or its removal attested to by appropriate
certification.
§ 420-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-16
1:571
COMBUSTIBLE WASTE — Yard trimmings, rags, waste wood or
cardboard and all other combustible waste solids of a nonvolatile and
nonexplosive nature.
COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND PROFESSIONAL PROPERTIES —
Any retail, manufacturing, wholesale, governmental or other
nonresidential establishment.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS — Waste building materials resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations performed by
a resident, which is placed at the curb in a bag, bundle or container as
defined herein.
CONTAINER — See also "receptacle" and please note terms are
interchangeable.
CONTRACTOR — The person, corporation or partnership performing
solid waste and recycling collection through disposal services under
contract.
COORDINATOR — The Solid Waste, Recycling and Clean Community
Coordinator for the Township.
DEAD ANIMALS — Animals or portions thereof that have expired from
any cause, except deer which shall be removed by Township or NJDEP
personnel.
DEPARTMENT — The Township Department of Public Works.
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE — The Director of Finance for the Township.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director of Public Works for the
Township.
ELIGIBLE WASTE — All that material, garbage, refuse, solid waste and
rubbish discarded by residential units. The exceptions are as noted
below and includes recyclable items, certain yard waste, including
leaves, grass clippings and brush.
CONTAINER, RECYCLING — A capacity of greater than five
gallons but not more than 20 gallons, molded plastic, bright-yellowcolored
container with Hamilton recycling logo, of sufficient
volume, strength and durability to store and place for collection
commingled materials, such as food and beverage containers made
from aluminum, glass, plastic (PET and HDPE), steel, tin or
combination of metals and alloys.
(1)
CONTAINER, SOLID WASTE — A receptacle with capacity of
greater than 20 gallons but less than 35 gallons constructed of
plastic, metal or fiberglass, having handles of adequate strength for
lifting and having a tight-fitting lid capable of preventing entrance
into the container by animals. The mouth of the container shall
have a diameter greater than or equal to that of the base. The
weight of the container including its contents shall not exceed 50
pounds.
(2)
§ 420-16 HAMILTON CODE § 420-16
1:572
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and/or vegetative waste resulting from
the handling, preparation, consumption or cooking of food, and shall
include any fecal waste from any animal or bird (when fecal matter
has been separated from other waste and is double-bagged prior to
placement for collection). Solid waste or animal or vegetable matter
from houses, kitchens, restaurants, hotels, produce markets or any
other source of food of any kind to be thrown away.
GOVERNING BODY — The Council of the Township.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste or combination of wastes which
poses a present or potential threat to human health, living organisms
or the environment, including, but not limited to, waste material that
is toxic, carcinogenic, corrosive, irritating, sensitizing, biologically
infectious, explosive, flammable or radioactive and any waste so
designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(USEPA) or the New Jersey Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP).
HOSPITAL/RED BAG WASTE — Includes but not limited to all
instruments, supplies, containers, bandages, tubing, gloves, etc., used
by health-care practitioners and facilities as described in New Jersey
Department of Health regulations and applicable New Jersey law.
HOUSEHOLD TRASH — Every waste accumulation of paper,
sweepings, dirt, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind,
other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — All waste, including solids, semisolids, sludge
and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other
manufacturing enterprises.
INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTIES — Any nontaxable (exempt) property,
whether they be religious, educational, service facilities/organizations
or institutional establishments, which may be residential or
nonresidential, at which garbage or trash may be generated.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof, including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, any
unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material
or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other
lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or
paper containers or other packaging or construction material, but not
including the waste of primary processes of mining or other extraction
processes, logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing, or as
otherwise defined in applicable New Jersey law.
MULTIPLE-DWELLING UNIT — Any building or structure and land
appurtenant thereto containing two or more living units.
§ 420-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-16
1:573
MULTIPLE-DWELLING COMPLEX — Any building or structure and
land appurtenant thereto containing more than two living units, such as
townhouses, condominiums and apartment houses.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE WASTE — All solid waste material which does not
burn.
POLYCHLORINATED BIPHENYL (PCB) — A pathogenic and teratogenic
industrial compound used as a heat-transfer agent. PCBs accumulate in
human or animal tissue and are normally found in household appliances
and underground fuel storage tanks that are sometime processed for
disposal.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind. Includes all individuals,
partnerships, corporations, owners, tenants, lessees, occupants,
associations, organizations, residing or owning, operating, managing,
leasing, occupying any premises or business, commercial or industrial,
within the Township.
PRODUCER — Any occupant of a residential unit, public school
buildings/facilities and/or municipal office/activity that generates solid
waste and recyclables.
RECEPTACLE — A container constructed of such material and in such
a manner as to hold solid waste and trash and other such items without
breaking or collapsing. Receptacles shall have handles and covers so
that contents therein are not exposed to the weather, animals and
vermin. A disposable plastic bag shall constitute a receptacle if it is of
sufficient strength to hold its contents without breaking when collected.
The receptacle shall be of such a design and weight as to be able
to be conveniently handled by one person. No container shall exceed
a weight of more than 50 pounds when loaded. Commercial garbage
receptacles and fifty-five gallon drums are not acceptable as containers.
Receptacles which, in the opinion of the Department, are badly broken
or fail to meet the requirements of this article may be classified as
"garbage."
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — All waste materials which have the ability
to be returned, through processing, to their former or alternate use.
Following are examples, and not necessarily limited to these:
ALUMINUM CANS — Includes such beverage or food containers
constructed or fabricated of aluminum or its alloys.
(1)
BATTERY(IES) — Includes all types of batteries from flashlights,
radios, appliances, automobiles, cameras, etc., whether
rechargeable or not.
(2)
BIMETAL FOOD CONTAINERS — Food and beverage containers
which are made up of a mixture of various metals (aluminum, steel,
tin).
(3)
§ 420-16 HAMILTON CODE § 420-16
1:574
CARDBOARD/CORRUGATED PAPER — Includes kraft corrugated,
which has a brown liner made from kraft paper, and regular
corrugated, which is gray or tan and is made from other types of
paper such as newspaper.
(4)
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — Includes all waste
materials as a result of construction and/or demolition of buildings
and facilities and made up of mixed wastes such as metals, wood,
cement, blacktop, macadam, plaster, glass, plastics, etc.
(5)
GLASS — Includes all products made from silica or sand, soda
ash and lime, the product being transparent or translucent and
being used as packaging and commonly known as "glass." Food and
beverage containers commonly known as jars, bottles in the colors
of clear, brown and green.
(6)
HI-GRADE AND MIXED PAPERS — Includes computer printouts,
office paper and stationery.
(7)
JUNK MAIL AND MAGAZINES — Includes all delivered and mailed
advertisements, telephone books, magazines, glossy-surfaced
periodicals and other paper products with shiny photos, colored
writing and/or glossy pictures.
(8)
BULKY ITEMS/WASTE — Large items such as concrete, tree
stumps, heavy wood items, iron and steel. Includes but is not
limited to furniture, bedding, mattresses, and so on, which may
be constructed of several types and mix of materials, which may
be rebuilt, reconstructed or segregated into reusable and/or
reclaimable materials.
(9)
NEWSPAPERS — Includes papers of the type commonly referred to
as "newsprint" and distributed at periodic intervals, usually daily
or weekly. The term "used newspaper" is interchangeable with
"newspapers."
(10)
PLASTICS — Includes all beverage containers which are
constructed of polyethylene teraphthalate (PET) with recycling
logo (1), which is characterized by its clarity, toughness and barrier
(ability to resist permeation of carbon dioxide). PET is primarily
used for soft drink soda containers; or high-density polyethylene
(HDPE) with recycling logo (2), which is characterized by its
stiffness, low cost, ease of forming and resistance to breakage.
HDPE has a variety of uses, such as milk, water and juice beverage
containers.
(11)
TEXTILES — Includes all rags, clothes, fabric and woven materials
that were formerly used as clothing and/or covering.
(12)
TIN CANS — Includes all food and beverage containers which are
constructed of tin and/or steel sides, tops and bottoms.
(13)
§ 420-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-16
1:575
RECYCLING AREA — Space allocated for collection and storage of
source-separated recyclable materials.
REFUSE — Whether it consists of combustible or noncombustible solid
wastes, all miscellaneous materials such as soiled or used rags, paper
products, leather goods, rubber, crockery or other material not defined
as recyclable or white goods. Garbage, rubbish, trash, trade waste,
debris or the remains of uprooted or severed plant life.
REGULATIONS — Includes such rules, schedules or times promulgated
by the Director of Public Works and adopted by the governing body to
carry out the intent of this article.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT —
REUSABLE RECEPTACLE — Any container which meets the definition
of "receptacle" and is constructed of wood, metal, plastic or other
natural or synthetic materials and used for containment and placement
for collection of solid waste and recyclables.
RUBBISH — All materials generated by residential units consisting
of materials other than food waste items not included in the current
recycling/recyclable list.
SCAVENGER — Any private individual or firm collecting and sorting
for profit from the curbside waste, recyclables, used furniture, or other
materials of value. Also any person engaged in cleanup of lots,
buildings, etc.
SINGLE-RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Any dwelling place occupied by one
family.
USED TIRES — Includes bias, belted and polyester, of which rubber
is the main material in manufacturing.
(14)
VEGETATIVE WASTE — Grass clippings, grass cuttings, plant
residue and leaves. See also "yard waste."
(15)
WASTE OIL — Includes used oil drained from automobiles,
motorcycles and lawn mowers, etc.
(16)
YARD WASTE — Includes leaves, grass clippings, plant residue,
tree limbs, branches and trunks. See also "vegetative waste."
(17)
A dwelling within the corporate limits of the Township occupied by
a person or group of persons. A "residential unit" shall be deemed
occupied when either water or domestic light and power services
are being supplied thereto.
(1)
Note: "Residential unit" definition shall also include all public
schools, municipal offices, activities and properties, official/quasiofficial
municipal service activities (such as fire, first aid) located
in the Township, where solid waste and recyclables can be safely
placed at the curb in containers, bags and bundles as may be
appropriate and not exceeding five items per collection day.
(2)
§ 420-16 HAMILTON CODE § 420-16
1:576
§ 420-17. License required for waste collection.
No person or persons or corporation shall engage in the business of yard/
lot/facility maintenance, which collects waste (garbage, refuse or
SOLID WASTE — All garbage, rubbish, refuse and waste matter usually
disposed of and normally generated by the occupants of residential
and other property, disposed of by private and/or public collection and
defined as "solid waste" by the New Jersey Solid Waste Management
Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq., or other applicable New Jersey law. Items
classified as recyclables shall be prohibited from being commingled
with solid waste. The Township is approved by state law to collect three
types of waste:
STREET — Any right-of-way, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct,
drive or other way as approved by the Township Planning Board and/
or Township Zoning Board of Adjustment and built in accordance with
Township standards.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Hamilton.
TRADE WASTE — All waste solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting
from construction, building operations or the prosecution of any
business, trade or industry, including but not limited to plastic
products, cartons, paints, grease, oil and other petroleum products,
chemicals, cinders and other forms of solid or liquid waste material.
YARD WASTE — Any waste accumulations of grass, leaves or shrubbery
cuttings or clippings, tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes,
shrubbery or other material usually created by yard maintenance. Yard
waste shall be free of dirt, rocks and other bulky and noncombustible
materials and shall be separated for purposes of collection into grass
clippings, leaves and other materials.
TYPE 10, MUNICIPAL WASTE — Residential, commercial and
institutional solid waste generated within a community.
(1)
TYPE 13, BULKY WASTE — Large items of solid waste which
because of their size or weight require handling other than
normally used for municipal waste. "Bulky waste" includes, but is
not limited to, such items as tree trunks, parts of auto bodies,
demolition or construction material, appliances, furniture and
drums.
(2)
TYPE 23, VEGETATIVE WASTE — Includes, but is not limited to,
tree limbs, branches, leaves, grass clippings, plants and flower
residue, etc.
(3)
B. Where the foregoing definitions conflict with those provided for in
regulations promulgated by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection or otherwise provided by New Jersey law, the
definitions contained herein shall be deemed to be accordingly
amended.
§ 420-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-17
1:577
recyclables) and transmits off site in the Township, without first obtaining a
permit to do so from the Director of Public Works or his designee. A permit
issued by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection may be
substituted for any such required Township permit. A Township permit shall
not exempt any person from obtaining required New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection permits.
§ 420-18. Term of licenses and renewal.
The expiration date of licenses shall be July 1 next after the same shall have
been granted. Applications for renewal of permits shall be made no later
than June 15 of each year.
§ 420-19. Application for license; license fees.
§ 420-20. Vehicle requirements for collection and transport of solid
wastes.
A. Generally. All applications for licenses to collect and/or transport
garbage or refuse shall be made in writing, addressed to the Director of
Public Works of said Township. The license fee shall be as promulgated
by the Director of Finance and the Director of Public Works and
approved by the governing body under separate cover, entitled
"Schedule of Fees for Solid Waste Services," and paid per vehicle.138
B. Recycling during application for building permit. All applications for a
construction permit obtained from the Township Construction Official
shall be accompanied by a recycling plan on a form provided. It shall
include at least the following:
(1) Estimate of waste to be generated.
(2) Provisions for recycling materials required to be recycled in this
article.
(3) Disposal point for waste and recyclables.
(4) Name of hauler to be used.
(5) Provisions to store waste and recyclables on site.
(6) Other data, including location, name, contractor's name, and date
to begin construction.
C. The approved plan shall be returned to the Construction Official within
30 days of completion of the construction with a stamp or other
certification of disposal or recycling as provided by the hauler, disposal
point or recycler. It shall state weights and types of all recycled
material.
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 420-17 HAMILTON CODE § 420-20
1:578
§ 420-21. Solid waste hauler reports.
All licensed solid waste haulers servicing residential, commercial and/or
institutional premises located within the boundaries of the Township shall
be required to complete and submit tonnage reports of recyclables collected
within the Township on a quarterly basis to the Department of Public Works.
Such report shall include weight, market outlet and dates of collection.
§ 420-22. Scheduling of collection.
A. Every person, persons or corporation who shall transport solid waste/
recyclable materials through or along any street in the Township shall
use a properly constructed and furnished vehicle. Vehicles used for the
purpose of collection and transport of solid waste materials shall be
loaded in a manner that will prevent any of the contents from spilling,
falling or leaking from the vehicle. Each vehicle used for garbage shall
be provided with adequate and sufficiently tight covering so as to
prevent the spillage of contents.
B. No such vehicles shall stand in the streets or other public places at any
time except when being loaded. Vehicles shall also be in compliance
with appropriate noise level and abatement requirements and
standards. It is further provided herein that solid waste collection
vehicles shall only operate from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday.
C. All such vehicles must carry a New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection vehicle permit displayed as required by law.
A. Collection sectors, together with the dates of collection, shall be
established by regulation of the Department of Public Works. In the
event of emergency situations and inclement weather such as ice and
snowstorms, high winds and/or heavy rains, the Department may
suspend, restrict or otherwise modify the provisions of this article.
Should any of the above situations occur, collection for the service
which was suspended will resume on the next regularly scheduled
collection day.139
B. The following plus others as may be established shall constitute
holidays on which collections will not be made:
New Year's Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 420-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-23
1:579
§ 420-23. Solid waste disposal service requirements.
Property owners and their agents, lessees, tenants or other occupants who
wish to have their solid waste disposed by the Township shall:
A. Place solid waste from their unit in appropriate containers, receptacles
and/or bundles as specified at the street curb if one exists or adjacent to
but not on the street pavement if there is no curb. The number of
containers shall not exceed seven per dwelling on a single collection
day. If residents plan to exceed seven items or put out items that are
over four feet in length or weigh over 50 pounds, they must call the
Department (or its designee) between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. at least one working day prior to their published collection day.
They must describe the number of items placed out for collection, its
volume and provide their address. The Department (or its designee)
shall reserve the right of decision in determining the maximum capacity
per truck and, therefore, the right to limit the number of special
collections according to volume per route.
B. Receptacles may be placed beginning at dusk of the night preceding the
scheduled collection day. All containers with solid waste shall be placed
out by 6:00 a.m. of the collection day, and those placed after said hour
may not be collected if said collection activity has already taken place.
Solid waste receptacles shall be removed from the curb or pavement
edge by the evening of the collection day.
C. Properties shall be permitted to place solid waste for collection
pursuant to this article and regulations issued by the Department. Said
regulations shall, as a minimum, state the type and number of
receptacles and shall provide for regular and special pickup, subject to
limitations of the municipal budget of the Township.
D. The Department may permit additional receptacles to be placed at
curbside, provided that special prior arrangements have been made
with the Department.
E. No collection of solid waste shall be accomplished on property outside
of the dedicated public rights-of-way by any Township vehicle or private
hauler under contract to the Township except as provided or required
by law.
F. Owner and occupants to supply receptacles in all cases as follows:
(1) The owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or agent of every premises
where solid waste and recyclables accumulate shall provide
receptacles for receiving and holding solid waste and recyclables.
At least one receptacle shall be provided for each residential unit.
(2) Combinations of multifamily units, restaurant, market, store or
similar business establishment, except those "mom and pop" stores
currently approved for curbside collection, shall be equipped for
§ 420-23 HAMILTON CODE § 420-23
1:580
commercial collection. These combination units shall not be served
by Township resources.
(a) "Mom and pop" operations are all those small commercial
properties which in the process of planning or zoning approval
have received permission to place waste containers at the
curb. All properties currently serviced by curbside collection
without such approval shall apply for approval to maintain
curbside collection to the Director of Public Works. Criteria for
approval shall include:
1. Inability of the property to safely and conveniently
accommodate a commercial container.
2. The business does not generate more than the waste
allowed to a single-family residential unit, seven solid
waste containers per collection day.
3. A recycling plan has been filed with the Mercer County
Improvement Authority.
(3) All receptacles or solid waste containers shall be constructed of
metal or plastic and shall be watertight and fitted with tight-fitting
covering, which shall prevent spilling or leakage of contents. For
single-family residences, each container shall have the capacity of
not more than 35 gallons for garbage and not more than 20 gallons
for recycling, and both shall be equipped with at least one handle
for pulling and lifting. In no case will the weight of the container
and its contents be allowed to exceed 50 pounds. In no case shall
paper or cardboard be used to contain garbage placed at the curb
for collection.
(4) Reusable containers made of wood, plastic or metal may be used
for newspaper containment prior to placement at the curb for
collection, provided that littering (blowing paper) will not occur
prior to collection and the total weight of container and
newspapers do not exceed 50 pounds.
(5) All owners and tenants of property at which recyclable food and
beverage containers are sold, dispensed or vending machines are
located shall provide separate solid waste and recycling containers
for use and disposal of solid waste and recyclables, as defined
herein.
G. Depositing residential waste in commercial containers or on property
owned by others.
(1) It shall be a violation of this article for any person to place garbage
in a waste container or dumpster not owned, rented or leased by
that person without the permission of the property owner.
§ 420-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-23
1:581
§ 420-24. Exceptions to solid waste disposal services requirements.
§ 420-25. Prohibited materials.
The following items are prohibited from being placed for municipal
collection:
(2) It shall be a violation of this provision for any person to place
garbage on the property of any other person without the
permission of the property owner.
A. Solid waste and recycling collection or disposal service shall not be
provided to any commercial, industrial or institutional properties unless
they are an agency of the Township.
B. Solid waste and recycling collection or disposal service shall not be
provided to federal, state or county governmental properties or local
schools or medical facilities or offices, except offices located in a
residential structure which qualify under applicable New Jersey law,
nor to multiple-dwelling complexes or any development wherein the
developer in securing municipal approval agreed to provide private
garbage service as set forth in an offering statement or in a resolution
approving such development, unless otherwise provided by law or
separate written agreement.
A. Construction materials, including but not limited to bulk roof shingles,
dimensional framing lumber, bulk or sheets of plywood, paneling,
plasterboard, sheetrock, etc.
B. Bulk tree trimmings and tree stumps above 50 pounds.
C. Hot ashes, dirt, earth, stone, blacktop, concrete, concrete block and
macadam.
D. Industrial waste, including but not limited to processed scrap materials,
packing materials and certain hazardous and dangerous materials,
such as acids, paints, fluorescent tubes, bulk amounts of glass, toxic
materials and highly volatile or explosive matter, either in liquid,
gaseous or solid form.
E. Bulk automotive parts, including but not limited to transmissions,
engines, rear ends, rims, tires, wheels, mufflers and other bulk items
normally produced in quantity by vehicular repair operations.
F. Dead animals and farm animal waste.
G. Surgical dressings, syringes and disposable hospital-type waste items,
also known as "red bag waste." Note: Health care providers and
residents who are producing and/or are creating red bag waste
components in conducting daily activities or are maintaining their
health shall be required to make appropriate arrangements with their
§ 420-23 HAMILTON CODE § 420-25
1:582
§ 420-26. Bulky items from residential use.
§ 420-27. Branches and tree trunks. [Amended 3-6-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-008]
Branches and brush shall be collected in accordance with requirements
established by the Township Department of Public Works. Collection of
tree trunks shall be scheduled through the Township Department of Public
Works.
§ 420-28. Leaves. [Amended 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05-035]
suppliers to correctly contain and process for disposal their red bag
waste materials.
H. New and used motor oils, petroleum-based products, or antifreeze.
I. Hazardous waste classified pursuant to regulations issued by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP), adopted
under authority of N.J.S.A. 13:1D-9 and 13:1E-6, as amended. Toxic
chemicals commonly known as "commercial hazardous waste" and
"household hazardous waste" would be excluded.
A. Domestic or household bulky items, such as washing machines, dryers,
refrigerators, stoves, household appliances, and other household
furnishings, such as chairs, sofas, rugs, padding, etc., shall not be
placed at the curb for collection unless special arrangements have been
made with the hauler, meeting the published collection schedule. No
bulky item shall be of a weight or be of a size greater than can be
conveniently handled by two persons.
B. It shall be a violation of this article for any individual, association,
partnership or corporation to leave outside of any property, building or
dwelling any icebox, refrigerator, freezer or dishwasher or any other
item which has an airtight door, without first removing said airtight
door. It shall also be a violation of this article to dispose or place for
disposal or to collect any appliance containing freon without making
arrangements for recovery of the freon and its recycling.
C. It shall be a violation of this article for any individual, association,
partnership or corporation to conduct a repair or salvage operation and
use the services of the Township for solid waste collection.
A. The service listed under the nomenclature of "yard waste" in the annual
Township schedule shall, during the months of October, November and
December, consist of strictly leaf collection. During this time, leaves
may be placed in neat piles in a trash can, bucket, bag or other vessel at
the curb or pavement edge for collection, provided that the piles do not
constitute a traffic hazard. It shall be a violation of this article for any
private contractor to place leaves at the curb or pavement. Residents
may also place leaves for collection in plastic bags during the months of
§ 420-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-28
1:583
§ 420-29. Grass clippings. [Amended 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05-035]
§ 420-30. Fees for noncompliance.
Property owners of record shall be responsible for the placement of
materials for collection as specified herein. The governing body shall be
October, November and December, which are collected on the normal
solid waste collection day. The plastic bags shall not exceed 50 pounds
in weight, be neatly placed untied at the curb and be separated from
solid waste containers by a minimum of a foot (12 inches) distance.
B. Leaves that are not placed in containers described in Subsection A
above shall be placed at the curb or pavement edge no more than seven
days prior to scheduled collection and no closer than 10 feet from any
storm drain inlet.
C. It shall be a violation of this article for any private contractor to place
leaves at the curb or pavement. If an appropriate license has been
secured and fees paid, the collected leaves of these contract operations
can be disposed of legally and properly at the Department-regulated
location, as published under separate cover.
A. Residents are encouraged to recycle their grass clippings by cutting
and leaving. For those individuals who cut and bag their grass
clippings, the following procedures shall govern:
(1) Grass clippings shall not be commingled with other yard waste
between April 15 and October 15 of the year.
(2) Grass clippings shall be placed at the curb in reusable containers
with tops off or in untied plastic bags placed curbside. Neither the
reusable container or the plastic bags shall exceed 50 pounds,
including the contents within the container.
(3) Reusable containers or bags shall be placed at curbside on
normally scheduled solid waste collection days, separate from
garbage or refuse also placed for collection.
(4) Any grass clippings placed at the curb or pavement edge during the
months of leaf collection need not be contained but can be
commingled with leaves placed for collection. If not contained, the
grass clippings shall be placed at the curb or pavement edge no
more than seven days prior to scheduled leaf collection and no
closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. See Subsection B of
§ 420-28, Leaves.
B. It shall be a violation of this article for any private contractor to place
grass clippings at the curb or pavement. If an appropriate license has
been secured and fees paid, the collected grass clippings of these
contract operations can be disposed of legally and properly at the
Department-regulated location as published under separate cover.
§ 420-28 HAMILTON CODE § 420-30
1:584
empowered to fix fees by regulation for the removal of materials not placed
in accordance with the terms of this article. The payment of applicable fees
shall be the responsibility of the property owner of record.
§ 420-31. Hold harmless and indemnification provision.
Property owners and their agents, lessees, tenants or other occupants who
place materials not in accordance with this article shall hold harmless and
indemnify for any or all losses the Township, its employees and agents for
all costs, direct and indirect, which are attributable, in the sole discretion
of the Township, for materials which were placed for collection in violation
of the terms of this article.
§ 420-32. Special collection fees.
A schedule of fees shall be established by the governing body for services
provided under §§ 420-28 and 420-29. The approved fees may be charged
for household containers and/or containerized receptacles, including but
not limited to normal service and re-collection if collection activities are
unable to be performed due to violation of this article.
§ 420-33. Collection of assessed fees.
Fees not paid within 30 days of assessment by the Department shall
constitute a lien against the property, which shall be collected in a manner
provided by law, and services shall cease until full restitution has occurred.
§ 420-34. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced in Municipal Court upon a complaint signed by
a member of code enforcement, the Division of Health, the Department of
Public Works or the Department of Public Safety of the Township. Further,
once a complaint has been signed and issued, the responsibility for disposal
of solid waste shall lie with the violator and/or shall be processed as a lien
against the property and in accordance with law.
§ 420-35. Exceptions for individuals with disabilities.
The Department of Public Works may issue regulations exempting from total
or partial compliance those residential properties whose sole occupant or
occupants are unable to meet the requirements of this article by reason of
disability. Obtaining an exemption based on disability shall be by application
to the Township's Americans with Disabilities Act Coordinator.
§ 420-36. Disposal of solid waste.
The Department of Public Works shall transmit all solid waste collected
pursuant to this article to lawfully licensed facilities designated by the
County of Mercer in the Mercer County Solid Waste Plan and/or the State
of New Jersey. If permitted by said solid waste plan and if said users and
markets exist on a positive-cost-benefit-ratio basis to the municipality, then
§ 420-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-36
1:585
the Township may elect to dispose of said solid waste or a portion thereof in
an alternative manner.
§ 420-37. Ownership of solid waste.
The Township shall assume ownership of items or materials classified as
solid waste and/or recyclable upon placement at curbside, subsequent
collection by the Township or upon delivery to a municipal dropoff center
specified herein, except as otherwise provided by law.
§ 420-38. Designation of solid waste officials.
The Mayor shall designate a Clean Communities Coordinator, Solid Waste
and Recycling Coordinator and an alternate selected from among the
Department of Public Works executive management personnel, required to
act as liaison with Mercer County and State of New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) solid waste/recycling and clean
communities officials, keep records, apply for grants/aid and perform the
annual/recurring applications and updating process.
§ 420-39. Designation of recyclable materials and services.
A. Upon classification of an item or material as recyclable, residential and
other property owners shall cause themselves or their agents, lessees,
tenants or their occupants to separate said items or materials
separately for collection, whether said collection is performed by a
municipal agency or private contractor.
B. On and after the date fixed in the regulations and in accordance with
the terms thereof, it shall be mandatory for all persons who are owners,
lessors, renters or occupants of residential dwellings and commercial,
industrial and institutional property in the Township to separate
recyclable materials from all other solid waste generated.
C. Commercial, industrial and institutional properties that are not
serviced by the Township shall be required to negotiate with their
private hauler/contractor in accordance with the provisions of the
Mercer County District Recycling Plan. Written approval of exemption
shall be required to be secured by the owner, operator, contractor of
commercial, industrial and/or institutional users. The Director of Public
Works shall review the exemption form submitted to determine that the
person applying for the exemption has otherwise provided for
alternative recycling of the designated recyclable materials. If a
determination has been made that adequate alternative provisions have
been made for recycling, a written exemption shall be granted.
D. At the present time, the waste materials to be recycled by New Jersey
State mandate and designated as recyclable by the Township are:
(1) Commingled materials, which are:
(a) Aluminum cans and containers.
§ 420-36 HAMILTON CODE § 420-39
1:586
§ 420-40. Municipal dropoff center.
The Department of Public Works shall designate a municipal dropoff center.
Said center shall accept, as a minimum, used motor oils, newspaper,
corrugated paper, junk mail, aluminum, metal, bimetal, glass and plastics
pursuant to New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
regulations or applicable New Jersey law.
§ 420-41. Disposal of recyclable items.
Materials classified as recyclable shall only be disposed of by:
(b) Glass food and beverage containers, all colors.
(c) Steel (tin) and bimetal food and beverage containers.
(d) Plastic (PET-HDPE), milk, water and beverage containers with
recycling logo (1) and (2).
(2) Cardboard/corrugated paper, bundled two feet by two feet by one
foot.
(3) Hi-grade and mixed paper – computer, office paper, stationery/
envelopes without windows.
(4) Newspapers, used newspapers with inserts, but no magazines.
(5) Junk mail, telephone books, glossy/shiny paper and magazines,
bundled two feet by two feet by one foot.
(6) Waste oil brought to recycling center.
(7) White goods, metals, bulky items.
(8) Textiles.
(9) Used tires.
(10) Yard wastes – leaves, grass clippings, branches, vegetative waste.
(11) Construction and demolition wastes – tree stumps, logs, concrete,
asphalt, cinder blocks, bricks and other construction materials.
Note: Additional recyclable materials shall be added in accordance
with the New Jersey Source Separation and Recycling Act and
the Mercer County District Recycling Plan. The Department of
Public Works or the County of Mercer shall issue regulations
classifying recyclables and providing for the method and manner
of collection. Said classification shall be dependent upon the
existence of lawful disposal, users or markets for said recyclables.
A. Placing them for collection by the municipality pursuant to the terms of
this article and regulations issued by Department in accordance with
the provisions set forth by the governing body.
§ 420-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-41
1:587
§ 420-42. Violations and penalties.
§ 420-43. General repealer and interpretive statement.
All provisions of this Code, as amended and supplemented inconsistent
herewith, are hereby repealed only to the extent of any such inconsistencies
B. Giving, donating or selling them or permitting them to be collected by
any person, partnership or corporation, whether operating for profit or
not, provided that the material shall:
(1) Be recycled.
(2) Be collected from a point other than curbside in districts with
municipal collection of recyclable items or materials or at a
municipal dropoff center, with the permission of the Township.
(3) Be reported to the municipality by both the generator and the
receiver of the recyclable items or materials in accordance with
regulations of the Public Works Department, the County of Mercer
and the State of New Jersey.
C. Recycling documentation in the form and format adopted by the
Department, supported by weight slips or a signed business form letter,
shall be required from all those who market, collect, haul and/or
generate recyclable materials, whether they be residential, commercial
and/or institutional premises, located within the boundaries of the
Township, as required by the Mercer County District Recycling Plan.
These records and reports shall be submitted to the Township Recycling
Coordinator on a quarterly basis, specifically, not later than close of
business January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of a given year and
beginning as of the effective date of this article.
D. Used tires. Depending upon the availability of markets or other disposal
means for used tires, the Department may, at its discretion, provide for
the disposal of used tires by the residents. The governing body shall be
empowered to fix fees by regulation for the disposal of used tires, and
the disposal method shall be established by regulation of the
Department.
A. Each collection in violation of this article and each day a violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with
any provision of this article or any rule, regulation or directive
promulgated pursuant thereto shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to the penalties in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations;
penalties, of the Township Code.140
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 420-41 HAMILTON CODE § 420-43
1:588
and as necessary to render such provisions consistent with the requirement
of this article.
§ 420-44. Reconciliation of conflicting terms and definitions.
The definitions provided herein at § 420-16 shall take precedence when in
conflict with definitions provided in the following chapters of this Code,
which shall be deemed to be amended to conform herewith:
§ 420-45. Legislative intent; goals and objectives.
The central goal of this article is to reduce its 1993 solid waste stream by
at least 25% from 1989 levels by using a variety of recycling procedures. In
subsequent years, the plan also seeks to recycle at least 50% of the 1989
solid waste stream by the year 1995. The additional goal is to place all
ordinances and rules relating to solid waste collection under one section
and avoid scattering the laws over an entire volume. To accomplish this
goal, this plan element establishes the following objectives:
A. Chapter 362, Property Maintenance.
B. Article I, Garbage Receptacles; Private Collection; and Article II,
Recycling, of this chapter.
A. To continue the implementation of the Township recycling ordinance
requiring the source separation and collection of recyclable materials.
B. To provide site plan and subdivision review procedures that require the
collection, disposition and recycling of recyclable materials within any
development proposal for the construction of any major subdivision of
single-family housing and any commercial or industrial development
proposal.
C. To expand and improve the procedures and requirements of the
Township recycling program, including the materials to be recycled,
whenever said expansion or improvement is consistent with the
statewide Recycling Act, Mercer County Solid Waste Management Plan
and the findings of the Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 420-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-45
1:589

ARTICLE IV
Dumpsters on Public Property
[Adopted 11-1-1994 by Ord. No. 94-050 (Sec. 122-39 of the 1994
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 420-46. Placement of roll-off dumpsters and containers on rightof-
way or other public property.
Roll-off dumpsters and containers shall not be parked, placed or left
unattended along any public right-of-way or on any public property without
the authorization of the Division of Police pursuant to N.J.S.A. 27:5I-1 et seq.
§ 420-47. Removal of dumpsters; costs; violations and penalties.
The Division of Police may cause to be removed any roll-off dumpster or
container parked, placed or left unattended along any public right-of-way
or on any public property contrary to the requirements of this article, and
recover from the owner thereof the costs associated with such removal, in
addition to the fine specified at N.J.S.A. 27:5I-1(b).
§ 420-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-47
1:591
Chapter 427
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 167.
Sewers — See Ch. 385.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435.
Floodplain damage prevention — See Ch. 536.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 577.
§ 420-47 HAMILTON CODE § 420-47
1:592
ARTICLE I
Improper Disposal of Waste
[Adopted 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05-035 (Ch. 86, § 86-14, of the 1994
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 427-1. Purpose.
This purpose of this article to prohibit the spilling, dumping or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the Township of Hamilton in Mercer County, New
Jersey, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 427-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Hamilton or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater. Streams and natural stream channels shall also be considered
as components of MS4.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state +subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Hamilton in Mercer County, New Jersey,
and or any of its administrative units exercising jurisdiction within the
Township.
§ 427-3. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township
is prohibited. The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than
stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 427-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-4
1:593
§ 427-4. Exceptions to prohibition.
§ 427-5. Enforcement.141
The Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services of the
Township shall enforce this article. The public is strongly advised to report
any violations to Township officials.
§ 427-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to the penalties set forth
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn-watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car-washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from firefighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following its use for its
intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
(3) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is limited to
exterior, undercarriage and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 427-4 HAMILTON CODE § 427-6
1:594
in Chapter 1, General Penalties, § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code of
the Township of Hamilton.
§ 427-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-6
1:595

ARTICLE II
Illicit Connections
[Adopted 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05-035 (Ch. 86, § 86-15, of the 1994
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 427-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Hamilton
in Mercer County, New Jersey, so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 427-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater
or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by the Township of Hamilton in Mercer
County, New Jersey, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES
permit other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit
(NJPDES Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may
include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows or overflows into the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Hamilton or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
§ 427-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-8
1:597
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 427-9. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Township any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 427-10. Enforcement. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
This article shall be enforced by the Public Works Department and/or other
Department of Health, Recreation, Senior and Veterans Services officials of
the Township.
§ 427-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1,
General Penalties, § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code of the Township
of Hamilton.
§ 427-8 HAMILTON CODE § 427-11
1:598
ARTICLE III
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 9-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-040]
§ 427-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Township of Hamilton so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 427-13. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Hamilton or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 427-14. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
§ 427-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-14
1:599
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 427-15. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 427-13 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see Subsection C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 427-15 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicyclesafe
grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater than 0.5
inch across the smallest dimension. Examples of grates subject to
this standard include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (noncurb-
opening portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in
slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of
roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways,
plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater
basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0
square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
§ 427-14 HAMILTON CODE § 427-15
1:600
§ 427-16. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Public Works Department and/or
Department of Community Planning and Compliance. The public is strongly
advised to report any violations.
§ 427-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to the penalties set forth
in Chapter 1, General Penalties, § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code of
the Township of Hamilton.
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(This option does not apply for outfall netting facilities.); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 427-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-17
1:601
Chapter 435
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 215, § 215-9.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 285.
Land development — See Ch. 550.
§ 427-17 HAMILTON CODE § 427-17
1:602
ARTICLE I
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted as Ch. 130, Art. II, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 435-1. Responsibility of owner or tenant.
§ 435-2. Deposit of snow or ice on street or sidewalk.
No owner, tenant or occupant of any premises abutting on any street shall
throw, place or deposit any snow or ice upon the street. The intent of this
section is to prohibit all persons from throwing, placing or depositing snow
or ice accumulating on the private property of that person upon the streets
or sidewalks of the Township.
§ 435-3. Removal by Township; recovery of costs by Township.
If snow or ice is not removed as required by § 435-1 or is cast, deposited or
placed upon the sidewalks or streets in violation of § 435-2, the snow or ice
shall be removed by the Department of Public Works upon notification by
the Police Division, and the cost of removal shall be certified to the Director
of Finance, who shall cause the cost to be charged against the real estate
abutting the sidewalk or street from which the snow or ice was removed.
The amount so charged shall become a lien upon the real estate abutting the
sidewalk or street, passageway, private roadway or parking area, and shall
be added to the taxes next assessed upon the land and shall be collected
and enforced in the same manner as other taxes. The remedy provided by
this section shall be in addition to any penalty imposed for a violation of this
article in § 435-4.
A. Generally. The owner or tenant of lands, whether residential,
commercial or industrial, abutting or bordering on any street, avenue
or highway of the Township, the sidewalks of which have been installed,
shall remove all snow and ice from the sidewalks adjoining the
properties within 12 daylight hours after the snow or ice shall fall or be
formed.
B. Multifamily housing. The owners of properties commonly known as
apartment projects, garden apartments, townhouses or retirementvillage-
type projects or any similar multifamily housing complex shall,
in addition to meeting the requirements of Subsection A of this section,
within 12 daylight hours after the snow or ice shall fall or be formed,
cause all snow and ice to be removed from the common sidewalks,
passageways, driveways and private streets of such projects or
properties to an ample degree so as to provide for the health and
welfare of the residents thereof and to provide for unobstructed ingress
and egress of their vehicles as well as fire, police, ambulance and other
emergency vehicles and, in addition, shall remove all snow and ice and
clear an area to provide ample off-street parking for the persons
residing therein.
§ 435-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-4
1:603
§ 435-4. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply with the
requirements of § 435-1A shall be fined $10 for such violation, and the
additional sum of $10 for each day such violation continues.
B. Any person who shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply with the
requirements of § 435-1B shall be fined $50 for the first such offense to
be recorded, and thereafter shall be fined $100 for each subsequent
offense.
§ 435-4 HAMILTON CODE § 435-4
1:604
ARTICLE II
Street Excavations
[Adopted as Ch. 130, Art. III, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 435-5. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
IMPROVED ROAD CLASS A — Any road surfaced with a pavement such
as asphalt, concrete, brick or similar pavement, and any road having a
concrete base.
IMPROVED ROAD CLASS B — Any road surfaced with stone or slag
uniformly deposited in layers, with a total thickness of not less than four
inches, where the stone or slag has been compacted by the use of a power
roller or other device and bound together by the application of oil.
IMPROVED ROAD CLASS C — Any old macadam or other road surfaced
with a light coat of stone and oil, any water-bound macadam road without
oil treatment, and any gravel road with oil treatment or with surface coating
mixed in place.
STREET — Any road, highway, public way, public alley, easement or other
right-of-way accepted or maintained by the Township as a public street, as
well as any state or county road or highway over which the Township has
acquired jurisdiction by agreement.
§ 435-6. Permit required; duration of permit.
A. No person shall make an excavation in or tunnel under any street
without first obtaining a permit from the Director of Community
Planning and Compliance and the Department of Public Works.
[Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
B. A tunnel or excavation may be commenced without a permit where an
emergency has arisen which makes it necessary to start work
immediately, provided that the application for a permit is made
simultaneously with the commencement of the work or as soon
thereafter as is practical. The permit, when issued, shall be retroactive
to the date on which the work was begun.
C. Such permit shall remain in effect for 90 days. Upon application to the
Director of Community Planning and Compliance and the Department
of Public Works, the permit may be extended an additional 60 days for
good cause shown. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
§ 435-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-7
1:605
§ 435-7. Application for permit. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-029]
Application for a permit under this article shall be made to the Director of
Community Planning and Compliance and the Department of Public Works,
and shall contain or be accompanied by the following information:
§ 435-8. Permit fees; fee exemptions. [Amended 2-8-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-006; 4-22-2010 by Ord. No. 10-014]
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name of the street where the opening is to be made and the street
number, if any, of the abutting property.
C. The Township Tax Map block and lot numbers of the property for the
benefit of which the opening is to be made.
D. The nature of the surface in which the opening is to be made.
E. The character and purpose of the work proposed.
F. The time when the work is to be commenced and completed.
G. A set of plans in quadruplicate showing the exact location and
dimensions of all openings.
H. The name and address of the workman or contractor who is to perform
the work.
I. A statement that the applicant agrees to replace, at his own cost and
expense, the street, curb, gutter and sidewalk in the same state and
condition in all things as they were at the time of the commencement of
the work within 48 hours of the commencement of such work.
A. Each applicant for a permit under this article shall, before the issuance
of the permit, pay to the Director of Community Planning and
Compliance and the Department of Public Works the fees as set forth in
Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code. [Amended 7-18-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-029]
B. A municipal or utility corporation may, in lieu of the payment of the
permit fees prescribed in this section, file with the Director of
Community Planning and Compliance and the Department of Public
Works an approved bond to the Township in the penal sum of $1,000,
conditioned for the complete restoration to the satisfaction of the
Township Council of the foundation and surface of any road permitted
by the Director to be opened by it. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-029]
C. No fee shall be required for any permit to open any street to make an
underground conduit extension required by the Township Council
because of a proposed improvement to a street.
§ 435-7 HAMILTON CODE § 435-8
1:606
§ 435-9. Bond. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029; 11-20-2018
by Ord. No. 18-055]
§ 435-10. Protection of public safety; interference with traffic.
Each permittee under this article shall keep each respective opening
properly guarded and, at night, cause lights to be placed at the site. In doing
the work, the permittee shall interfere as little as possible with traffic along
the road and shall not close the road to traffic unless permission has been
granted by the Police Division.
§ 435-11. Liability of permittee.
A permittee under this article shall hold harmless the Township and its
officers and agents from any loss, injury, claim, demand or damage resulting
D. No fee shall be required when there is an excavation by the Water
Department of the City of Trenton for emergency purposes to repair
house service.
A. No permit shall be issued under this article until the applicant has filed
a bond in an amount determined to be sufficient by the Township
Engineer. The Township Engineer may waive the requirements of this
section in the case of a public utility upon the presentation of
satisfactory proof that the utility is capable of meeting any claims
against it up to the amount of the bond which would otherwise be
required. The bond shall be executed by the applicant as principal and
by a surety company licensed to do business in the state as surety, and
shall be conditioned as follows:
(1) To indemnify and hold harmless the Township from all loss,
damage, claim or expense, including expenses incurred in the
defense of any litigation arising out of injury to any person or
property resulting from any work done by the applicant under the
permit.
(2) To indemnify the Township for any expense incurred in enforcing
any of the provisions of this article.
(3) To indemnify any person who shall sustain personal injuries or
damage to his property as a result of any act or omission of the
applicant or his agents, employees or subcontractors in the course
of any work under the permit.
(4) Upon the applicant restoring the surface and foundation of the
street for which the permit is granted in a manner acceptable to the
Township Engineer.
B. One bond may be accepted to cover a number of excavations by the
same applicant. Bonds shall remain in force for a period to be
determined by the Township Engineer.
§ 435-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-11
1:607
from any negligence or fault of the permittee or the agents of the permittee
in connection with the performance of the work covered by the permit.
§ 435-12. Expiration of permit prior to completion of work.
[Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
In case the work has not been completed on or before the expiration date
of a permit granted under this article, and the permittee has not requested
an extension of time, the Director of Community Planning and Compliance
and the Department of Public Works may, if deemed advisable, take steps
to backfill the trench and replace a permanent pavement over the opening
for which the permit was issued. If any extension of time beyond the date is
required for the completion of the work, a new application must be filed if
the Director so requires.
§ 435-13. Excavations near water or sewer lines; damaging trees or
shrubs. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
Any work for which a permit is issued under this article shall be conducted
so as not to interfere with any water main or sewer or any connection
from a water main or sewer to any building, unless prior permission for
interference has been obtained from the Director of Community Planning
and Compliance and the Department of Public Works. All rock within five
feet of any water main, sewer or other pipe which may become damaged
shall be removed without blasting. No excavation which may damage trees
or shrubbery shall be made without the prior permission of the Director of
Community Planning and Compliance and the Department of Public Works.
§ 435-14. Backfilling. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
Each permittee under this article shall completely backfill each excavation
and replace as great a portion as possible of the matter excavated; compact
the material by flushing, tamping or other suitable means; and supply
additional material when a deficiency exists. If the Director of Community
Planning and Compliance and the Department of Public Works deems the
excavated material unsatisfactory for backfill, the permittee shall backfill
the trench with sand, soft coal, cinders or other proper material, which is
to be placed in layers not exceeding three inches in thickness, moistened as
directed and each layer energetically tamped until thoroughly compacted.
§ 435-15. Restoration of pavement.
In connection with the restoration of the original pavement in an excavation
made by municipal or utility corporations in improved class A and class B
roads, the following rules shall govern:
A. The foundation shall be restored to a width of 12 inches wider than the
width of the trench and six inches longer than the length of the trench.
B. The surface pavement shall extend 12 inches wider than the width of
the foundation and six inches longer than the length of the foundation.
§ 435-11 HAMILTON CODE § 435-15
1:608
§ 435-15.1. Excavations prohibited following street improvements.
[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-055]
C. In all cases the foundation shall be nine inches thick, composed of
cement concrete of a mixture, by volume, of one part cement, three
parts sand and five parts stone. Cement concrete foundations shall be
slab shape and not less than nine inches in depth.
D. Municipal or utility corporations operating under agreement and bond
with the Township must install the restored foundation as well as the
restored surface of all openings in improved class A and class B roads.
It may be omitted from openings made prior to reconstruction and over
openings made in unimproved roads.
A. Whenever the Township undertakes any action to provide for the paving
or repaving of any street, the Township Engineer shall, within 14 days
from the date of adoption of the capital budget by the Township
Council, mail a written notice thereof to each person or entity owning
sewers, mains, conduits or other utilities in or under said street or any
real property, whether improved or unimproved, abutting said street.
Such notice shall notify such persons that street opening permits or
openings, cuts or excavations and permits for work to be done prior to
such paving or repaving, shall be submitted promptly in order that the
work covered by the street opening permit may be completed no later
than six months from the date of adoption of the capital budget by the
Township Council, unless the Township Engineer, in his or her sole
discretion, allows additional time if warranted. The Township Engineer
shall also promptly mail copies of such notice to the occupants of all
houses, buildings and other structures abutting said street for their
information.
B. Within said six months, or additional time if granted by the Township
Engineer, every public utility company receiving notice as prescribed
herein shall perform such excavation work, subject to the provisions of
this article, as may be necessary to install or repair sewers, mains,
conduits or other utility installations. In the event that any owner of real
property abutting said street shall fail within six months, or additional
time if granted by the Township Engineer, to perform such excavation
work as may be required to install or repair utility service lines or
service connections to the property lines, any and all rights of such
owner or his or her successors in interest to make openings, cuts, or
excavations in said streets, shall be forfeited for a period of five years
after the completion of said paving or repaving. During said five-year
period, no street opening permit shall be issued to open, cut or excavate
in said street unless, in the judgment of the Township Engineer, in
consultation with the Director of Public Works, an emergency, as
described in Subsection D of this section, exists which makes it
absolutely essential that the street opening permit be issued.
C. Every Township department or official charged with responsibility for
any work which may necessitate any opening, cut or excavation in said
§ 435-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-15.1
1:609
street is directed to take appropriate measures to perform such
excavation work within said six-month period, or additional time if
granted by the Township Engineer, so as to avoid the necessity for
making any openings, cuts, or excavations in the new pavement in said
Township street during said five-year period.
D. Newly paved streets. No permit shall be issued for any street opening
which would disturb the pavement of any road having been
constructed, reconstructed or overlaid until a period of five years after
the completion of said construction, reconstruction or overlay, except in
the event of an emergency or hardship as described below. The fiveyear
period as articulated herein shall be calculated from the date
construction, reconstruction, or overlaying of said road was completed
and run five years thereafter.
(1) Emergency opening.
(a) In the event that an entity shall be required to open a street
and/or roadway as a result of an emergency, the entity shall
apply for an emergency street opening permit and the permit
request shall be received by the Township Engineer. The
Township Engineer, in consultation with the Director of Public
Works, shall determine whether an emergency does truly exist.
If an emergency exists, the street opening permit shall be
issued, provided that the permit applicant restores the street/
roadway as provided hereinbelow under Subsection D(4),
Roadway restoration.
(b) In the event the Township Engineer, in consultation with the
Director of Public Works, determines that no emergency exists,
then in such event no emergency opening permit shall be
issued. If the entity opened a street or roadway absent having a
street opening permit, the entity applicant is required to
restore the street as described herein under Subsection D(4),
Roadway restoration: and must pay the Township $1,000 as
liquidated damages for each street opening. The entity
applicant is deemed to have accepted this liquidated damages
obligation upon applying for the emergency street opening
permit.
(2) Hardship condition. In the event in which a property owner has a
hardship condition which requires a street opening permit to be
issued contrary to the above, the Township Engineer may grant
relief if all of the following conditions are met:
(a) A letter addressed to the Township Engineer is received
detailing the hardship and necessity of opening the street in
lieu of waiting the prescribed period of time. The letter must
contain the following:
1. Identification of the property by street address and block
and lot.
§ 435-15.1 HAMILTON CODE § 435-15.1
1:610
§ 435-16. Backfill in tunnels.
In cases where it is necessary to resort to tunneling operations to reach the
point of connection with any main line, the backfill in the tunnel shall be of
rammed cement concrete composed of a mixture of one part of cement to
six parts of coarse aggregate material not inferior to cinders.
§ 435-17. Imposition of special conditions.
The Township Council may impose special conditions on work regulated by
this article in any special case.
2. Statement of reason for the hardship.
3. Type and size of the utility opening.
(b) The Township Engineer, in consultation with the Director of
Public Works, shall determine whether a hardship does truly
exist. If a hardship exists, the street opening permit shall be
issued, provided that the permit applicant restores the street/
roadway as provided hereinbelow under Subsection D(4),
Roadway restoration.
(c) A request which includes the extension of a utility main shall
not be considered and will be automatically denied.
(d) A request based solely on economic savings shall not be
considered and will be automatically denied.
(3) Appeal. In the event the applicant's request for an emergency
street opening permit or hardship condition street opening permit
is denied in whole or part by the Township Engineer, in consultation
with the Director of Public Works, the applicant may seek a review
of the decision by the Township Council by sending a written
request to the Township Council within 10 days of the decision,
providing to the Township Council the reasons, materials,
affidavits, etc., the applicant relies upon to seek an emergency
street opening permit. The Township Council shall review the
request and render its decision, based upon the written materials
submitted by the applicant and the Township Engineer, at the next
following regularly scheduled meeting of the Township Council,
provided the request is received by the Township Council at least
10 days prior to the meeting.
(4) Roadway restoration. In the event that an emergency or hardship
requires the opening of a roadway that has been resurfaced by the
Township during the previous five years, the restoration of such
roadway shall be made in accordance with the specifications set
forth in § 435-15, and such specifications shall be applicable to any
person or entity making such restoration.
§ 435-15.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-18
1:611
§ 435-18. Determination of permit fee in cases of unusual work.
[Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
Under extraordinary conditions not covered by this article, the Director of
Community Planning and Compliance and the Department of Public Works
shall receive a copy of the plan of the permittee for the work regulated by
this article and, after an evaluation, set a fee in accordance with the fee
schedule set forth in § 435-8.
§ 435-19. Authority to prescribe additional regulations. [Amended
7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
The Director of Community Planning and Compliance and the Department
of Public Works may make any rules and regulations which it considers
necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article, but no
regulation shall be inconsistent with, alter or amend any provision of this
article or impose any requirement which is in addition to those expressly
or by implication imposed by this article. No regulations shall be effective
unless they shall be approved by resolution of the Council. Copies of all
current regulations shall be furnished each permittee at the time of the
issuance of the permit.
§ 435-18 HAMILTON CODE § 435-19
1:612
ARTICLE III
Curb and Sidewalk Construction and Repair
[Adopted as Ch. 130, Art. IV, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 435-20. License and permit required; fees. [Amended 10-22-2008
by Ord. No. 08-061; 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
§ 435-21. Application for permit.
Application for a permit under this article shall be made to the Director of
Community Planning and Compliance by the owner of the premises or his
agent upon forms provided by the Township and shall contain the following
information:
A. License. Contractors doing commercial work must obtain a license with
the Township of Hamilton from the Director of Community Planning and
Compliance. The fee for this license is set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of
the Township Code. Contractors doing work on a residential property
must be licensed with the New Jersey Division of Consumer Affairs.
Property owners may do their own work, however, they must obtain a
permit and comply with all of the requirements regarding curb and
sidewalk construction.
B. Permit. A curb and sidewalk permit must be obtained before any new
work or repair work is done. This may be obtained from the Director of
Community Planning and Compliance upon payment of the fee set forth
in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code, for new or replacement
work.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the person who is to perform the proposed
work, and the name and address of the owner of the property on which
the work is to be performed, if other than the applicant.
C. The location, by street number or otherwise, of the premises where the
work is to be done.
D. The estimated cost of the proposed work.
E. A line and grade plan showing the proposed work, including its exact
location with respect to a street intersection or some other fixed and
prominent object, as well as its width and relationship to the grade of
the street and the adjacent property and, in the case of a driveway
apron, its slope or pitch.
F. Any other information that the Director deems necessary in order to
determine whether the work will comply with this article.
§ 435-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-22
1:613
§ 435-22. Specifications.
All curbs and sidewalks and repairs to them shall be installed in accordance
with the Township specifications for curbing and sidewalks, which are
hereby adopted. A copy of the specifications is on file in the office of the
Municipal Clerk, and the specifications are incorporated in this article as
though set out at length.
§ 435-23. Setting and removal of stakes.
§ 435-24. Notification of Township prior to pouring concrete.
The Director of Community Planning and Compliance must be notified 24
hours prior to the pouring of new concrete for either curbs or sidewalks.
If this notice is not received, the Township reserves the right to reject the
curbs or sidewalks or revoke the license of any contractor violating this
provision.
§ 435-25. Quality of workmanship.
Poor workmanship by a permittee under this article will result in rejection
of the work and revocation of the contractor's license.
§ 435-26. Protection of new concrete.
All concrete used in curb and sidewalk work shall be protected from
damage by traffic, rain, vandalism, etc. If the concrete is damaged, it will
be the responsibility of the permittee to remove the damaged concrete and
replace it with new concrete.
§ 435-27. Temperature for pouring concrete.
No concrete used in curb or sidewalk work is to be poured when the
temperature is expected to drop below freezing. If any possibility exists of
the temperature dropping below freezing, the concrete shall be protected
by an adequate covering of hay or other means approved by the Director
of Community Planning and Compliance or his representative. Any concrete
left exposed to freezing temperature without approved protection must be
removed and replaced.
A. After curb permits have been issued by the Director of Community
Planning and Compliance, the Township will, upon request, set the
necessary stakes for curbline and grade in a reasonable length of time,
depending upon the workload. Curbs will be staked out only once. If the
stakes are destroyed, an additional charge will be made for restaking.
B. It shall be the curb contractor's or owner's responsibility to see that all
grade stakes are removed upon completion of the job.
§ 435-22 HAMILTON CODE § 435-28
1:614
§ 435-28. Use of curbing machines.
Concrete curbing machines, if approved by the Director, may be used in
work on curbs and sidewalks.
§ 435-29. Driveway width and location.
Driveway widths and location will be in accordance with the Township's
typical construction details for streets.
§ 435-30. Barriers and warning lights.
During construction on curbs or sidewalks, barricades and warning lights
must be placed to protect the public.
§ 435-31. Minimum size of construction.
Construction of less than 75 linear feet of new sidewalk or curb shall not be
permitted unless the construction covers the entire frontage of a building
lot or will complete the installation of curbs or sidewalks for a building lot.
§ 435-32. Modification of standards due to unusual field conditions.
The Director of Community Planning and Compliance is authorized to order
any changes in the requirements set out in this article or in the
specifications because of unusual field conditions. The decision of the
Director shall be final, and any changes ordered by him in the field must be
complied with.
§ 435-33. Revocation of license.
Violation of any provision of this article or failure to abide by the
specifications shall be just cause for revocation of a license by the Director
of Community Planning and Compliance. The license shall not be renewable
within one year of the date of revocation thereof.
§ 435-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-33
1:615

ARTICLE IV
Maintenance of Sidewalk, Driveway Apron and Curb Areas
[Adopted as Ch. 130, Art. V, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 435-34. Responsibility of property owner.
Where the lands of a property owner abut a right-of-way, it shall be the
responsibility of such property owner to keep the area between the property
line and the street line, including the sidewalk, driveway apron and curb,
as the case may be, in good repair. The street line for the purposes of this
article is designated as the edge of the paved surface of the street.
§ 435-35. Order to repair.
If it comes to the attention of the Director of Public Works that the area
described in § 435-34 is kept in such a state of disrepair as to endanger the
health and general welfare of the citizens of the Township, he may order the
property owner to repair the area within 10 days.
§ 435-36. Repair by Township; recovery of costs. [Amended
2-5-2013 by Ord. No. 13-003]
If the owner of the lands in question shall refuse or neglect to abate or
remedy the condition within 30 days following receipt of notice pursuant
to § 435-35, the Director of Public Works shall cause the condition to be
remedied and shall certify the cost to the Director of Finance, who shall
cause the costs as shown to be charged against the lands. The amount so
charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be added
to and become and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon such lands, and such amount shall bear interest at the same rate as
taxes and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as taxes.
§ 435-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-36
1:617

ARTICLE V
Structures in Right-of-Way
[Adopted as Ch. 130, Art. VI, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 435-37. Approval for placement required; exceptions.
No coin-operated vending machines, signs of any nature or lighting or
utility poles may be placed within the public right-of-way without the prior
approval of the Director of Public Works, the Division of Police and the
Department of Community Planning and Compliance. Vending machines
used solely for the distribution of printed matter containing a variety of
articles by different authors, which has general availability at stated
intervals and can be purchased through subscription and is recognized as a
periodical by the United States Post Office, are exempted.
§ 435-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-37
1:619

ARTICLE VI
Parades
[Adopted as Ch. 130, Art. VII, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 435-38. Permit required; police escort.
§ 435-39. Processions or parades on Sunday.
§ 435-40. Wearing masks.
It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any procession or parade
to cover his face, wholly or in part, for concealment or disguise; provided,
however, that persons may mask or disguise to hide their identities in
Halloween celebrations or in other general public celebrations.
§ 435-41. Interference prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, molest or interfere in any
manner with any procession or parade lawfully in progress.
A. All processions and parades are prohibited in, over, upon or through
any street of the Township unless written notice of the object, time and
route of such procession or parade is given to the Chief of Police by the
person in charge of such procession or parade not less than two weeks
previous to the proposed date of such procession or parade, and a
permit is obtained. The Chief of Police may designate in the permit the
time and place of formation and dismissal and the route of such
procession or parade, and when so designated, the person in charge
shall be responsible to see that the designation is obeyed.
B. The Chief of Police may furnish such escort as may be necessary to
protect persons and property and maintain peace and order.
A. Processions or parades on Sunday are prohibited, except processions or
parades of persons participating in some special public ceremony or
proceeding to or returning from some place of burial or to or from some
place of worship in connection with a religious service then being
celebrated, and in such cases there shall be no music played except
with the consent of the Chief of Police.
B. It shall be lawful for any body of the United States Army or Navy, the
New Jersey National Guard, the Police or Fire Department, the Grand
Army of the Republic or other veteran organizations to parade in any
public street on Sunday and to play music while in such parade or while
proceeding to or returning from any place of burial.
C. In no case on Sunday shall music be played within 300 feet of any
church or place of religious worship.
§ 435-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-42
1:621
§ 435-42. Denial of permit; appeal.
Whenever in the opinion of the Chief of Police the granting of a permit for
any procession or parade will result in public disorder or riot or unduly
interfere with traffic or the public convenience, he shall refuse to issue
a permit therefor. Whenever the Chief of Police has refused to issue a
permit for a procession or parade, the applicant may appeal from such
determination in accordance to Chapter 285, Licenses and Permits, of the
Code of the Township of Hamilton.
§ 435-42 HAMILTON CODE § 435-42
1:622
Chapter 442
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 167.
Fees — See Ch. 215, § 215-6.
Land development — See Ch. 550.
§ 442-1. State swimming pool code adopted. [Amended 12-1-2010
by Ord. No. 10-042]
A code regulating and controlling the location and construction, alteration
and operation of swimming pools, and the issuance of licenses to locate
and construct, alter or operate swimming pools, and declaring and defining
certain swimming pools as nuisances, and fixing penalties for violation, is
hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:26.
§ 442-2. Title. [Amended 12-1-2010 by Ord. No. 10-042]
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the current edition of the New Jersey State Sanitary
Code, Chapter IX, Public Recreational Bathing.
§ 442-3. Availability of copies. [Amended 12-1-2010 by Ord. No.
10-042]
Three copies of the current edition of the Swimming Pool Code of New
Jersey have been placed on file in the office of the Division of Health and
the office of the Clerk of the Township and will remain on file for use and
examination by the public.
§ 442-4. Permit to construct or alter. [Amended 12-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-042; 4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 13-014; 5-3-2016 by Ord. No.
16-014]
No person shall locate, construct or alter a public recreational bathing
facility until a construction permit is issued as required under the Uniform
Construction code (N.J.A.C. 5:23).
§ 442-5. Division of Health plan review. [Added 5-3-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-014142]
No person shall construct or alter a public recreational bathing facility
until the Division of Health has reviewed and approved plans as required
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 435-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 442-5
1:623
under the Public Recreational Bathing Code (N.J.A.C. 8:26). The fees for
plan review are set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.
§ 442-6. License to operate. [Added 5-3-2016 by Ord. No. 16-014143]
No person shall operate a public recreational bathing facility until a license
has been issued by the Division of Health. The fees for operating the
following types of public recreational bathing facilities are set forth in
Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code:
§ 442-7. Expiration and renewal of operator's license.
Licenses issued for the operation of a swimming pool shall expire annually
on May 15 of each year, and application for renewal shall be submitted,
together with the required fee, prior to May 1 of each year.
§ 442-8. Denial or suspension of license.
Chapter 449
TAXATION
A. Yearly pools.
B. Yearly spas.
C. Seasonal pools.
D. Seasonal wading pools.
A. Licenses required by this chapter or the code adopted by this chapter
may be denied or suspended by the Division of Health for failure to
comply with this chapter or the code.
B. The Division of Health shall afford the person whose license to locate
and construct, alter or operate has been denied or suspended an
opportunity to be heard in public hearing and, following this, to be
informed of the Division's decision as provided by the code.
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 442-5 HAMILTON CODE § 442-8
1:624
ARTICLE I
Hotel Tax144
[Adopted 7-5-2007 by Ord. No. 07-019 (Ch. 65 of the 1994 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 449-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to implement the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:48F-1 et seq., which authorizes a municipality to impose a tax for every
occupancy of a room in a hotel located within the municipality.
§ 449-2. Imposition of hotel room occupancy tax.
§ 449-3. Payment of tax by guest; restrictions on vendors.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48F-1 et seq.:
§ 449-4. Violations and penalties.
A. There shall be a hotel room occupancy tax in the Township, which shall
be fixed at a uniform rate of 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy
of a hotel in the Township occurring in a hotel subject to taxation
pursuant to the Sales and Use Tax Act, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-1 et seq.
B. The hotel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any other tax or fee
imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by any
governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
A. All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser or guest
renting a hotel room.
B. A hotel establishment (hereinafter "vendor") shall not assume or absorb
any tax imposed by this article.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
occupancy tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the
occupancy tax will not be separately charged and taxed to the customer,
or that the occupancy tax will be refunded to the purchaser or guest.
A. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the occupancy tax as
described in § 449-3 shall be deemed a separate offense, and each
representation or advertisement of such an assumption or absorption
by a vendor shall be deemed a separate offense for each day that
representation or advertisement continues. [Amended 3-20-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-012]
144. Editor’s Note: Former Article I, Tax Exemption and Abatement Program for Residential
Improvements, adopted 1-15-2002 by Ord. No. 02-003 (Ch. 110, Art. I of the 1994 Code of
Ordinances), was repealed 3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-012. This ordinance also
redesignated former Article II as Article I and former §§ 449-11 through 449-15 as §§
449-1 through 449-5, respectively.
§ 449-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 449-4
1:625
§ 449-5. When effective.
The tax provisions of this article shall take effect on the first day of the first
full month occurring 90 days after the date of transmittal of this article to
the New Jersey State Treasurer.
B. Any violation of this article shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code
of the Township of Hamilton, as same may be amended.
§ 449-4 HAMILTON CODE § 449-5
1:626
Chapter 454
TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 215, § 215-1.
§ 449-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 449-5
1:627

ARTICLE I
Taxicabs
§ 454-1. Authority and scope.
§ 454-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CRUISING — The driving of an empty taxicab along a public street at a slow
rate of speed for the obvious purpose of soliciting passengers.
MUNICIPAL CLERK — The Municipal Clerk of the Township of Hamilton.
OPERATION OF A TAXICAB — The transporting of one or more persons
in a taxicab for hire. Accepting a passenger to be transported for hire
from a point of departure within the municipality to a destination within or
outside the municipality shall be considered operation of a taxicab within
the municipality. The operation of a taxicab by one other than the owner
shall be deemed operation by the owner as well as by the person actually
driving the taxi. The transportation of any person other than the owner
or operator in any motor vehicle bearing a sign using the word "taxi,"
"taxicab," "cab" or "hack" shall be prima facie evidence of operation.
OWNER — Any person in whose name title to any taxicab is registered
with the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission or who appears in the
Commission's records to be a conditional vendee or lessee or has any other
proprietary interest in a taxicab or limousine.
A. Authority. The authority to license and regulate taxicabs is set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:52-1 and N.J.S.A. 48:18-1 et seq.
B. Scope. This article shall apply to all businesses commonly known as
taxicabs which are located in the participating municipal areas.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to regulate limousines, livery
services, hotel buses, buses employed solely in transporting
schoolchildren or teachers, autobuses which are subject to the
jurisdiction of the New Jersey Department of Transportation, or
interstate autobuses required by federal or state law to carry insurance
against loss from liability imposed by law on account of bodily injury or
death.
C. In addition to licenses issued in accordance with this article, the
Township of Hamilton will recognize the validity of duly authorized
taxicab licenses issued by the participating municipalities for purposes
of the pickup and discharge of passengers within the Township of
Hamilton, upon the adoption of reciprocal ordinances in those
participating municipalities, as provided hereunder.
§ 454-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-2
1:629
PERSON — Any individual, copartnership, association, corporation or jointstock
company, their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court
whatsoever.
PUBLIC TAXICAB STANDS — A section of a public street or of a public
place set apart for the exclusive use of a taxicab or a limited number of
taxicabs, when such section is distinctly marked as such by an appropriate
sign attached to a stanchion on the curb or other conspicuous place or by
clearly visible marks upon the surface of a street or public place.
STREET — Any street, avenue, park, highway or other public place.
TAXICAB or TAXI — Any automobile, sport utility vehicle, crossover vehicle,
minivan, or motor car, engaged in the business of carrying passengers for
hire which is held out announced or advertised to operate or run or which is
operated or run over any of the streets or public highways of this state, and
particularly accepts and discharges such persons as may offer themselves
for transportation from points or places within or without the state. The
capacity of any taxicab or taxi under this definition shall not exceed seven
passengers.
TAXIMETER — A mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for
hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated, either for the distance traveled
or for waiting time, or for both, and upon which such charge shall be plainly
indicated by means of figures, and which shall be inspected and calibrated
by the New Jersey Office of the Attorney General, Division of Consumer
Affairs, Office of Weights and Measures as least annually.
§ 454-3. Licenses required.
§ 454-4. Owner's license requirements.
A. Taxicab operator's license. No person shall operate a taxicab in the
municipality unless that person holds a valid taxicab operator's license
issued by the Municipal Clerk. Any and all violators would be subject to
the penalties provided in § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code of the
Township of Hamilton.
B. Taxicab owner's license. No person owning or leasing a vehicle shall
use that vehicle or permit that vehicle to be used as a taxicab unless
there is a current taxicab owner's license in effect for such vehicle.
C. The owner of an taxicab shall display on the body of the vehicle the taxi
license number issued to the vehicle. The number shall be three inches
in height and located in the center rear quarter panels on the driver and
passenger sides and the rear center line of the trunk of the vehicle.
Each taxicab shall display on each rear door of the taxicab the name of
the municipality or municipalities which has issued the taxicab a taxi
license in letters three inches in height.
A. General provisions. No taxicab owner's license shall be granted unless
the applicant meets the requirements set forth in this section.
§ 454-2 HAMILTON CODE § 454-4
1:630
(1) Citizenship or visa. The applicant must be a citizen of the United
States or a legal resident alien. If the applicant is a partnership or
corporation then each partner or officer must be a citizen of the
United States or a legal resident alien.
(2) Authorization to do business. If the applicant is a corporation, the
corporation must either be incorporated in the State of New Jersey
or authorized to do business in this state.
(3) Convictions. The applicant shall not have been convicted of any
crime and/or disorderly persons offense involving moral turpitude,
including, but not limited to, conviction for possession and/or
distribution of pornography, conviction for possession and/or
distribution of controlled dangerous substances, all elements
included under the New Jersey statute prohibiting prostitution,
sexual offenses of physical violence against persons or property
within 10 years next preceding the date of application for license,
unless the police, for good cause shown, shall waive any
disqualification based on such conviction. If the applicant is a
partnership, then no partner may have such record. If the applicant
is a corporation, then neither the corporation nor any officer or
director may have such record.
(4) Prior license revocations. The applicant must have no record of
prior revocation by any jurisdiction of a license related to the
taxicab business. If the applicant is a partnership, then no partner
may have such record. If the applicant is a corporation, then
neither the corporation nor any officer or director may have such
record.
(5) Insurance. The applicant must have complied with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 48:16-21 et seq., and the acts amendatory thereof or
supplemental thereto, relating to insurance.
(a) The owner of the taxicab shall have filed with the Clerk of the
municipality in which such operation is permitted, an
insurance policy which shall be issued by an admitted
insurance company duly licensed to transact business under
the insurance laws of this State or a company registered to do
business in the state, the policy providing for not less than
$35,000 of motor vehicle liability insurance coverage or the
amount of motor vehicle liability coverage required pursuant
to § 1 of P.L. 1972. c. 197 (N.J.S.A. 39:6B-1), whichever is
greater, to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of bodily
injury to or the death of any person or persons resulting from
or on account of an accident by reason of the ownership,
operation, maintenance or use of such taxicab upon any public
street; and to satisfy any claim for damages to property of any
person resulting from or on account of an accident by reason of
the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of such taxicab
upon any public street.
§ 454-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-4
1:631
§ 454-5. Applications for owner's license.
(b) Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the owner of a
taxicab from obtaining any additional amount of motor vehicle
liability insurance coverage from a company licensed outside
the State of New Jersey.
(c) The consent shall be effective and operation thereunder shall
be permitted only so long as the insurance policy shall remain
in force to the full and collectible amounts as aforesaid.
(d) The insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final
judgment recovered by any person on account of the
ownership, maintenance or use of the taxicab or any fault in
respect thereto, and shall be for the benefit of every person
suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
(e) If a licensed owner operates more than one taxicab, he may file
with the Municipal Clerk, in lieu of the policy required by
Subsection A(5)(a) above, a bond or insurance policy of a
company duly licensed to transact business under the
insurance laws of this state in the sum of $50,000, which shall
be a blanket insurance coverage covering all cabs operated by
such owner, which shall provide for the payment of any final
judgment recovered by any person on account of the
ownership, maintenance and use of any such taxicab or any
fault in respect thereto, and shall be for the benefit of every
person suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
B. An owner's license granted under this article and pursuant to N.J.S.A.
48:16-2 may be revoked by the Hamilton Township Council, after notice
and hearing, whenever it shall appear that the person to whom the
consent was granted has failed to furnish or keep in force the insurance
policy or bond and power of attorney required by this article or to
comply with any terms or conditions imposed by the board or body
granting the consent or any law of this state.
A. Forms. Applications for an owner's license under this article shall be
made by the owner or lessee thereof upon blank forms to be furnished
by the Municipal Clerk. The application shall require the applicant to
provide all of the information necessary to determine whether the
applicant is entitled to an owner's license. Each individual applicant,
copartner or officer of a corporation shall have his fingerprints taken
and filed with the police of the municipality.
B. Insurance. The applicant for a taxicab license shall file an insurance
policy conforming with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 or a bond
referred to in N.J.S.A. 48:16-4 and file concurrently a power of attorney,
wherein and whereby the owner shall appoint the Chief Fiscal Officer of
the municipality his true and lawful attorney for the purpose of
acknowledging service of any process out of a court of competent
§ 454-4 HAMILTON CODE § 454-5
1:632
§ 454-6. Requirements, qualifications for operator's license.
jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the indemnity
granted under the insurance policy or bond filed.
(1) The Municipal Clerk, upon the filing of the required insurance
policy or bond, shall issue a certificate in duplicate showing that
the owner of the taxicab has complied with the terms and
provisions of this article. The certificate shall recite the name of the
insurance company, the number and date of expiration of the policy
or bond, a description of the taxicab insured thereunder, and the
registration number of the same. The duplicate certificate shall be
filed with the Motor Vehicle Commission before any such car is
licensed as an taxicab. The original certificate shall be posted in a
conspicuous place within the taxicab.
C. False statement. Any person who shall make a false statement in any
license application or in any record or certificate that he/she is required
to file or maintain shall be subject to rejection of the application
submitted and/or to appropriate disciplinary sanctions, including
license suspension or revocation, in addition to any penalty provided
under the New Jersey Criminal Code.
D. Fees. All fees must be paid with the application. If the application is
withdrawn or denied, then the fees shall be refunded, with the
exception of the amount provided for in § 454-11, License fees.
A. Required. No person shall drive a taxicab for the purpose of accepting
therein or discharging therefrom any person without first having
obtained a license to do so.
B. Qualifications of applicants. Generally, each applicant for a license to
drive a taxicab must:
(1) Have a valid New Jersey driver's license with no suspensions or
revocations of license in any jurisdiction for the preceding two
years, except for suspensions and revocations purely
administrative in nature.
(2) State the name of the licensee of the taxicab by whom or which he/
she will be employed.
(3) Be at least 21 years of age and a citizen of the United States or a
legal resident alien.
(4) Be able to speak, read and write the English language.
(5) At the time of making the initial application, have his/her
fingerprints taken and filed with the police of the municipality.
(6) The applicant must file with the Municipal Clerk a certificate from a
licensed physician, setting forth that he/she has been examined by
a physician within 30 days prior to the date of the application. The
§ 454-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-6
1:633
§ 454-7. Applications for taxicab operator's license.
applicant must have no disability or illness of any type which poses
a significant risk of substantial harm to the applicant or others if
he/she is granted a license to drive a taxicab.
(7) Each operator or driver of the taxicab for which the owner thereof
is seeking the consent to operate in a municipality has submitted to
the performance of a criminal history record background check and
will submit to the performance of a criminal history record
background check every two years thereafter. The cost for the
criminal history record background checks, including all costs of
administering and processing them, shall be borne by the operator
or driver of the taxicab.
C. A person shall be disqualified from operating or driving an taxicab if a
criminal history record background check required pursuant to this
section reveals a record of conviction of any of the following crimes:
(1) In New Jersey or elsewhere, any crime as follows: aggravated
assault, arson, burglary, escape, extortion, homicide, kidnapping,
robbery, aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault or endangering
the welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4, whether or not
armed with or having in his possession any weapon enumerated in
subsection r. of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, a crime pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, N.J.S.A. 2C:39-4, or N.J.S.A. 2C:39-9, or other
than a disorderly persons or petty disorderly persons offense for
the unlawful use, possession or sale of a controlled dangerous
substance as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
(2) In any other state, territory, commonwealth or other jurisdiction of
the United States, or any country in the world, as a result of a
conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, a crime which in
that other jurisdiction or country is comparable to one of the crimes
enumerated in Subsection C(1) of this section.
D. If a person who has been convicted of one of the crimes enumerated in
Subsection C(1) and (2) can produce a certificate of rehabilitation
issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-8 or, if the criminal offense
occurred outside New Jersey, an equivalent certificate from the
jurisdiction where the criminal offense occurred, the criminal offense
shall not disqualify the applicant from operating or driving an taxicab.
E. The provisions of Subsection C shall not apply to an operator or driver
of a taxicab who has received the consent to operate in a municipality
prior to the effective date of P.L. 2011, c. 135 (N.J.S.A. 48:16-2.1 et al.).
A. Forms. Applications for taxicab operator's licenses under this article
shall be made by the applicant upon forms furnished by the Municipal
Clerk. The form shall require the applicant to provide all of the
§ 454-6 HAMILTON CODE § 454-7
1:634
§ 454-8. Review of applications; inspection of vehicle.
information necessary to determine whether the applicant is entitled to
an operator's license.
B. Proof of driver's license. The applicant must provide the Municipal
Clerk with proof that he/she holds a valid driver's license issued by the
New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission.
C. Convictions. At the time of the initial application and every two years
thereafter, the applicant shall provide the police with authorization to
review any records of criminal convictions for that individual or the
individual partners. Any costs associated with providing the police with
the authorizations to review any records of criminal convictions will be
borne by the applicant.
D. Affidavit. All applications shall be duly verified by the affidavit of the
applicant seeking the license.
E. False statement. Any person who shall make a false statement in any
license application or in any record or certificate that he/she is required
to file or maintain shall be subject to rejection of the application
submitted and/or to appropriate disciplinary sanctions, including the
license suspension or revocation, in addition to any penalty provided
under the New Jersey Criminal Court.
F. Fees. A nonrefundable fee (cash or money order) as provided in
§ 454-11, License fees, shall be submitted with all license applications,
which, if approved, will be applied to the licensing fee.
G. Photographs. Each applicant for an operator's license shall file with his/
her application three unmounted, unretouched passport-quality
photographs of himself/herself. The photographs shall have been taken
within 30 days preceding the filing of the application. One of the
photographs shall be attached to the operator's license. The remaining
photographs shall be filed with the application by the Municipal Clerk
and with the police. Each licensed operator shall exhibit his/her license
with the photograph attached for inspection. In case an application for
an operator's license is denied, two of the photographs shall be
returned to the applicant.
A. Review by Municipal Clerk. Each application shall be reviewed by the
Municipal Clerk for completeness. If the application is not complete,
the Municipal Clerk shall advise the applicant, and no further action
shall be taken until the application is complete. If the application is
complete, the Municipal Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief of
Police for further action.
B. Inspection of vehicle.
(1) Vehicles must be inspected at a state-operated inspection station
only.
§ 454-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-8
1:635
§ 454-9. Issuance of owner's license.
§ 454-10. Badges.
(2) No vehicle shall be licensed under this article until it has been
thoroughly and carefully inspected by the police and found to be in
a thoroughly safe, clean and fit condition for transportation of
passengers. If required, a taximeter shall be attached to the
vehicle. The taximeter shall be inspected and approved by the
police. Municipal inspection stickers will be affixed to the vehicle
by the police.
C. Examination and certification of applicant as to knowledge of laws. As
part of his/her review, each applicant may be examined as to the
applicant's knowledge of the provisions of this article, the Motor
Vehicle Act, the Traffic Act and other ordinances and regulations having
to do with traffic and the geography of the municipality, and if the result
of the examination is unsatisfactory, he/she shall be refused a license.
A. If upon inspection a taxicab is found to be in a safe condition for
transportation of passengers and conforms to the rules and regulations
established under this article, the police shall authorize the issuance of
the license and the Municipal Clerk shall issue a license to the
applicant. The license shall set forth the name of the owner of the
vehicle, the trade name, and the official license number thereof. The
license shall be signed by the Municipal Clerk and shall be
conspicuously displayed within the taxicab. If upon inspection the
taxicab is found to be in a safe condition for the transportation of
passengers and conforms to the rules and regulations established
under this article, and the applicant pays an annual inspection fee as
provided in § 454-11, License fees, to the authority so designated to
certify inspections, the police shall authorize the issuance of the
license, and the Municipal Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant.
B. The Municipal Clerk shall also furnish a small card, not exceeding six
inches and not less than four inches in length or width, indicating the
rates and fares. The card shall be conspicuously displayed within the
vehicle.
A. General. A badge shall be issued to each licensee under this article
bearing the license number of the operator and the word "operator"
thereon. The badge must be conspicuously displayed on the left breast
of the operator's outer garment when he is engaged in his employment.
If any badge becomes lost or destroyed, a new badge shall be furnished
by the Municipal Clerk upon payment of the sum as provided in
§ 454-11, License fees.
B. Sale or loan of badge prohibited. No person shall sell, loan or otherwise
dispose of any license issued under the provisions of this article or of
any badge delivered by the Municipal Clerk with any license.
§ 454-8 HAMILTON CODE § 454-11
1:636
§ 454-11. License fees.
A. General. The license fees are fixed for the purpose of regulation and
control and shall be paid annually, in the manner and amounts set forth
below, to the Township for conducting or engaging in the business
aforementioned. The term of each license issued shall expire on the last
day of May of the year following issue.
B. Taxicab owner's license. The annual renewal fee for a taxicab owner's
license shall be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code,
per vehicle per year, up to a maximum of 15 vehicles, after which the
fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, per vehicle to cover the
cost of the medallion. Any license issued for a particular vehicle may be
transferred to a different vehicle upon the payment of a transfer fee as
set forth in Chapter 215, Fees.145
C. Taxicab operator's license. For each original taxicab operator's license
or for each renewal thereof, the fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 215,
Fees. A fee as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, shall be paid to the
Municipal Clerk for a badge for each licensed operator.146
D. Replacement fee. If any license becomes lost or destroyed, a new
license shall be furnished by the Municipal Clerk upon payment of the
sum as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees.147
E. Additional fees. The fees for the following items shall be set forth in
Chapter 215, Fees:148
(1) Amount of application fee retained if application denied or
withdrawn.
(2) Taxicab operator's license application fee, nonrefundable portion.
(3) Taxicab owners' license annual inspection fee.
(4) Badge.
(5) Failure to renew an expired owner's license.
(6) Lost badge replacement.
F. Exemptions. Each person honorably discharged from the United States
armed services, upon furnishing satisfactory proof of service and
discharge and complying with the terms and conditions of this article,
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 454-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-11
1:637
§ 454-12. Renewal of owners' and operators' licenses.
§ 454-13. Regulations for taxicabs.
shall be exempt from payment of fee for an operator's license. However,
no fee shall be waived for the purchase of a badge.
A. General. Taxicab owners' licenses may be renewed from year to year by
the Municipal Clerk after vehicle inspection by the police or other
designee, as determined by the municipality. Taxicab operators'
licenses may be renewed from year to year by the Municipal Clerk.
B. Form. An application for renewal of a taxicab owner's or operator's
license shall be made upon a form to be furnished by the Municipal
Clerk.
C. Time for filing. The renewal application shall be filed no later than May
1 of the year of issue, which requirement may be waived or the period
extended for good cause by the Municipal Clerk.
D. Failure to file. Failure of an owner or operator to renew a license will
result in the termination of the license upon the expiration date. The
license may be extended, upon written request made to the Municipal
Clerk prior to the expiration date, if good cause is shown for the failure
to make timely renewal application.
E. Late fees. In the event any holder of an owner's license seeks to renew a
license that shall have expired, there shall be an additional fee as
provided in § 454-11, License fees.
F. Extension of license. In the event it is determined that an inspection of
the vehicle will not be completed for the timely renewal of an owner's
license, the Police Inspector or other designee of the municipality who
may perform inspections may authorize the extension of a license for a
fourteen-day period.
A. General. In addition to carrying out the provisions of this article, all
licensees hereunder shall abide by the following regulations applicable
to the license or licenses held.
B. Posting of license identification.
(1) There shall be posted in a conspicuous place, on the inside of each
taxicab, the name and address of the owner and the name, address
and photograph of the operator, together with the license number
of the vehicle and the number of the operator's license. Such
identification shall be provided by the owner in a manner to be
approved by the Municipal Clerk.
(2) In addition to all other working knowledge of geography, a street
map of Mercer County, which shall be purchased in the Clerk's
office, is required to be kept in all cabs at all times.
§ 454-11 HAMILTON CODE § 454-13
1:638
C. Change of address; loss of records. Any change of address of any owner
or operator licensed under the provisions of this article must be
reported, in writing, to the Municipal Clerk's office within 72 hours of
such change. The loss of the license badge or any other book or
document required to be kept by any licensed owner or operator must
be reported to the Municipal Clerk's office, in writing, within 72 hours
of such loss. The Municipal Clerk shall charge any licensee a fee as
provided in § 454-11, License fees, to replace any lost badge, book or
document.
D. Record of trips. Each and every licensed operator shall legibly record
on a trip form, kept solely for the purpose of recording, the departure
from the garage or stand, the name and address of the operator thereof,
his/her license number and the license number of the vehicle and the
time of the return to the garage or stand of each such vehicle, locations
of pickup, time of pickup, destination, time destination is reached, the
number of passengers conveyed and the fee charged. All owners and
operators shall keep open for inspection by any police officer his/her
record of trips. Records shall be maintained for a period of six months.
Failure of an operator or owner to produce a record of trips for the sixmonth
period preceding a police officer's demand shall constitute a
violation of this article. This form shall record the acceptance and
discharge of passengers.
E. Identification of taxicabs. Each taxicab shall have a dome displaying the
trade name of the company or the word "taxi" affixed to its roof and
shall have the trade name of the taxicab lettered on its exterior. Each
taxicab shall also conspicuously display the medallion certifying that an
annual inspection has been completed next to the painted numbers
assigned by the Municipal Clerk on the front panels and on the left rear
section of the trunk of the taxicab.
F. Imitation of insignia used by other taxicab. No licensee of any taxicab
shall use thereon or thereabout any imitation of any color scheme,
monogram or insignia previously adopted or used by any other licensee
of a taxicab licensed under the provisions of this article.
G. Giving false or misleading information to passengers; operators to use
most direct route. No operator of a taxicab shall induce any person to
employ him/her by knowingly misinforming or misleading such person
either as to the time or place of the arrival or departure of any train,
omnibus, boat, aircraft or other means of public transportation or as to
the location of any hotel, airfield, airdome, public place or private
residence or place, nor shall any operator deceive any person or make
any false representation to him/her in respect to the transportation or
prospective transportation of any passenger, or convey any passenger
to any other place or over any other route than that to which or over
which such passenger may have instructed the operator to go. Unless
otherwise ordered, operators shall convey passengers by the most
practical direct routes to their destinations.
§ 454-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-13
1:639
H. Taxicabs, additional passengers. No taxicab operator shall delay an
immediate departure or otherwise accommodate additional passengers
without the express permission of the first passenger to hire the
taxicab.
I. Riding in operator's compartment. No person other than the licensed
operator of the taxicab, excepting a fare occupying the auxiliary seat,
shall ride or sit in the compartment of a taxicab reserved for the
operator.
J. Lost or misplaced items; disposition of property left in taxicab. Every
operator of a taxicab shall, immediately after termination of
employment, carefully search the taxicab for any property lost or left
therein and shall, immediately after finding any property, deliver the
property to Police Headquarters.
K. Response of taxicab service. All taxicab licensees or their
representatives shall answer all calls received for taxi service inside the
municipality limits without unreasonable delay. If such service cannot
be rendered within a reasonable time, they shall notify the prospective
passenger as to how long it will be before the call can be answered and
give the reason.
L. Insurance identification card. The insurance identification card shall be
posted in a conspicuous place within the vehicle.
M. Cooperation with law enforcement officers. All licensees under this
article shall cooperate with law enforcement officers in the
performance of their duty. No licensee shall conceal evidence of a crime
or voluntarily aid violators to escape arrest. A licensee shall report
immediately to the police any attempt to use his/her vehicle to commit a
crime or escape from the scene of a crime.
N. Conduct of operators.
(1) Licensed operators, while engaged in the operation of a taxicab,
shall behave in a civil and orderly manner and shall not use any
indecent, profane or abusive language.
(2) Operators shall be clean and neat and shall wear the following
items of dress:
(a) A long- or short-sleeved shirt or blouse with a collar.
(b) A pair of zippered trousers or skirt.
(c) Other items of clothing, e.g., headgear, jackets, sweaters or
shoes, as well as jewelry, shall be appropriate and tasteful.
Operators shall not wear excessive cologne, perfume or
aftershave.
(3) Operators shall not be under the influence of or impaired by any
intoxicant.
§ 454-13 HAMILTON CODE § 454-13
1:640
O. Storage and parking of vehicles. No taxicab shall be stored or parked on
any street of the municipality, other than when the vehicle or operator
is on duty. All off-duty vehicles shall be stored and maintained in strict
accordance with the applicable land use codes of the Code of the
Township of Hamilton.
P. Operation of vehicles. No operator of a taxicab shall operate his/her
vehicle in a manner to endanger a passenger or any other person.
Q. Maintenance of vehicles. The owner and operator of a taxicab shall
maintain such vehicle in a safe and clean condition and shall maintain
such vehicle in a good appearance, including proper painting and the
prompt repair of dents.
R. Accidents; reporting and repair. Every owner of a licensed taxicab
which is involved in an automobile accident shall provide the police
with a copy of the accident report within five working days after the
accident. Any taxicab which has sustained damage to the vehicle, such
as dents, or is in need of painting shall be repaired within eight weeks
after the date of the accident. The police shall inform the taxicab owner
of any and all repairs that are necessary. Any taxicab owner who fails to
comply with the terms of this section shall be in violation of this article
and subject to suspension of his/her taxicab license.
S. Inspection of vehicles. The owner and operator of a taxicab shall permit
the police or any law enforcement officer to inspect such vehicle at any
and all times.
T. Obstruction of vision. No licensee under this article shall display any
advertising on his/her vehicle which obstructs the vision of the
operator, including the operator's vision to the rear.
U. Taxicab overcharges. No person shall charge or attempt to charge any
taxicab passenger a greater rate of fare than that to which the operator
is entitled under the provisions of this article.
V. Refusal of service. No taxicab operator licensed by the municipality, and
who is on duty, shall unreasonably refuse to carry any orderly person
applying for a taxicab who agrees and, upon reasonable request,
demonstrates ability to pay the proper rate of fare. A refusal to carry an
orderly passenger shall be presumptively unreasonable where the
refusal is based on the amount of money the operator expects to receive
or is based upon the race, sex, religion or ethnic background of the
passenger.
W. Age of vehicle. When a taxicab owner or operator first becomes licensed
in the municipality, his/her taxicab shall not be more than 84 months
(seven years). A vehicle owned by a currently licensed operator which is
in excess of 84 months as of the effective date of this article or a new
license with a vehicle in excess of 84 months of age may obtain a waiver
of the eighty-four-month requirement if it otherwise satisfies all
inspection criteria required of vehicles less than 84 months, and
§ 454-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-13
1:641
§ 454-14. Enforcement; registry and records.
§ 454-15. Designated taxicab stands.
The governing body of the municipality may designate taxicab stands within
its jurisdiction if and when it shall deem such action necessary for the
convenience of the public, but no designation shall become effective until
the designation has been approved and adopted by ordinance by the
governing body. When a taxicab stand has been designated, fixed or
established, the following regulations shall apply:
thereafter such vehicle in excess of 84 months can receive a waiver of
this requirement based upon the inspection of the vehicle by the Police
Inspector or other authorized inspection designee of the municipality,
who shall find that the vehicle is able to satisfy all safety, repair,
operational and passenger requirements provided hereunder and
otherwise satisfies all requirements provided for vehicles of less than
84 months.
X. Receipts. The operator of any taxicab shall, upon demand by any
passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged,
which shall contain the name of the owner of the taxicab, the name of
the operator, the date and time of the transaction and the amount of the
fare. All negotiated fares shall be recorded and a receipt issued to the
customer.
Y. Safety equipment. Every taxicab is required to have approved child
safety seats appropriate to the age of the child prior to transporting the
child and is required to have all children secured as defined in Title 39
of New Jersey Statutes before transporting them from point of pickup.
A. General. The enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be under
the control of the Municipal Clerk and the municipal police. All licenses
for vehicles and operators shall be issued by the Municipal Clerk.
B. License registry. The Municipal Clerk shall keep a register of the name
of each person owning or operating a vehicle or vehicles licensed under
this article, together with the license number and the description, make
and dimensions of such vehicles, with the date and complete record of
inspections made of them. All applications for licenses shall be filed by
the Municipal Clerk and carefully preserved for reference. All such
records shall be opened to the inspection of the public at all reasonable
times and shall be deemed the official records of the office of the
Municipal Clerk of the municipality.
A. All designated taxicab stands shall be open to all taxicabs for which an
owner's license has been issued under this article.
B. Only taxicabs in such numbers as shall be set forth on the sign
designating any taxicab stand shall remain at any such stand while
waiting for employment, and taxicabs shall remain in single file.
§ 454-13 HAMILTON CODE § 454-15
1:642
§ 454-16. Disciplinary action; violations and penalties; suspension
or revocation of license.
C. No operator of a taxicab standing at the head of any line shall refuse to
transport any orderly person applying for a taxicab who agrees to pay
the proper rate of fare; provided, however, that this provision shall not
prevent any prospective passenger from selecting a taxicab at any
stand, whether or not it shall be at the head of the line. As a taxicab
shall leave the line or move forward, the taxicab behind it shall be
moved forward, and the operator of a taxicab seeking a space at the
stand shall approach from the rear of the stand and shall stop as near as
possible to the last taxicab then in line. No taxicab shall stand at any
place in or upon any of the streets or highways or any other public place
within the municipality awaiting employment for hire excepting at
designated taxicab stands.
D. No taxicab shall stand within 25 feet of the nearest crosswalk or
sideline of a street or intersecting highway, except at alleys, or within
50 feet of a stop sign, or within 50 feet of the near right-hand corner of
any street upon which any autobus route is established and approved by
the Board of Public Utility Commissioners, or within 20 feet of the
driveway entrance to any fire station, or within 10 feet of any fire
hydrant.
E. No taxicab operator shall stand in front of the entrance to any building
within any prohibited space after his passengers desiring to alight have
done so or stand in the prohibited space waiting for passengers.
F. No taxicab operator shall, while engaged in employment, engage in
conversation with persons upon any street, highway or public place
except in the course of his/her business or suffer or permit any person
to loiter in or about the taxicab of which he is the operator.
G. No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall stop at any public taxicab
stand except while loading or unloading goods, wares or merchandise
or receiving or discharging passengers.
H. Each taxicab stand shall be marked with a suitable stanchion, which
shall bear the statement that the stand is a stand reserved for licensees
only and shall designate the number of taxicabs which may occupy the
stand.
I. All duly licensed taxicabs of the participating municipal areas may
stand at any designated taxi stand in the participating municipalities.
Each participating municipality will designate its own taxi stands for its
own municipality, which shall then be distributed to the respective
clerks of the other participating municipalities for distribution to its
licensees.
A. General. Any licensee who violates a provision of this article or is in
violation of any rule or regulation governing the operation or conduct of
§ 454-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-16
1:643
any activity licensed hereunder shall be subject to reasonable license
disciplinary action, including the imposition of monetary sanctions as
provided in § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code of the Township of
Hamilton and license suspension and revocation, in addition to such
civil or criminal prosecution as may be appropriate. Penalty for a first
offense shall be a monetary fine up to $500; penalty for a second offense
shall be a monetary fine up to $1,000; and penalty for a third and
subsequent violations is a monetary fine up to $2,000.
B. Notice of revocation hearing. Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a
license or permit shall be given in writing by the Municipal Clerk. The
notice shall specifically set forth the grounds upon which the proposed
revocation is based and the time and place of the hearing. It shall be
served by mailing a copy to the licensee at his/her last known address
by regular mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, at least five
days prior to the date set for the hearing.
C. Procedure for revocation hearing. Hearings for the revocation of a
license or permit shall be conducted before a panel of municipal clerks
of the participating municipalities or designees thereof. At the hearing,
the licensee shall have the right to appear and be heard, to be
represented by an attorney, to present witnesses in his/her own behalf,
to cross-examine opposing witnesses, and to have a permanent record
made of the proceedings at his/her own expense. The panel of municipal
clerks or designees thereof shall revoke or suspend the license if it is
satisfied by a preponderance of the evidence that the licensee is guilty
of the acts charged. If the license is suspended or revoked, the licensee
may appeal to the governing body of the municipality in which the
offense occurred.
D. Other powers. Nothing herein contained shall limit the power of the
Municipal Clerk and/or the police to immediately suspend such license
for a period not exceeding 14 days, pending the giving of notice and
holding of hearing, whenever, in the opinion and discretion of the
Municipal Clerk and/or the police, it is necessary. In the event of
temporary suspension, if notice and hearing of alleged violations or
charges are not given and held prior to the expiration of the five-day
period, unless extended by the owner, or operator, the proposed
charges and violations shall be deemed dismissed.
E. Suspension or revocation of license. Owners' licenses and operators'
licenses issued under this article may be suspended or revoked at any
time. Any suspension shall be noted upon the license suspended,
together with the reason thereof. No operator whose license has been
revoked shall again be licensed as an operator of a taxicab. The
Municipal Clerk shall notify the Chief of Police whenever a license shall
be deemed suspended or revoked.
§ 454-16 HAMILTON CODE § 454-17
1:644
§ 454-17. Appeal process.
Any person who shall be aggrieved by any decision shall be entitled to
appeal to the governing body of the municipality in which the offense
occurred within 30 days of the receipt of the decision by filing a written
request for review by the governing body with the Municipal Clerk within
the thirty-day period.
§ 454-18. Taximeters.
Each participating municipality will require the metering of its taxicabs in
accordance with the standards hereafter upon the enforcement date of this
article.
A. Each taxicab shall have affixed thereto a taximeter of a size and design
approved by the panel of municipal clerks of the participating municipal
areas. Each taximeter shall be so placed that the dial thereof shall at all
times be within the plain view of all passengers in the vehicle.
B. No license for a taxicab shall be issued until the taximeter attached
thereto shall have been inspected and found to be accurate.
C. No person shall use or permit to be used upon any taxicab a taximeter
which shall be in such a condition as to be more than 5% incorrect to
the prejudice of any passenger.
D. The face or dial of every taximeter shall be illuminated by a suitable
light, which shall be so arranged as to throw a continuous steady light
thereon from one hour after sunset until one hour before sunrise.
E. No person shall use or drive for hire or permit to be so used or driven
any taxicab equipped with a taximeter the case of which is unsealed or
the cover or gear of which shall not be intact.
F. No operator of any taxicab equipped with a taximeter shall, while
carrying any passenger or under employment, display the signal affixed
to the taximeter in such a position as to indicate that he is then
employed at a rate of fare different from that to which he is entitled
under the provisions of this article.
G. No person shall drive or permit to be driven any taxicab to which is
attached a taximeter which shall not have been duly inspected and
approved.
H. It shall be the duty of the police to cause all taximeters used in the
municipality to be examined, inspected and sealed at least once in every
period of 12 months; provided, however, that if any complaint that any
taximeter registers improperly or inaccurately shall be made to the
police it shall be the duty of the police to cause the taximeter
complained of to be immediately inspected and examined. If the
taximeter shall be found to be in such condition that it does not properly
and accurately register, indicate or display the time consumed by the
§ 454-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-18
1:645
§ 454-19. Rates and charges.
§ 454-20. Taxi stands.150
taxicab while in waiting, the distance traveled and the amount of the
fare to be determined and charged therefor, then it shall be unlawful
for the taxicab to be used for the transportation of any passenger for
hire until the taxicab shall be equipped with a taximeter approved by
the police.
I. Every taximeter shall be tested by running the taxicab to which it is
attached either over a course of a standard mile in length or by a
mechanical test to prove the accuracy of the register thereof. Both of
such tests may be made in the discretion of the police. In order to
determine whether any taximeter correctly registers waiting time, the
taximeter shall be tested by comparing the time recorded thereon with
the actual elapsed time.
J. It shall be the duty of any person owning, controlling or operating any
taxicab to deliver either the taxicab with the taximeter or the taximeter
detached therefrom to any inspector designated by the police for the
purpose of making any test upon demand.
A. The maximum charges that may be made or requested by owners and
operators of taxicabs who are subject to licensing under this article for
transportation of passengers and other services incidental thereto
either entirely within the municipality or originating or terminating
entirely within the participating municipal areas are set forth in
Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.149
B. The rates and the contact information for the cab company shall be
displayed and posted conspicuously in each taxicab on a placard that
shall be permanently affixed to the front passenger dashboard and
either the rear passenger windows or the back of the front passenger
seat.
C. Any fare originating and terminating inside the participating municipal
area shall be metered. Fares terminating or originating outside the
participating municipal area shall be based on the negotiation of the
parties, which shall be set and agreed to prior to the commencement of
the fare. A receipt shall be issued to the customer for all negotiated
rates.
A. The following described locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
150. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 485, Vehicles and Traffic, § 485-40, Taxi stands.
§ 454-18 HAMILTON CODE § 454-20
1:646
Stand Number Location Number of Cabs
1 West Trenton Railroad Station,
subject to the approval of the
Reading Railroad Company
1
2 Mercer County Airport, Scotch 6
3 Hamilton Train Station, subject to
approval by New Jersey Transit
4
§ 454-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-20
1:647

ARTICLE II
Limousines
§ 454-21. Authority and scope.
§ 454-22. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings given herein:
LIMOUSINE — Any automobile or motor car, commonly called a limousine,
used in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out,
announced or advertised to operate or run or which is operated or run over
any of the streets or public highways of this Township and which is hired by
charter; for a particular contract; by the day, hour or other fixed period; to
transport passengers to a specified place or places; or which charges a fare
or price agreed upon in advance between the operator and the passenger.
LIMOUSINE SERVICE — Includes the business of carrying passengers for
hire by limousines.
§ 454-23. Licenses required.
§ 454-24. Requirements for limousine owners' licenses.
General. No limousine owner's license shall be granted unless the applicant
meets the requirements set forth in this section.
A. Authority. The authority to license and regulate limousines is set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40:52-1 and N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq.
B. Scope. This article shall apply to all businesses commonly known as
limousine services which are located in the municipality. Nothing in this
article shall be construed to regulate hotel buses, buses employed
solely in transporting schoolchildren or teachers, autobuses which are
subject to the jurisdiction of the Department of Transportation or
interstate autobuses required by federal or state law to carry insurance
against loss from liability imposed by law on account of bodily injury or
death.
A. Limousine operator's license. No person shall operate a limousine in
the municipality unless that person holds a valid limousine operator's
license issued by the Municipal Clerk.
B. Limousine owner's license. No person owning or leasing a vehicle shall
use or permit that vehicle to be used as a limousine unless there is a
current limousine owner's license in effect for such vehicle.
C. Violations. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to the
penalties provided in § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code of the
Township of Hamilton.
§ 454-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-24
1:649
§ 454-25. Requirements for limousine operator's license.
General. No limousine operator's license shall be granted unless the
applicant meets the requirements set forth in this section.
A. Citizenship or visa. The applicant must be a citizen of the United States
or a legal resident alien. If the applicant is a partnership, then each
partner must be a citizen of the United States or a legal resident alien.
B. Authorization to do business. If the applicant is a corporation, the
corporation must either be incorporated in the State of New Jersey or
authorized to do business in this state.
C. Convictions. The applicant shall not have been convicted of any crime
and/or disorderly persons offense involving moral turpitude, including,
but not limited to, conviction for possession and/or distribution of
pornography, conviction for possession and/or distribution of controlled
dangerous substances, all elements included under the New Jersey
statute prohibiting prostitution, sexual offenses or physical violence
against persons or property within 10 years next preceding the date of
application for license, unless the police, for good cause shown, shall
waive any disqualification based on such conviction. If the applicant is a
partnership, then no partner may have such record. If the applicant is a
corporation, then neither the corporation nor any officer or director
may have such record.
D. Prior license revocations. The applicant must have no record of prior
revocation by any jurisdiction of a license related to the limousine
business. If the applicant is a partnership, then no partner may have
such record. If the applicant is a corporation, then neither the
corporation not any officer or director may have such record.
E. Insurance.
(1) The applicant must have complied with the provision of N.J.S.A.
48:16-1 et seq., and the acts amendatory thereof or supplemental
thereto, relating to insurance.
(2) In the event of the cancellation of a licensee's insurance, the
license shall terminate upon the effective date of the cancellation,
unless prior thereto the insurance has been reinstated by
withdrawal of the cancellation or a new policy of insurance is
delivered to the Municipal Clerk for the remainder of the license
year.
A. Age. The applicant must be of the age of 21 years or over and a citizen
of the United State or a legal resident alien.
B. New Jersey driver's license. The applicant must have a valid driver's
license issued by the State of New Jersey with no suspensions or
revocations of license in any jurisdiction for the preceding two years,
except for suspensions and revocations purely administrative in nature.
§ 454-24 HAMILTON CODE § 454-25
1:650
§ 454-26. Applications for limousine owner's license.
C. Motor vehicle infractions. The applicant may not have been convicted of
reckless driving, driving while intoxicated or under the influence of
drugs, or leaving the scene of an accident within three years of the
application.
D. Disability or illness. The applicant must have no disability or illness of
any type which poses a significant risk of substantial harm to the
applicant or others if he/she is granted a license to drive a limousine.
E. English language. The applicant must be able to speak, read and write
the English language.
F. Fingerprints. The applicant, at the time of making the initial
application, must have his/her fingerprints taken and filed with the
police of the municipality.
G. Knowledge of law, regulations and geography of the Township. The
applicant must have a thorough knowledge of the provisions of this
article, the Motor Vehicle Act, the Traffic Act and other ordinances and
regulations having to do with traffic and the geography of the Township.
A. Forms. Applications for a limousine owner's license under this article
shall be made by the owner or lessee thereof upon blank forms to be
furnished by the Municipal Clerk. The application shall require the
applicant to provide all of the information necessary to determine
whether the applicant is entitled to an owner's license.
B. Authorization to do business. If the applicant is a corporation, that
applicant shall provide the Municipal Clerk with proof that the
corporation is either incorporated in the State of New Jersey or
authorized to do business in this state.
C. Vehicles. Every application shall contain a statement as to whether the
applicant is the owner or lessee of the vehicle sought to be licensed, the
state license plate number of the vehicle, the year, make, model and
manufacturer's (VIN) number and the number of persons it is capable of
carrying.
D. Affidavit. All applications shall be duly verified by the affidavit of the
individual, partner of the copartnership or an officer of the corporation
seeking the license, as the case may be.
E. False statement. Any person who shall make a false statement in any
license application or in any record or certificate that he/she is required
to file or maintain shall be subject to rejection of the application
submitted and/or to appropriate disciplinary sanctions, including
license suspension or revocation, in addition to any penalty provided
under the New Jersey Criminal Code.
§ 454-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-26
1:651
§ 454-27. Applications for limousine operators' licenses.
§ 454-28. License fees.
F. Fees. All fees must be paid with the application. If the application is
withdrawn or denied, then the fees shall be refunded, with the
exception of the amount provided for in § 454-28, License fees.
A. Forms. Applications for limousine operators' licenses under this article
shall be made by the applicant upon blank forms to be furnished by the
Municipal Clerk. The form shall require the applicant to provide all of
the information necessary to determine whether the applicant is
entitled to an operator's license.
B. Proof of driver's license. The applicant must provide the Municipal
Clerk with proof that he/she holds a valid driver's license issued by the
State of New Jersey.
C. Photographs. Each applicant for an operator's license shall file with his/
her application three unmounted, unretouched passport-quality
photographs of himself/herself. The photographs shall have been taken
within 30 days preceding the filing of the application. One of the
photographs shall be attached to the operator's license. The remaining
photographs shall be filed with the application by the Municipal Clerk
and with the police. Each licensed operator shall exhibit his/her license
with the photograph attached for inspection. In case an application for
an operator's license is denied, two of the photographs shall be
returned to the applicant.
D. Convictions. The applicant shall provide the Municipal Clerk with
authorization to review any records of criminal convictions for that
individual or the individual partners.
E. Affidavit. All applications shall be duly verified by the affidavit of the
applicant seeking the license.
F. False statement. Any person who shall make a false statement in any
license application or in any record or certificate that he/she is required
to file or maintain shall be subject to rejection of the application
submitted and/or to appropriate disciplinary sanctions, including the
license suspension or revocation, in addition to any penalty provided
under the New Jersey Criminal Code.
G. Fees. A nonrefundable fee (cash or money order), as provided in
§ 454-28, License fees, shall be submitted with all license applications,
which, if approved, will be applied to the licensing fee.
A. Limousine owner's license. The annual fee for a limousine owner's
license for the first vehicle and for each subsequent vehicle thereafter
shall be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code. Any
license issued for a particular vehicle may be transferred to a different
§ 454-26 HAMILTON CODE § 454-28
1:652
§ 454-29. Maintenance of vehicles.
vehicle upon the payment of a transfer fee as set forth in Chapter 215,
Fees.151
B. Limousine operator's license. For each original limousine operator's
license or for each renewal thereof, the fee shall be as set forth in
Chapter 215, Fees. A fee as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, shall be paid
to the Municipal Clerk for a badge for each licensed operator.152
C. Limousine owner's licensing administrative fee. The annual fee for a
limousine owner's licensing administrative fee shall be as set forth in
Chapter 215, Fees.153
D. Replacement fee. If any license becomes lost or destroyed, a new
license shall be furnished by the Municipal Clerk upon payment of the
sum as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees.154
E. Additional fees. The fees for the following items shall be set forth in
Chapter 215, Fees:155
(1) Amount of application fee retained if application denied or
withdrawn.
(2) Limousine operator's license application fee, nonrefundable
portion.
(3) Late fee.
(4) Lost badge, book or document replacement fee.
F. Exemptions. Each person honorably discharged from the United States
armed services, upon furnishing satisfactory proof of service and
discharge and complying with the terms and conditions of this article,
shall be exempt from payment of the fee for an operator's license.
However, no fee shall be waived for the purchase of a badge.
A. Maintenance of vehicles. The owner and operator of a limousine shall
maintain such vehicle in a safe and clean condition and shall maintain
such vehicle in a good appearance, including proper painting and the
prompt repair of dents. Every owner of a licensed limousine which is
involved in an automobile accident shall provide the Municipal Police
with a copy of the accident report within five working days after the
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 454-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-29
1:653
§ 454-30. Renewal of owners' and operators' licenses.
accident. Any limousine which has sustained damage to the vehicle,
such as dents, or is in need of painting shall be repaired within eight
weeks after the date of the accident. The Municipal Police shall inform
the limousine owner of any and all repairs that are necessary. Any
limousine owner who fails to comply with the terms of this section shall
be in violation of this article and subject to suspension of the limousine
license.
B. Inspection of vehicles. The owner and operator of a limousine shall
permit the Municipal Police or any other law enforcement officer to
inspect such vehicle at any and all times.
C. Inspection of records. The owner and operator of a limousine shall
permit the Municipal Police or any other law enforcement officer to
inspect any records required to be kept by this article at any and all
times.
D. Limousine fares. No limousine operator or owner shall carry or permit
the carrying of any passenger unless the fare or price has been agreed
upon in advance.
E. Operation of limousines. Neither the owner nor operator of a limousine
shall:
(1) Operate the limousine as a taxicab.
(2) Park or stop the vehicle on any street for the purpose of soliciting
or accepting passengers for hire.
(3) Drive the vehicle on any street in search of prospective passengers
for hire or for the purpose of soliciting or accepting passengers for
hire.
(4) Display any sign on or near the vehicle for the purpose of soliciting
passengers for hire.
(5) Utilize any on-street parking area as a taxi stand or place to solicit
passengers for hire.
A. General. Limousine owners' licenses may be renewed from year to year
by the Municipal Clerk after vehicle inspection by the police or other
designee, as determined by the municipality. Limousine operators'
license may be renewed from year to year by the Municipal Clerk.
B. Form. An application for renewal of a limousine owner's or operator's
license shall be made upon a form to be furnished by the Municipal
Clerk.
C. Time for filing. The renewal application shall be filed no later than
February 1 of the year of issue, which requirement may be waived or
the period extended for good cause by the Municipal Clerk.
§ 454-29 HAMILTON CODE § 454-30
1:654
§ 454-31. Regulations for limousines.
D. Failure to file. Failure of an owner or operator to renew a license will
result in the termination of the license upon the expiration date. The
license may be extended, upon written request made to the Municipal
Clerk prior to the expiration date, if good cause is shown for the failure
to make timely renewal application.
E. Late fees. In the event any holder of an owner's license seeks to renew a
license that shall have expired, there shall be an additional fee as
provided in § 454-28, License fees.
F. Extension of license. In the event it is determined that an inspection of
the vehicle will not be completed for the timely renewal of an owner's
license, the Police Inspector or other designee of the municipality who
may perform inspections may authorize the extension of a license for a
fourteen-day period.
A. General. In addition to carrying out the provisions of this article, all
licensees hereunder shall abide by the following regulations applicable
to the license or licenses held.
B. Posting of license identification. There shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the inside of each limousine the name and address of the
owner and the name, address and photograph of the operator, together
with the license number of the vehicle and the number of the operator's
license. Such identification shall be provided by the owner in a manner
to be approved by the Municipal Clerk.
C. Change of address; loss of records. Any change of address of any owner
or operator licensed under the provisions of this article must be
reported, in writing, to the Municipal Clerk's office within 72 hours of
such change. The loss of the license badge or any other book or
document required to be kept by any licensed owner or operator must
be reported to the Municipal Clerk's office, in writing, within 72 hours
of such loss. The Municipal Clerk shall charge any licensee a fee as
provided in § 454-28, License fees, to replace any lost badge, book or
document.
D. Record of trips. Each and every licensed operator shall legibly record
on a trip form, kept solely for the purpose of recording, the departure
from the garage or stand, the name and address of the operator thereof,
his/her license number and the license number of the vehicle and the
time of the return to the garage or stand of each such vehicle, locations
of pickup, time of pickup, destination, time destination is reached, the
number of passengers conveyed and the fee charged. All owners and
operators shall keep open for inspection by any police officer his/her
record of trips. Records shall be maintained for a period of six months.
Failure of an operator or owner to produce a record of trips for the sixmonth
period preceding a police officer's demand shall constitute a
§ 454-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-31
1:655
violation of this article. This form shall record the acceptance and
discharge of passengers.
E. Lost or misplaced items; disposition of property left in limousine. Every
operator of a limousine shall, immediately after termination of
employment, carefully search the limousine for any property lost or left
therein and shall, immediately after finding any property, deliver the
property to Police Headquarters.
F. Insurance identification card. The insurance identification card shall be
posted in a conspicuous place within the vehicle.
G. Cooperation with law enforcement officers. All licensees under this
article shall cooperate with law enforcement officers in the
performance of their duty. No licensee shall conceal evidence of a crime
or voluntarily aid violators to escape arrest. A licensee shall report
immediately to the police any attempt to use his/her vehicle to commit a
crime or escape from the scene of a crime.
H. Conduct of operators.
(1) Licensed operators, while engaged in the operation of a limousine,
shall behave in a civil and orderly manner and shall not use any
indecent, profane or abusive language.
(2) Operators shall be clean and neat and shall wear the following
items of dress:
(a) A long- or short-sleeved shirt or blouse with a collar.
(b) A pair of zippered trousers or skirt.
(c) Other items of clothing, e.g., headgear, jackets, sweaters or
shoes, as well as jewelry, shall be appropriate and tasteful.
(3) Operators shall not be under the influence of or impaired by any
intoxicant.
I. Storage and parking of vehicles. No limousine shall be stored or parked
on any street of the municipality, other than when the vehicle or
operator is on duty. All off-duty vehicles shall be stored and maintained
in strict accordance with the applicable land use codes of the Code of
the Township of Hamilton.
J. Operation of vehicles. No operator of a limousine shall operate his/her
vehicle in a manner to endanger a passenger or any other person.
K. Obstruction of vision. No licensee under this article shall display any
advertising on his/her vehicle which obstructs the vision of the
operator, including the operator's vision to the rear.
L. Age of vehicle. When a limousine owner or operator first becomes
licensed in the municipality, his/her limousine shall not be more than 84
months (seven years). A vehicle owned by a currently licensed operator
§ 454-31 HAMILTON CODE § 454-31
1:656
§ 454-32. Enforcement.
§ 454-33. Disciplinary action; suspension or revocation of license.
which is in excess of 84 months as of the effective date of this article
shall be licensed hereunder if it otherwise satisfies all inspection
criteria required of vehicles less than 84 months, and thereafter such
vehicle in excess of 84 months can receive a waiver of this requirement
based upon the inspection of the vehicle by the Police Inspector or
other authorized inspection designee of the municipality, who shall find
that the vehicle is able to satisfy all safety, repair, operational and
passenger requirements provided hereunder and otherwise satisfies all
requirements provided for vehicles of less than 84 months.
M. Receipts. The operator of any limousine shall, upon demand by any
passenger, render to such passenger a receipt of the amount charged,
which shall contain the name of the owner of the limousine, the name of
the operator, the date and time of the transaction and the amount of the
fare.
N. Safety equipment. Every limousine is required to have approved child
safety seats appropriate to the age of the child prior to transporting the
child and is required to have all children secured as defined in Title 39
of the New Jersey Statutes before transporting them from point of
pickup.
A. General. The enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be under
the control of the Municipal Clerk and the municipal police. All licenses
for vehicles and operators shall be issued by the Municipal Clerk.
B. License registry. The Municipal Clerk shall keep a register of the name
of each person owning or operating a vehicle or vehicles licensed under
this article, together with the license number and the description, make
and dimensions of such vehicles, with the date and complete record of
inspections made of them. All applications for a license shall be filed by
the Municipal Clerk and carefully preserved for reference. All such
records shall be opened to the inspection of the public at all reasonable
times and shall be deemed the official records of the office of the
Municipal Clerk of the municipality.
A. General. Any licensee who violates a provision of this article or is in
violation of any rule or regulation governing the operation or conduct of
any activity licensed hereunder shall be subject to reasonable license
disciplinary action, including the imposition of monetary sanctions as
provided in § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code of the Township of
Hamilton and license suspension and revocation, in addition to such
civil or criminal prosecution as may be appropriate.
B. Notice of revocation hearing. Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a
license or permit shall be given in writing by the Municipal Clerk. The
notice shall specifically set forth the grounds upon which the proposed
§ 454-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 454-33
1:657
§ 454-34. Appeal process.
Any person who shall be aggrieved by any decision shall be entitled to
appeal to the governing body of the municipality in which the offense
occurred within 30 days of the receipt of the decision by filing a written
request for review by the governing body with the Municipal Clerk within
the thirty-day period.
revocation is based and the time and place of the hearing. It shall be
served by mailing a copy to the licensee at his/her last known address
by regular mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, at least five
days prior to the date set for the hearing.
C. Procedure for revocation hearing. Hearings for the revocation of a
license or permit shall be conducted before a panel of municipal clerks
of the participating municipalities or designees thereof. At the hearing,
the licensee shall have the right to appear and be heard, to be
represented by an attorney, to present witnesses in his/her own behalf,
to cross-examine opposing witnesses, and to have a permanent record
made of the proceedings at his/her own expense. The panel of municipal
clerks or designees thereof shall revoke or suspend the license if it is
satisfied by a preponderance of the evidence that the licensee is guilty
of the acts charged. If the license is suspended or revoked, the licensee
may appeal to the governing body of the municipality in which the
offense occurred.
D. Other powers. Nothing herein contained shall limit the power of the
Municipal Clerk and/or the police to immediately suspend such license
for a period not exceeding 14 days, pending the giving of notice and
holding of hearing, whenever in the opinion and discretion of the
Municipal Clerk and/or the police it is necessary. In the event of
temporary suspension, if notice and hearing of alleged violations or
charges are not given and held prior to the expiration of the five-day
period, unless extended by the owner or operator, the proposed charges
and violations shall be deemed dismissed.
E. Suspension or revocation of license. Owners' licenses and operators'
licenses issued under this article may be suspended or revoked at any
time. Any suspension shall be noted upon the license suspended,
together with the reason thereof. No operator whose license has been
revoked shall again be licensed as an operator of a limousine. The
Municipal Clerk shall notify the Chief of Police whenever a license shall
be deemed suspended or revoked.
§ 454-33 HAMILTON CODE § 454-34
1:658
Chapter 460
THEATERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 215, § 215-1. Licenses and permits — See Ch. 285.
§ 460-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
THEATER — Any place indoors or outdoors devoted to public amusement,
wherein dramatic, operatic, vaudeville, burlesque performance, motionpicture
exhibitions or other like forms of amusement are provided for public
amusement or entertainment.
§ 460-2. License required.
No person having the management or control of any theater shall produce
any performance, show or exhibition therein, or suffer or permit any
performance, show or exhibition to be given, without obtaining a license in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 460-3. Application for license.
All persons applying for a license under this chapter shall make application
in writing on forms to be obtained from the Municipal Clerk and shall
furnish the information requested to determine the suitability of the
premises to be used as a theater and the qualifications of the applicant.
§ 460-4. Issuance of license.
Licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the Municipal Clerk
after first having determined the suitability of the premises to be used as a
theater and the fitness of the applicant to conduct the theater and upon the
payment of the fee requested.
§ 460-5. Term of license; revocation of license.
Licenses required by this chapter shall be issued for the period of one year,
commencing June 1 and expiring May 31 of the succeeding year, and upon
the express condition that the license will be forfeited without a return of
the license fee in case the licensee or his agents or servants shall violate any
law, ordinance, resolution or condition imposed by the Township Council,
and the Township Council reserves the right to suspend, revoke and annul
such license whenever in its opinion the public good requires such action to
the taken or for any reason enumerated in § 285-10 of the Code.
§ 454-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-6
1:659
§ 460-6. Regulation of entertainment.
The Township Council reserves the right to censor and suppress any
entertainment, exhibition, play, act or performance which it determines,
in its opinion, offends public decency and morals. The Township Council
shall first, through its Municipal Clerk, notify orally or in writing the person
violating this section. If the person fails to comply with the directive of
the Township Council, he shall then be subject to the penalty provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code of
the Township of Hamilton. The Township Council also reserves the right
to so censor and suppress any public advertisement of any entertainment,
exhibition, play, act or performance which it may determine, in its opinion,
offends against public decency or morals, and it may order any
entertainment, exhibition, play or act or performance to be produced in
private prior to public exhibition in order to censor or suppress the
entertainment, exhibition, play or act or performance.
§ 460-7. License fees.156
License fees for theaters with individual seating and for outdoor drive-in
theaters shall be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.
§ 460-8. Safety requirements.
Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be issued only upon the
condition that the licensee complies with all health, fire, traffic and other
safety laws and, at his own expense, cooperates with the issuing authority
to eliminate traffic hazards and other unsafe conditions.
Chapter 468
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 215.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 285.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 485.
§ 468-1. Definitions. [Amended 9-17-2008 by Ord. No. 08-056]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AUTOMOBILE — A private passenger automobile of a private passenger or
station wagon type that is owned or hired and is neither used as a public
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 460-6 HAMILTON CODE § 468-1
1:660
or livery conveyance for passengers nor rented to others with a driver,
and a motor vehicle with a pickup body or a delivery sedan, a van or a
panel truck or a camper type vehicle used for recreational purposes owned
by an individual or by a husband and wife who are residents of the same
household, not customarily used in the occupation, profession or business
of the insured other than farming or ranching. An automobile owned by a
farm family copartnership or corporation, which is principally garaged on a
farm or ranch and otherwise meets the definitions contained in this section,
shall be considered a private passenger automobile owned by two or more
relatives resident in the same household.
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile from a highway, street or other public or private road or a
parking area or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident
thereto, but does not include recovery of an automobile from a position
beyond the right-of-way or berm or from being impaled upon any other
object within the right-of-way or berm. Basic towing service fees are for the
first hour, any time over the first hour shall be prorated at one-fourth-hour
intervals.
CRUISING — The driving of an unengaged wrecker to and fro along a
public street in any fashion calculated for the obvious purpose of soliciting
business along the public street.
GARAGE — A building where motor cars are sheltered, stored, repaired
and made ready for use, and it is specifically intended not to include within
the meaning of this definition a gasoline service station used principally
for furnishing gasoline, oil, lubrication service and minor services for
automobiles.
HEAVY DUTY TOW — Any vehicle weighing over 18,001 pounds GVW.
INSIDE BUILDING — A vehicle storage facility that is completely indoors,
having one or more openings in the walls for storage and removal of
vehicles, and that is secured by a locking device on each opening.
LIGHT DUTY TOW — Any vehicle weighing up to three-fourths ton GVW
(passenger cars, sport utility vehicles, light trucks and vans).
MEDIUM DUTY TOW — Any vehicle weighing over three-fourths ton up to
18,000 pounds GVW.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — An occurrence in which a private
passenger automobile comes in contact with any other object for which the
private passenger automobile must be towed or removed for placement in
a storage facility. This includes all situations which are accidental as to the
insured even if they were caused by the intentional acts of a perpetrator,
where the perpetrator was not the insured or not otherwise involved with
the insured.
OUTSIDE SECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that is at least
six feet high and is installed with a passive alarm system or a similar on-site
security measure. The facility is to be lighted at night.
§ 468-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-1
1:661
OUTSIDE UNSECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is not secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier, and all other
storage facilities not defined in this section as "inside building" or "outside
secured."
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint-stock companies, as well as individuals, and also
includes all political subdivisions of this state or any agencies or
instrumentalities thereof.
STORAGE CHARGES FOR TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR PERIOD — The maximum
allowable amount to be charged by a storage facility for a twenty-four-hour
period or fraction thereof. A new twenty-four-hour period begins at 12:01
a.m.
TOWNSHIP TOWER — A tower summoned by the Township to pick up
disabled vehicles, other than a tower requested by the vehicle owner.
TOW VEHICLE — Only those vehicles equipped with a boom, winches,
slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or under-reach equipment specifically designed
by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of private passenger
automobiles.
TOW VEHICLE'S BASE OF SERVICE — The towing operator's principal
place of business where the tow vehicle is stationed when not in use.
WINCHING — The process of moving of a motor vehicle by the use of
the cable from a position that is not accessible for direct hook up by
conventional means for loading onto a tow vehicle. Winching is not pulling
a vehicle onto a tilt bed or carrier nor lifting a motor vehicle with a
conventional tow sling. Winching fees are for the first hour, any time over
the first hour shall be prorated at one-quarter-hour intervals.
WRECKER — A vehicle driven by mechanical power and employed for the
purpose of towing, transporting, conveying or removing any and all kinds of
vehicles ,which are unable to be and actually are not operated under their
own power, from the place where they are disabled to some other place.
§ 468-2. License required for Township towers.
No person shall be authorized to be a Township tower without first
obtaining a license from the Municipal Clerk.
§ 468-3. Application for license generally. [Amended 7-22-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-022]
A. Applications for licenses issued under this chapter shall be made upon
blank forms prepared and made available by the Municipal Clerk and
shall state:
(1) The name, home address and proposed or actual business address
of the applicant, and whether he is owner, lessee or bailee.
§ 468-1 HAMILTON CODE § 468-3
1:662
§ 468-4. License application fee. [Amended 7-22-2009 by Ord. No.
09-022157]
An application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by an
application fee as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code,
payable to the Township. The fee is not refundable if an inspection of the
vehicle has been made and no license is issued because of failure to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter or of any regulations set up
under this chapter by the Municipal Clerk. If the application is approved, a
portion of the license application fee, as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of
the Township Code, will be applied to the license fee.
§ 468-5. Investigation of applicant for license; approval procedure.
[Amended 2-7-2001 by Ord. No. 00-056; 7-22-2009 by Ord. No.
09-022]
(2) The location, description and hourly availability of the wreckers
owned or operated by the applicant.
(3) That the applicant uses the address supplied in Subsection A(1) as
its operational business and that it will be properly staffed to allow
retrieval of towed vehicles without undue difficulty to the public.
(4) That the applicant has available space for properly accommodating
and protecting all disabled motor vehicles to be towed or otherwise
removed from the place where they are disabled, and that the
disabled vehicles will not be stored or allowed to remain on public
property or Township streets or on property which is not zoned for
such storage.
(5) That the applicant has not made multiple applications to Hamilton
Township under secondary/multiple businesses in order to have
multiple spots on the Hamilton Township towing list.
(6) A description of the vehicle for which the license is desired,
including year, make, model, type, serial number of body and motor
capacity, length of time the vehicle has been in use, and any other
information which the Municipal Clerk shall deem necessary or
proper to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and to determine
whether the terms of this chapter have been complied with.
(7) The towing vehicle or vehicles described in Subsection A(6) are not
being used by multiple towing operations/businesses and are
available for use when called upon to tow for Hamilton Township.
B. The application shall have affixed thereto an affidavit by the applicant
that all of the information given in the application is true and correct,
and the application shall be submitted to the Municipal Clerk.
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-5
1:663
§ 468-6. Standards for approval of license. [Amended 2-7-2001 by
Ord. No. 00-056]
The Municipal Clerk shall approve and classify an application for a license
under this chapter only when the following requirements have been met:
§ 468-7. Hours of service; communications equipment.
A. Within seven days after receipt of an application as provided for in this
chapter, the Municipal Clerk shall cause an investigation to be made of
the applicant and of his proposed business operation and shall make or
have made an inspection of the vehicle to be licensed. The Municipal
Clerk may delegate the inspection of the vehicle to an independent
person, not engaged in business in the Township, who shall be qualified
by experience and training to make such inspection. He shall report to
the Municipal Clerk whether the applicant complies with the
requirements and standards of this chapter.
B. Upon completion of the investigation and inspection, the Municipal
Clerk shall either refuse to approve the application or shall approve the
application and classify the wrecker as either "light/medium duty" or
"heavy duty," in accordance with the standards given in this chapter,
and shall inform the applicant of the decision. If the application is
approved, the applicant shall supply the Municipal Clerk with the
insurance policies or certificates, as specified in § 468-14. Upon receipt
of the policies or certificates, the Municipal Clerk shall make
appropriate notations on the application. In the event of the denial of a
license, the applicant may appeal to the Township Council. The decision
of the Township Council shall be final.
A. That the public convenience and necessity will be served by the use of
the vehicle for which the application has been made.
B. That the insurance policies as required in this chapter have been
procured and supplied.
C. That the applicant and proposed operators are fit persons to operate
and conduct a wrecker service in the Township.
D. That the requirements of this chapter and all other governing laws,
statutes and ordinances have been met.
E. That the vehicle has been properly licensed and inspected by the state
and has the necessary stickers affixed thereto. No vehicle shall be
licensed as a wrecker which is using dealer's license plates or which
has failed the state inspection.
F. That the wreckers to be used, on inspection, meet with the required
minimum standards for a light/medium duty or heavy duty wrecker.
A. Towing services must be provided on a twenty-four-hour seven-day-perweek
basis. All wreckers must be radio-equipped with a public service
§ 468-5 HAMILTON CODE § 468-7
1:664
§ 468-8. Standards for wreckers; number of trucks. [Amended
2-7-2001 by Ord. No. 00-056]
The following minimum standards must be met for each class of wreckers.
band frequency to facilitate prompt response. A citizen's band radio
shall not be considered adequate for communications purposes.
B. All licensees must possess a cellular telephone and a pager with a
capacity to be compatible with the Township system.
C. All licensees must maintain an office with regular business hours. The
office shall be open a minimum of eight hours a day, five days a week.
The schedule of hours shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk. Any
change or amendment to the schedule of hours shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk within five days of the change.
A. Light/medium duty wreckers.
(1) A light/medium duty wrecker shall be able to handle all makes of
passenger cars and small trucks up to one ton, such as pickup and
small panel trucks. The garage from which a light/medium duty
wrecker originates must be equipped with a portable car dolly.
Each light/medium duty wrecker shall be equipped with the
following:
(a) Dual rear wheels or equivalent.
(b) Power-takeoff-controlled winch with a minimum cable
thickness of 3/8 inch or equivalent.
(c) Comparable weight equal to the vehicles to be towed, with a
minimum of 10,000 pounds to a maximum of 31,999 pounds.
(d) A 1/2 inch safety chain. The lift chain and safety chain shall not
be attached in any form or manner to the same part of the
wrecker.
(e) Two double-faced rear flashing amber lights mounted high
enough to be seen over the towed vehicle.
(f) A 360-degree rotating amber beacon light mounted over the
cab.
(g) Lights meeting the following standard: All lights shall be of
such candlepower and intensity as to be visible 1/4 mile away
or shall be equal to the candlepower of the lights on Township
police vehicles.
(2) Licensees shall own at least one flatbed truck for the removal of
vehicles from roadways. A flatbed truck will be used when, in the
opinion of the tower and the police officer on the scene, to tow the
vehicle by conventional means would result in further damage.
§ 468-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-8
1:665
§ 468-9. Issuance of license. [Amended 2-7-2001 by Ord. No.
00-056]
Upon receipt of notice by the Municipal Clerk that an application for a
license under this chapter has been approved and classified, and upon the
payment of the license fee designated in § 468-10, the Municipal Clerk shall
issue a license, designated "light/medium duty" or "heavy duty."
§ 468-10. License fee. [Amended 2-7-2001 by Ord. No. 00-056;
10-3-2001 by Ord. No. 01-033; 7-22-2009 by Ord. No. 09-022158]
B. Heavy duty wreckers. All wreckers classified as heavy duty shall be
equipped with the following:
(1) Dual rear wheels.
(2) Manufacturer rating: gross vehicle weight of 32,000 pounds or
more. The manufacturer's rating may be obtained from the factory
where the truck originates. Other written evidence of gross vehicle
weight may be accepted by the Township if verified.
(3) Power-takeoff-controlled winch with a minimum cable thickness of
5/8 inch.
(4) Two double-faced rear flashing amber lights mounted high enough
to be seen over the towed vehicle.
(5) Lights meeting the following standard: All lights shall be of such
candlepower and intensity as to be visible 1/4 mile away or shall be
equal to the candlepower of the lights on a Township police vehicle.
(6) A three-quarter-inch safety chain. The lift chain and safety chain
shall not be attached in any form or manner to the same part of the
wrecker.
(7) Air brakes.
(8) Connecting air lines for connection with the air compressor and air
brake lines of the towed vehicle.
(9) Detachable amber flashing lights for attachment to the rear of the
towed vehicle.
(10) Two-speed rear axle and differential or dual transmission or fivespeed
transmission.
C. Number of trucks. In order to be qualified for a license, the tower must
have at least the following number of trucks:
(1) Light/medium duty towing: one truck and one flatbed.
(2) Heavy duty towing: one truck.
§ 468-8 HAMILTON CODE § 468-10
1:666
§ 468-11. License period. [Amended 2-7-2001 by Ord. No. 00-056]
The license period for licenses issued under this chapter shall be a one-year
period of time commencing September 1 of each year. No licenses will be
issued between September 2 and August 31 of the following year.
§ 468-12. Cancellation of license.
The Township reserves the right to cancel any license issued under this
chapter, with cause, upon 30 days' written notice. However, this shall not
preclude the Township's right to cancel the license immediately after a
hearing if the licensee fails to abide by the terms of the license. If the license
is cancelled, the licensee will not have the opportunity to be reinstated until
the term of license expires.
§ 468-13. Protection and storage of towed vehicles.
A. The fee for a license under this chapter, for each light/medium duty
operation only, shall be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the
Township Code, per year.
B. The fee for a license for a heavy duty operation only shall be as set forth
in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code, per year.
C. The fee for a license for a combination light/medium duty and heavy
duty operation shall be as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the
Township Code, per year.
D. The full amount due shall be payable before issuance of the license. If
duplicates of a license are required, each duplicate shall be supplied for
the fee set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code. All fees
shall be payable to the Township.
A. The tower shall be responsible for any damage occurring to a vehicle
after he has taken possession and until the owner or his representative
reassumes possession.
B. The tower shall carry insurance in the amounts specified in § 468-14.
C. All vehicles must be stored indoors or in an area protected by lighting
and fencing to secure the safety of all vehicles. All fencing must be of
chain link and six feet in height. A stockade fence in good repair may be
used as an alternate.
D. The storage facility must be of sufficient size to accommodate at least
15 vehicles. The storage area must contain at least 4,000 square feet.
This shall consist of outside storage only.
E. No satellite yards may be used to meet the requirements for storage.
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-13
1:667
§ 468-14. Insurance. [Amended 2-7-2001 by Ord. No. 00-056]
§ 468-15. Register of licensees; drivers' identification card; drivers
to maintain safe driving record.
F. All vehicles towed by the licensee must be stored at the approved
storage yard or facility.
G. All yards must meet current zoning standards and comply with current
municipal ordinances and state laws. This includes the licensee's office
and attached property.
H. It is recognized by the Township that the licensee's yard is utilized for
purposes other than the needs of the Township. However, the licensee
will be required to keep available enough space to meet the prescribed
license requirements.
A. A licensee under this chapter must deposit with the Municipal Clerk the
following insurance policies or certificates of insurance, specifically
naming the Township as an insured party:
(1) Garage keeper's policy. A garage liability policy covering fire, theft,
collision and explosion in the amount of $75,000 per vehicle towed.
(2) Garage liability policy. A garage liability policy covering the
operation of the licensee's equipment or vehicles for any bodily
injury or property damage. This policy shall be in the amount of
$750,000 minimum for light/medium duty tow trucks and
$1,000,000 minimum for heavy duty tow trucks, combined single
limit of liability.
B. Each policy required in this section shall contain an endorsement
providing that 10 days' notice shall be given to the Municipal Clerk in
the event of any material change or cancellation for any cause.
C. If any policy is changed so as to fail to conform with the requirements of
this section, or if any policy on any wrecker is canceled for any reason,
the Township shall notify the person responsible for the policy, and it
shall be corrected or reinstated or replaced with a conforming policy
within 10 days after the notice is received. Before the date of
cancellation, the Township shall immediately suspend the licensee's
license and shall pick up from the owner all indicia of license, including
any stickers, cards, medallions or other means of identification.
A. The Chief of Police shall keep a register of the names of all those
owning or operating wreckers accepted under the license provided for
in this chapter, together with the license number and the description of
such wreckers and the date and complete record of inspections made of
them. This register shall be maintained by zones.
B. All drivers must obtain police identification cards and maintain a safe
driving record.
§ 468-13 HAMILTON CODE § 468-16
1:668
§ 468-16. Information card for persons requiring towing service.
The Township shall issue to each person requiring towing services a card,
not less than four inches in width and not more than six inches in length,
in such form as may be set by the Township, and providing notice of the
service rates and conditions of employment under which such wrecker is
operating, and a notice that, in case of any complaint, the Chief of Police
shall be notified, with the license number of the wrecker being given.
§ 468-17. Service rates generally; notice of fee. [Amended 2-7-2001
by Ord. No. 00-056; 9-17-2008 by Ord. No. 08-056]
§ 468-18. Fee for crane service.
§ 468-19. Conduct of licensees and operators.
A. Charges for the transportation, hauling or service of disabled vehicles
by a tower under the license provided for in this chapter shall not
exceed the rates set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township
Code.159
B. Every operator of a wrecker shall give the customer a written notice
listing the fee to be paid and the name and address of the tower. A copy
of this notice shall be given to the police officer in charge or to the Chief
of Police if no officer is present. If the driver is not available, the
operator shall give the officer in charge or the Chief of Police two copies
of the notice. The form of this notice must be approved by the Chief and
will be printed at the expense of the tower.
A. There shall be an extra charge for crane service, to be determined by
mutual consent of the licensee under this chapter and the owner or
driver of the disabled vehicle or his agent.
B. Every operator of a wrecker shall give the customer a written notice
listing the fee to be paid and the name and address of the tower. A copy
of this notice shall be given to the police officer in charge or to the Chief
of Police if no officer is present. The form of this notice must be
approved by the Chief and will be printed at the expense of the tower.
All disputes as to fares shall be determined by the Chief of Police. The
police officer at the scene shall report any disputes to the Chief.
A. No person owning or operating a wrecker shall:
(1) While waiting for employment, stand at any public street or
intersection or any public property without first obtaining the
consent of the owner of the property.
(2) Seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his
wrecker to and from in a short space in front of any disabled vehicle
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-19
1:669
§ 468-20. Record of service.
Every person licensed under this chapter shall record in a book kept solely
for such purpose the details of each disabled vehicle towed, serviced or
transported, together with full information concerning the details
surrounding the hiring, the names of the owners of the towed vehicle and of
the patron engaging him, and the charges paid for his services. The record
book described in this section shall be open for inspection at all times by
any duly authorized representative of the Township.
§ 468-21. Rotating call list. [Amended 2-7-2001 by Ord. No. 00-056;
9-17-2008 by Ord. No. 08-056]
or by otherwise interfering with the proper and orderly process of
traffic along the public highways.
(3) Permit or invite loitering within or near his wrecker.
(4) Solicit, demand or receive from any person any pay, commission or
emolument whatever, except the proper fee for transporting the
disabled vehicle in accordance with the schedule of service rates
listed in this chapter.
(5) Solicit or attempt to divert prospective patrons of another wrecker,
nor shall he solicit or divert prospective patrons of a given garage
in the Township to any other garage.
(6) Intercept police calls by shortwave radio or obtain information as
to the location of the scene of an accident or disabled vehicle by
means of interception of police radio calls.
B. When the owner or driver of the disabled vehicle indicates a choice of a
specific wrecker owner, that wrecker owner shall be called, and no
tower shall be assigned from the list. No person shall respond to the
scene of a disabled vehicle, except upon notification by the officer, for
information as to the location of any accident or for soliciting the
employment of the licensee's services, or give any gratuities, fees or
other compensation or gifts to any member of the Police Division.
A. Licensees performing towing service for the Township or called by a
police officer shall perform on a rotating basis. The rotating system is to
be used in the assignment of wreckers in such areas when the owner or
driver of a disabled vehicle declares or is unable to indicate any specific
choice of a wrecker to remove the vehicle. When the owner or driver of
the disabled vehicle indicates a choice of a specific wrecker owner, that
wrecker shall be called, and no wrecker shall be assigned from the
rotating list. No person shall respond to the scene of a disabled vehicle
except upon notification by the officer in charge in Police Headquarters
or upon request of the driver or owner of the disabled vehicle.
B. Such additional rules and regulations regarding the rotation of
wreckers as may be promulgated under this chapter by the Municipal
§ 468-19 HAMILTON CODE § 468-21
1:670
§ 468-22. Authority to prescribe additional regulations; inspections;
correction of unsafe equipment.
The Chief of Police shall establish reasonable rules and regulations for
the inspection and operation of wreckers and for the design, construction,
maintenance and condition of fitness for the safe conduct of the wrecker
service business in accordance with the standards in this chapter. A licensee
under this chapter shall maintain all wreckers in a condition of safety for
the transportation and hauling of disabled vehicles. The Chief shall have the
right at all times to inspect all such licensed wreckers and shall maintain
a record, in writing, of the report of all such inspections. If at any time
the Chief of Police shall deem the equipment inadequate or unsafe, he shall
have the power to demand immediate correction, and if not corrected to the
full satisfaction of the Chief, he shall then have the power to immediately
suspend the license in the interest of protection of the public health, safety
and welfare, after a due process hearing is had before the Chief of Police
upon the nature and circumstances of the violation.
§ 468-23. Towing of Township vehicles.
Any Township vehicle, whether located on or off the road, will be towed free
of charge.
§ 468-24. Abandoned vehicles. [Amended 2-7-2001 by Ord. No.
00-056; 9-17-2008 by Ord. No. 08-056160]
All vehicles found by the Police Division to be abandoned shall be towed to
the licensee's storage facility. These vehicles will be towed at the rate set
forth in Chapter 215, Fees.
Clerk shall take effect immediately after service of a copy thereof
on holders of all appropriate licenses for wreckers in the Township,
which service may be made by addressing the copy to the licensees
by ordinary mail at their last known address. If pursuant to the rules
and regulations for rotation of wreckers adopted under this chapter the
Police Division summons a wrecker to the scene of a disabled vehicle
for the purpose of removing the vehicle, and the summoned wrecker
shall arrive at the scene, the owner or driver of the disabled vehicle
shall use the services of the summoned wrecker.
C. In the establishment of a rotation system of assignment of wreckers,
separate lists shall be set up for light/medium duty wreckers, heavy
duty wreckers, and abandoned vehicles. The assignment of a call from
the heavy duty list of a heavy duty wrecker shall be in addition to, and
not in limitation of, the rights of such heavy duty wrecker owner to
participate on a rotating basis in the light/medium duty call list.
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 468-25
1:671
§ 468-25. Response time; missed calls. [Amended 9-17-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-056; 7-22-2009 by Ord. No. 09-022]
§ 468-26. Violations and penalties; suspension or revocation of
license.
A. A licensee under this chapter shall arrive at the scene of the accident
within 25 minutes of the call for service, unless a longer response time
is approved by the Police Division.
B. The licensee shall respond within one hour of being called by the
Township to tow any Township vehicle, except that, if the Township
vehicle is a Police Division vehicle, then the licensee shall respond
within 1/2 hour (30 minutes).
C. If the tower on call is dispatched for a towing service and arrived on the
scene of the accident within the specified response time, he shall be
given the tow or paid the towing fee by the citizen, regardless of
whether or not the citizen has subsequently requested another tower be
dispatched.
D. If the licensee misses three calls within a thirty-day period, his license
will be suspended for the duration of the license year. Written
notification will be given by the Police Division for each miss. There will
be no refund of licensee fees for suspended licenses.
E. If the tower is called by the police and the vehicle to be towed is started
before the wrecker arrives, there will be no fee charged, and the tower
will not be charged with a call but will receive the next tow call.
F. Refusal by the licensee/contract tower to respond to an abandoned
vehicle or disabled Township vehicle request shall result in the licensee/
contract tower being skipped for their next regular rotation call.
Subsequent offenses of this section shall be addressed by the Clerk's
office and the Chief of Police or his designee.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by the penalties set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Township
Code.161
B. In addition to the penalty provided in Subsection A of this section, any
license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended or
renewal denied, after notice and opportunity to be heard in accordance
with Chapter 285, Licenses and Permits, of the Code of the Township of
Hamilton, for violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any rules
and regulations established thereunder or for violation of the provisions
of any federal or state law or any local ordinance, including but not
limited to the Zoning Ordinance of the Township.162
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-25 HAMILTON CODE § 468-26
1:672
§ 468-27. Public availability of regulations and fee schedule.
The Municipal Clerk shall make available all fee schedules and regulations
applicable to towing for public inspection during normal business hours.
§ 468-28. Limitation of fees for storage of removed vehicles. [Added
8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 11-028163]
Chapter 473
TRAILERS AND CAMP VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 550.
C. If the licensee cannot, at any time, meet any provisions of this chapter,
he shall inform the Municipal Clerk in writing. If in the opinion of the
Municipal Clerk the licensee's failure to meet the specifications of this
chapter was the fault of the licensee, he shall be liable for a fine of not
less than $100 per day for each day any provision of this chapter was
not met.
A. A limit, per day, for the first 30 days of storage of a removed vehicle,
whether said vehicle is owned by the Township of Hamilton or found
abandoned by the police and towed at their direction and stored at a
tower's facility, may be charged to the Township for the storage of the
vehicle. The daily limit is included in Chapter 215, Fees.
B. A limit, per day, for the 31st day of storage and any day thereafter of a
removed vehicle, whether said vehicle is owned by the Township of
Hamilton or found abandoned by the police and towed at their direction
and stored at a tower's facility, may be charged to the Township for the
storage of the vehicle. The daily limit is included in Chapter 215, Fees.
C. A maximum limit per removed vehicle, whether said vehicle is owned by
the Township of Hamilton or found abandoned by the police and towed
at their direction and stored at a tower's facility, may be charged to the
Township for the storage of the vehicle regardless of the duration of the
storage. The maximum limit is included in Chapter 215, Fees.
162. Editor's Note: See Ch. 550, Land Development.
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 468-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 473-1
1:673
§ 473-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BOAT TRAILER — Any vehicle used or intended to be used for the
conveyance of a boat upon the public streets or highways.
TRAILER AND CAMP VEHICLE — Any vehicle used or intended to be used
as, or attached to a vehicle used as, a conveyance upon public streets
or highways and duly licensed as such, including any vehicle containing
within such vehicle the means of propulsion thereof and also any vehicle
propelled by means from without such vehicle, so designed, constructed,
reconstructed, remodeled or added to by means of accessories or otherwise
in such a manner or to such effect as to permit the occupancy thereof as a
temporary dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons, and having
no foundation other than wheels, jacks or supports so arranged as to be
integral with or conveyed by or with the trailer or camp vehicle.
§ 473-2. Parking.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any trailer or camp
vehicle or boat trailer upon or in any street or highway or upon any lands
and premises within the Township except in accordance with Township
regulations, and no trailer or camp vehicle or boat trailer shall under any
circumstances remain so parked for a period longer than three weeks;
provided, however, that such limitation as to time shall not be applicable
where repairs or service to or upon any such trailer or camp vehicle are
being furnished in any public garage or public automobile repair shop, or
where any such trailer or camp vehicle shall remain stored and unoccupied
on private property.
§ 473-3. Use as dwelling or sleeping place.
No trailer or camp vehicle or boat trailer, while parked or placed upon or
in any public street or highway or upon any lands and premises, or while
repairs or service to or upon such trailer or camp vehicle or boat trailer
are being furnished in any public garage or public automobile repair shop,
or while such trailer or camp vehicle or boat trailer remains stored upon
private property, shall be used by any person as a dwelling or sleeping
place.
Chapter 477
TREES AND SHRUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 362.
§ 473-1 HAMILTON CODE § 473-3
1:674
§ 477-1. Permit required for acts affecting trees or shrubs on public
property.
No person shall do or cause to be done any of the following acts affecting
the trees, shrubbery or ornamental material planted or growing naturally
within the highways or public places under the jurisdiction of the Township,
except with a written permit first obtained from the Department of Public
Works:
§ 477-2. Protection of trees from cables and wires.
Every person having control over any wire for the transmission of an
electric current along a public highway shall at all times guard all trees
through which or near which such wire passes against any injury from the
wire or cable or from the electric current carried by it. The device or means
used shall in every case be subject to approval by the Department of Public
Works.
§ 477-3. Use of guy wires and braces.
No person shall place any guy wire, brace or other device on any such tree
in such a manner as to injure it.
§ 477-4. Injury by animals.
No person shall hitch or fasten an animal to any tree or shrub upon a public
highway or to any guard or support provided for such tree or shrub or
permit an animal to bite or otherwise injure any tree or shrub.
A. Cut, trim, break, disturb the roots of or spray with chemicals any living
tree or shrub or injure, misuse or remove any structure or device placed
to support or protect any tree or shrub.
B. Plant or remove any living tree or shrub or climb any living tree or
shrub with spikes.
C. Fasten any rope, wire, electric attachments, sign or other device to a
tree or shrub or to any guard about such tree or shrub.
D. Close or obstruct any open space provided about the base of a tree or
shrub to permit the access of air, water or fertilizer to the roots of such
tree or shrub.
E. Pile any building material or make any mortar or cement within six feet
of a tree or shrub.
F. Change the grade of the soil within the limits of the lateral spread of the
branches of any such tree.
§ 473-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 477-5
1:675
§ 477-5. Chemical damage.
No person shall permit any brine, gas or injurious chemical or liquid to
come in contact with the stump or roots of any tree or shrub upon a public
highway.
§ 477-6. Interference with Department of Public Works.
No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with any lawful work undertaken
by the Department of Public Works or its authorized agent.
§ 477-7. Trimming of trees and shrubs near roadways.
A. Responsibility of owner or tenant. The owner or tenant of lands lying
within the Township shall be required to keep all trees, shrubs, hedges
and other plant life growing within 10 feet of any roadway and within
25 feet of the intersection of two roadways cut to a height of not more
than 2 1/2 feet, as deemed necessary and expedient for the
preservation of public safety after a determination by the director of the
Department of Public Works or any subordinates acting under his
direction.
B. Notice to remove. After such determination, a written notice to remove
shall be forwarded to the owner or tenant of the lands, and he shall
comply in accordance therewith within 10 days after its receipt. The
notice shall contain a description of the property affected sufficiently
definite in terms to identify it and shall set forth that, unless such trees,
shrubs, hedges and other plant life are cut, the Township shall cut or
cause the trees, shrubs, hedges or other plant life to be cut pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.26.
C. Service of notice. A notice under this subsection may be served on the
owner or tenant residing within the Township in person or by leaving it
at his usual place of residence or with a member of his family above the
age of 14 years. If an owner or tenant shall not reside within the
Township, the notice may be served on him personally or it may be
mailed to his last known post office address, or it may be served on the
agent of the owner or tenant in charge of the property. Notice to an
infant owner or tenant or to an owner or tenant of unsound mind shall
be served on his guardian. When any property is held in trust, service of
notice shall be made on the trustee. When any property is held by two
tenants by the entirety or two or more as joint tenants or tenants in
common, service on one shall be deemed as notice to all. If for any
reason notice cannot be served as directed in this subsection, it shall be
published at least once in any newspaper circulating in the Township,
and publication of the notice shall have the same effect as if served in
any other manner.
D. Failure to comply; removal by Township. If an owner or tenant shall
neglect, after notice is given, to cut such trees, shrubs, hedges or other
plant life, and the trees, shrubs, hedges or other plant life is cut under
§ 477-5 HAMILTON CODE § 477-7
1:676
§ 477-8. Violations and penalties.
If any person continues to violate any of the provisions of this chapter
after being duly notified of such violation or neglects or refuses to comply
with any lawful order of the Department of Public Works, the failure to
comply with a second or each of any subsequent notifications or orders
shall be construed as an additional violation of this chapter, and each such
additional offense shall subject the offending party, upon conviction, to the
same penalty as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations;
penalties, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton.
Chapter 485
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435.
Taxicabs and limousines — See Ch. 454.
Towing — See Ch. 468.
the direction of an officer of the Township, such officer shall certify
the cost thereof to the Township Council, which shall examine the
certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the cost to be charged
against the lands or, if such cost is excessive, shall cause a reasonable
cost to be charged against the lands. The amount so charged shall
forthwith become a lien on the lands and shall be added to and become
and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied on the lands,
and such amount shall bear interest at the same rate as other taxes and
shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as taxes.
§ 477-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 477-8
1:677

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 485-1. Definitions; time standard.
§ 485-2. Authorization for the closing of any street.
§ 485-3. Tow-away.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this chapter shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall bear the reasonable costs of removal and storage, which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 485-4. Penalties. [Amended 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-005]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statutes or this
chapter, every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter
or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $60
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
A. Words and phrases. Whenever any words and phrases are used in this
chapter, the meanings respectively ascribed to them in N.J.S.A. 39:1
shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein.
B. Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this
chapter, they shall mean either Eastern standard time or Eastern
daylight saving time as may be in current use.
A. The Chief of Police, or in his absence the ranking police officer, is
hereby authorized to provide, by regulation, for the closing of any
municipal street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any day or
days whenever he finds that such closing is necessary for the
preservation of the public safety, health, or welfare. This closure can
last for up to 48 hours and does not require the approval of the
Commissioner of Transportation.
B. Any regulation promulgated by the Chief of Police in accordance with
Subsection A above shall provide for the posting of proper warning
signs on such street closings as required by N.J.S.A. 39:4-198.
C. Any violation of this regulation promulgated hereunder shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $60.
D. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any municipal
street for a period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become
effective unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Motor Vehicle Commission.
§ 485-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-5
1:679
§ 485-5. Work zone traffic control.
The standards for traffic controls within the Township established herein
are consistent with the Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways of the Federal Highway Administration, which are published in
the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), as adopted by the
Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Transportation pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27 and N.J.A.C. 16:27-1. The work zone requirements
promote the public health, safety and welfare, prevent occurrence of
dangerous traffic obstructions, and ensure the safe and expeditious
movement of traffic within work zones.
A. Work zones generally. Safety controls and regulations are required
when work zones obstruct the normal flow of traffic and/or block
roadways. The safety of the workers in such work zones is enhanced
with the safe and expeditious movement of traffic through the work
zones.
B. Preconstruction meeting and emergency contact phone numbers
required. Any person, contractor, or public utility wishing to conduct
work on, under, or above the roadway shall comply with the following:
(1) Contact the Traffic Bureau of the Division of Police to arrange a
preconstruction meeting. Plans must be submitted for the safe
movement of traffic through the work zone.
(2) Provide the Traffic Bureau of the Division of Police with at least two
emergency contact numbers.
(a) The Traffic Bureau of the Division of Police may take action to
correct a hazardous condition if the emergency contact does
not respond to a request to correct the hazardous condition, or
cannot be reached.
(b) The reasonable fees for emergency service to correct
hazardous conditions shall be charged to the person,
contractor, or utility responsible for such hazardous condition.
C. Hours. There shall be no construction maintenance or utility work on
any roadway before 8:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. Adjustments to such
hours may be made by the officer in charge of the Traffic Bureau of the
Division of Police. Such adjustments shall not be permitted if traffic
would be substantially delayed, or cause safety and/or health hazards.
D. Road closings and detours. Road closings and/or detours due to work
zones shall not be permitted unless approved by the Traffic Bureau of
the Division of Police.
E. Traffic directors. Traffic directors shall be posted at all work zones
when deemed necessary by the Traffic Bureau of the Division of Police.
F. Stop work. In order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard, or for
any violation of this section, the Traffic Bureau of the Division of Police
§ 485-5 HAMILTON CODE § 485-5
1:680
shall have the authority to stop work in any work zone, which includes
removal of the following:
(1) Equipment and vehicles;
(2) Stored material within the street right-of-way;
(3) Backfilling of open excavations and/or other related work.
G. Site preparation. No materials, vehicles, or equipment shall be placed
in the roadway or sidewalk area until all construction signs, lights,
devices, and pavement markings are installed.
H. Violations and penalties.
(1) Generally. Any person, contractor, or utility who violates this
section shall, upon conviction thereof for a first offense, pay a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $500 and/or be imprisoned for
a term not exceeding 90 days; for a second offense, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine of not less than $250 and/or be imprisoned for a
term not exceeding 90 days.
(2) Continuing violations. Continuation of a violation for each
successive day shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 485-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-5
1:681

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 485-6. Parking regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute, or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 485-7. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
§ 485-8. Temporary parking prohibition for snow plowing and
removal.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
the streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no
parking signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the
ranking police officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of such emergency no parking signs when weather
conditions, accidents, road construction, fires, public celebrations, etc.,
dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic.
B. Notification that emergency no parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
C. The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the streets or highways, an emergency shall exist and no vehicle shall
be parked on the streets or highways or portions thereof indicated. The
parking prohibitions set out in this section shall remain in effect after
the snow has ceased and until the streets have been plowed sufficiently
and to the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of
traffic.
B. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation shall be deemed
a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic,
and any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
Name of Street Sides Location
Argonne Avenue Both Entire length
Bow Hill Avenue Both Entire length
§ 485-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-8
1:683
Name of Street Sides Location
Cedar Lane Both From Newkirk Avenue to
Chambers Street (CR #626)
Cedar Lane South From Chambers Street (CR
#626) to Broad Street
East State Street (CR
#635)
Both From Nottingham Way (CR
#614) to Klockner Avenue
Englewood Boulevard Both Entire length
Flock Road (CR #649) Both From Quakerbridge Road (CR
#533) to Edinburg Road (CR
#535)
Flock Road Both From Mercer Street to its
northerly terminus
Gropp Avenue Both Entire length
Hempstead Road Both Entire length
Hughes Drive Both Entire length
Independence Avenue Both Entire length
Johnston Avenue Both Entire length
Klockner Road Both Entire length
Kuser Road (CR #619) Both From Whitehorse-Mercerville
Road (CR #533) to Hamilton
Avenue (CR #606)
Kuser Road Both From Whitehorse-Mercerville
Road (CR #533) to Route US 130
Lafayette Avenue South Entire length
Lamberton Road Both Entire length
Leonard Avenue Both Entire length
Liberty Street Both From South Olden Avenue (CR
#622) to Chambers Street (CR
#626)
Mercer Street Both Entire length
Newkirk Avenue Both Entire length
Norway Avenue North From Route NJ 33 (Greenwood
Avenue) to East State Street (CR
#635)
Park Avenue Both Entire length
Paxson Avenue164 Both Entire length
Sandalwood Avenue Both Entire length
164. Editor’s Note: A portion of Paxson Avenue, in the area of Mercer County Park was
renamed Richard J. Coffee Boulevard 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-059.
§ 485-8 HAMILTON CODE § 485-8
1:684
§ 485-9. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts thereof
described.
Name of Street Sides Location
Albert E. Bonacci Drive
[Added 10-1-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-038]
Both From Kuser Road to Briarwood
Drive
Alfred Avenue South Between Hobson Avenue and
Camden Avenue
Argonne Avenue North From a point 208 feet east of the
easterly curbline of South Broad
Street (CR #524) and extending
to a point 93 feet in an easterly
direction therefrom
Argonne Avenue North From a point 294 feet west of
the westerly curbline of
Sunnybrae Boulevard and
extending to a point 96 feet in a
westerly direction therefrom
Argonne Avenue South From a point 181 feet east of the
easterly curbline of South Broad
Street (CR #524) and extending
to a point 173 feet in an easterly
direction therefrom
Argonne Avenue South From a point 655 feet west of
the westerly curbline of
Sunnybrae Boulevard and
extending to a point 95 feet in a
westerly direction therefrom
Name of Street Sides Location
Schiller Avenue North Entire length
Sloan Road (CR #649) Both Entire length
South Clinton Avenue Both Entire length
Sunnybrae Boulevard Both Entire length
Ward Avenue Both From Hamilton Avenue (CR
#606) to Nottingham Way (CR
#614)
Yardville Hamilton
Square Road
Both Entire length
Youngs Road Both From Hughes Drive to
Quakerbridge Road (CR #533)
§ 485-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-9
1:685
Name of Street Sides Location
Argonne Avenue South From a point 261 feet west of
the westerly curbline of
Sunnybrae Boulevard and
extending to a point 96 feet in a
westerly direction therefrom
Atlantic Avenue West From Hamilton Avenue (CR
#606) to Hobart Avenue
Balog Avenue Both From Park Lane to a point 115
feet southwest therefrom
Barricklo Street East From Lalor Street (CR #650) to
a point 75 feet south therefrom
Beal Street Both From Newkirk Avenue to a point
615 feet west therefrom
Beal Street Both From South Olden Avenue (CR
#622) to a point 100 feet east
therefrom
Bernadine Avenue North From the east curbline of East
Franklin Street to a point 100
feet east therefrom
Bernadine Avenue North From the west curbline of East
Franklin Street to a point 75 feet
west thereof
Bernadine Avenue South From the east curbline of East
Franklin Street to a point 75 feet
east therefrom
Bernadine Avenue South From the west curbline of East
Franklin Street to a point 100
feet west therefrom
Bismark Avenue South From Dewey Avenue to Hobson
Avenue
Bowhill Avenue Both From Jeremiah Avenue to
Stenton Court
Bowhill Avenue South From the southwest curbline of
Reeger Avenue and extending
for 100 feet in an easterly
direction
Camden Avenue West Between Ruskin Avenue and
Emeline Avenue
Cedar Lane Both From Newkirk Avenue to
Pittman Avenue
§ 485-9 HAMILTON CODE § 485-9
1:686
Name of Street Sides Location
Charlotte Avenue West From the south curbline of
Hamilton Avenue (CR #606) to a
point 110 feet south therefrom
Church Street (CR #609) Both From the south curbline of
South Broad Street (CR #672) to
a point 3,270 feet south thereof
(the northerly property line of
the Groveville School)
Church Street (CR #609) South From a point 230 feet west of
the southeast corner of Church
Street (CR #609) and Main
Street and extending to a point
405 feet west therefrom
Coleridge Road North From South Broad Street (CR
#524) to Dover
Concord Avenue West From the north curbline of Route
NJ 33 to a point 100 feet north
therefrom
Cypress Lane [Added
5-15-2018 by Ord. No.
18-021]
South From a point 950 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Rockwood
Avenue to approximately 18 feet
west from the westernmost
entrance of a parking area to the
Hamilton Township Senior
Center. The said prohibited
parking shall be restricted to the
easterly and westerly sides of all
parking area entrances to said
facility, each side being 20 feet
in length
Dancer Drive South From a point 487 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Birch Street
to its terminus
Dewey Avenue North From South Broad Street to
Emeline Avenue
Donald Drive [Added
7-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-026]
Both From Nottingham Way (NJ State
Highway Route 33) to a point 50
feet south therefrom
East Franklin Street East From the north curbline of
Bernadine Avenue to a point 75
feet north therefrom
East Franklin Street East From the south curbline of
Bernadine Avenue to a point 100
feet south therefrom
§ 485-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-9
1:687
Name of Street Sides Location
East Franklin Street West From the north curbline of
Bernadine Avenue to a point 100
feet north thereof
East Franklin Street West From the south curbline of
Bernadine Avenue to a point 75
feet south therefrom
East State Street (CR
#635)
Both From the northerly curbline of
Nottingham Way (CR #614) to a
point 150 feet north therefrom
East State Street (CR
#635)
Both From the northerly curbline of
Nottingham Way (CR #614) to a
point 150 feet south therefrom
East State Street
Extension
West From a point 345 feet north of
the northerly curbline of
Sculptors Way to a point 113
feet south of the southerly
curbline of Sculptors Way
Edinburg Road (CR #535) Both From Quakerbridge Road (CR
#533) to Steinert Avenue
Edmund Street Both From the west curbline of
Newkirk Avenue to a point 615
feet west therefrom
Edmund Street Both From the east curbline of South
Olden Avenue (CR #622) to a
point 615 feet east therefrom
Elwood Street Both From the west curbline of
Newkirk Avenue to a point 615
feet west therefrom
Elwood Street Both From the east curbline of South
Olden Avenue (CR #622) to a
point 100 feet east therefrom
Goeke Drive West From a point 230 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Whitehorse
Mercerville Road (CR #533) to
the Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road
Grandview Avenue East From Highland Avenue to Althea
Avenue
Hubert Avenue Both Extending 123 feet from the
intersecting curbline of East
State Street (CR #635)
Hughes Drive Both From Quakerbridge Road (CR
#533) to Youngs Road
§ 485-9 HAMILTON CODE § 485-9
1:688
Name of Street Sides Location
Jencoholla Avenue North Beginning at a point 378 feet
west of the westerly curbline of
Klockner Road and extending to
a point 22 feet west therefrom
Johnston Avenue East From the northerly curbline of
Hamilton Avenue (CR #606) to
the southerly curbline of Hobart
Avenue
Johnston Avenue East From the south curbline of
Nottingham Way (CR #614) to a
point 160 feet south therefrom
Johnston Avenue Northwest From the north curbline of Route
NJ 33 (Greenwood Avenue) to a
point 150 feet north therefrom
Johnston Avenue Southeast From the south curbline of
Route NJ 33 (Greenwood
Avenue) to a point 75 feet south
therefrom
Johnston Avenue West From the northerly curbline of
East State Street (CR #635) to a
point 200 feet north therefrom
Johnston Avenue West From the northerly curbline of
Hamilton Avenue (CR #606) to a
point 100 feet north therefrom
Johnston Avenue West From Nottingham Way (CR
#614) to Roberts Avenue
Klockner Road Both From a point 200 feet south of
the southerly curbline of
Hamilton Avenue (CR #606) to
Kuser Road
Knapp Avenue East From Whitehorse Avenue (CR
#533) to Garden Avenue
Kuser Road Both From Whitehorse Mercerville
Road (CR #533) to Route US
130
Lakeside Boulevard Both From Route NJ 37 (South Broad
Street) to the southerly curbline
of Spicer Avenue
Lalor Street (CR #650) South From the Hamilton Township
corporate line—City of Trenton
corporate line to a point 200 feet
west of the west curbline of
Deutz Avenue
§ 485-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-9
1:689
Name of Street Sides Location
Lalor Street (CR #650) South From a point 200 feet east of the
east curbline of Deutz Avenue to
South Broad Street
Lamberton Road Both From the Hamilton Township
corporate line—City of Trenton
corporate line to the south
terminus of Lamberton Road
Leonard Avenue East From a point 322 feet south of
the northerly curbline of
Steward Street and extending
470 feet in a southerly direction
therefrom
Liberty Street [Amended
1-17-2017 by Ord. No.
17-002]
Both From Hamilton Avenue (CR
#606) to Newkirk Avenue
Linden Avenue North Between Hobson Avenue and
Camden Avenue
Locust Avenue North From Gropp Avenue to
Whitehorse Avenue (CR #533)
Locust Avenue South From the east curbline of
Whitehorse Avenue (CR #533) to
a point 134 feet east therefrom
Massachusetts Avenue Both From Route NJ 33 (Greenwood
Avenue) into the Fairlawn
Gardens complex through the
cul-de-sac driveway westerly to
the parking lot
Massachusetts Avenue East From Route NJ 33 (Greenwood
Avenue) to Quincy Avenue
Mercer Street East From Hughes Drive to
Nottingham Way (CR #618)
Michael Drive North From Nottingham Way (CR
#614) to the dead-end
Miles Avenue East From Dewey Avenue to Hobson
Avenue
Milton Avenue East From Whitehorse Avenue (CR
#533) to Garden Avenue
Montana Avenue North Beginning at a point 235 feet
east of the easterly curbline of
Klockner Road and extending to
a point 218 feet in a northerly
direction therefrom
§ 485-9 HAMILTON CODE § 485-9
1:690
Name of Street Sides Location
Nebraska Avenue Both From Klockner Road to Kentucky
Avenue
Newkirk Avenue Both From South Olden Avenue (CR
#622) to Cedar Lane—Leonard
Avenue
North Hamilton Avenue West From the north curbline of Route
NJ 33 to a point 100 feet north
therefrom
Nottingham Way (CR
#614)
Both From the easterly curb of East
State Street (CR #635) to a
point 150 feet east therefrom
Nottingham Way (CR
#614)
Both From the westerly curb of East
State Street (CR #635) to a
point 150 feet west therefrom
Nottingham Way (CR
#614) [Added 8-21-2018
by Ord. No. 18-039]
South From the easterly curbline of
North Johnston Avenue in an
easterly direction to a point of
100 feet east therefrom
Nottingham Way (CR
#618)
South From the easterly curbline of
George Dye Road to a point 88
feet in an easterly direction
therefrom
Nottingham Way (CR
#618)
South From the westerly curbline of
George Dye Road to a point 133
feet in a westerly direction
therefrom
Olympia Avenue East Entire length
Orchard Avenue North From the westerly curbline of
Whitehorse Avenue (CR #533) to
a point 186 feet west therefrom
Orchard Avenue South From the westerly terminus
(dead end) and extending 96 feet
in an easterly direction
therefrom
Oregon Avenue West From Dewey Avenue to Hobson
Avenue
Parent Avenue South Entire length
Park Avenue Both From the south curbline of
South Clinton Avenue to a point
130 feet south therefrom
Park Avenue East From Genesee Street to South
Clinton Avenue
§ 485-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-9
1:691
Name of Street Sides Location
Park Avenue West From Nottingham Way (CR
#618) to Mapleshade Avenue
Patterson Avenue East Beginning at a point 387 feet
north of the northeasterly
curbline of Sylvan Avenue and
extending to a point 118 feet in a
northerly direction therefrom
Patterson Avenue West Beginning at a point 430 feet
north of the northwesterly
curbline of Sylvan Avenue and
extending to a point 76 feet in a
northerly direction therefrom
Paxson Avenue West Beginning at the northerly
curbline of Route NJ 33 and
extending to a point 205 feet in a
northerly direction therefrom
Prospect Avenue East From Highland Avenue to Althea
Avenue
Quakerbridge Plaza Drive Both Beginning at a point 300 feet
west of the westerly curbline of
Quakerbridge Road (CR #533)
and extending to the easterly
curbline of Thomas J. Rhodes
Industrial Drive
Quakerbridge Road (CR
#533)
Both From Nottingham Way (CR
#652) to Pollman Avenue
Quakerbridge Road (CR
#533)
Both From Sloan Avenue (CR #649)
to Hughes Drive
Quimby Avenue [Added
10-18-2016 by Ord. No.
16-049]
South Beginning at the northerly
curbline of Whitehorse Avenue
and extending 50 feet
northwesterly in direction along
the south side of Quimby Avenue
Raintree Drive [Added
8-20-2013 by Ord. No.
13-027]
Both From Willow Bend Drive to
Hawthorne Court
Regina Avenue East From the north curbline of
Nottingham Way (CR #652) to a
point 740 feet north therefrom
Roberts Avenue Northeast From the west curbline of
Johnston Avenue to a point 900
feet west therefrom
§ 485-9 HAMILTON CODE § 485-9
1:692
Name of Street Sides Location
Roberts Avenue Southeast From a point 129 feet west of
the west curbline of Johnston
Avenue to a point 280 feet west
thereof
Rowan Avenue [Added
12-15-2015 by Ord. No.
15-048]
East From South Broad Street to
Genesee Street
Rowan Avenue East From South Clinton Avenue to
William Street
Rowan Avenue North From Genesee Street to South
Clinton Avenue
Ruskin Avenue North From Hobson Avenue to South
Broad Street
Ruskin Avenue South From Camden Avenue to South
Broad Street
Saybrook Avenue South From the south curbline of
Hamilton Avenue (CR #606) to a
point 150 feet south therefrom
Sherwood Avenue North From the west curbline of
Quakerbridge Road (CR #533)
to a point 150 feet west
therefrom
Sherwood Avenue South From the west curbline of
Quakerbridge Road (CR #533)
to a point 200 feet west
therefrom
South Broad Street (CR
#672)
East From the southeasterly curbline
of the Groveville Allentown Road
to a point 200 feet in a
southeasterly direction
therefrom
South Broad Street (CR
#524)
South Between Hempstead and Route
NJ 206
South Clinton Avenue Both From Park Avenue to Rowan
Avenue
South Olden Avenue (CR
#622)
North From Cunningham Avenue to
Loomis Avenue
South Olden Avenue (CR
#622)
Northeast Beginning at the southeasterly
curbline of Tampa Avenue and
extending to a point 215 feet in a
southeasterly direction
therefrom
§ 485-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-9
1:693
Name of Street Sides Location
South Olden Avenue (CR
#622)
East From a point 50 feet east of the
east curbline of Ryan Avenue to
Arena Drive
Spicer Avenue North Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Lakeside Boulevard
and extending to a point 294
feet in an easterly direction
therefrom
Stenton Court Both From a point 250 feet south of
the south curbline of Bow Hill
Avenue and extending in a
clockwise direction (in the culde-
sac) to a point 389 feet
therefrom, the ending point
being 208 feet south of the south
curbline of Bow Hill Avenue
Stenton Court Both From Lalor Street (CR #650) to
a point 100 feet south of the
intersection with Lalor Street
(CR #650)
Sylvan Avenue Both From Newkirk Avenue to Tampa
Avenue
Tampa Avenue Both From South Olden Avenue (CR
#622) to Sylvan Avenue
Victoria Avenue North From Hobson Avenue to Dewey
Avenue
Walnut Avenue Both From the southwest curbline of
Park Lane to a point 115 feet
southwest therefrom
Walnut Avenue North From Norway Avenue to the
Hamilton Township corporate
line—City of Trenton corporate
line
Walnut Avenue South From Norway Avenue to
Lynwood Avenue
Whitehorse Hamilton
Square Road
Both From Klockner Road to a point
1,240 feet south of the south
curbline of Kuser Road
Whitehorse Hamilton
Square Road
East From the southeast corner of
Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road and Klockner Road to a
point 1,110 feet south along the
eastern curbline
§ 485-9 HAMILTON CODE § 485-9
1:694
Name of Street Sides Location
Whitehorse Hamilton
Square Road
East From the northeast corner of
Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road and Kuser Road to a point
700 feet north along the eastern
curbline
Whitehorse Hamilton
Square Road
East Starting at a point 1,700 feet
north along the eastern curbline
from the northeast corner of
Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road and Kuser Road and
ending at a point 3,695 feet
north
Whitehorse Hamilton
Square Road
East From the south curbline of
Nottingham Way (CR #618) to a
point 150 feet south therefrom
Whitehorse Hamilton
Square Road
West From the northwest corner of
Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road and Cypress Lane to
appoint 350 feet north along the
western curbline
Whitehorse Hamilton
Square Road
West From the southwest corner of
Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road and Cypress Lane to a
point 675 feet south along the
western curbline
Whitehorse Hamilton
Square Road
West From the southwest corner of
Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road and Klockner Road to a
point 1,625 feet south along the
western curbline
Whitehorse Hamilton
Square Road
West From the northwest corner of
Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road and Kuser Road to a point
650 feet north along the western
curbline
Whitehorse Hamilton
Square Road
West From the northwest corner of
Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road and Silver Court 25 feet
north along the western curbline
Whitehorse Hamilton
Square Road
West From the southwest corner of
Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road and Silver Court 25 feet
south along the western curbline
Whitehorse Hamilton
Square Road
West From Nottingham Way (CR
#618) to Route NJ 33
§ 485-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-9
1:695
Name of Street Sides Location
Whitehorse Mercerville
Road (CR #533)
Both From Route NJ 206 (South
Broad Street) to South Olden
Avenue
Whitehorse Mercerville
Road (CR #533)
Both From Route NJ 33 to
Nottingham Way (CR #618)
Whitehorse Mercerville
Road (CR #533)
Both From South Olden Avenue to
Route NJ 33
Whitehorse Mercerville
Road (CR #533)
West From South Olden Avenue to
Finley Avenue
Winslow Avenue East From the south curbline of
Route NJ 33 to a point 100 feet
south therefrom
Wolf Drive [Added
9-17-2019 by Ord. No.
19-042]
South From a point of curvature
connecting the southerly
curbline of Wolf Drive with the
easterly curbline of Whitehorse
Mercerville Road to a point 13
feet therefrom
Woolsey Street Northeast Beginning at the southeasterly
curbline of Liberty Street and
extending to a point 103 feet in a
southeasterly direction
therefrom
Yardville Hamilton Square
Road
Both From South Broad Street (CR
#672) to a point 1,315 feet north
of the north curbline of Klockner
Road
Yardville Hamilton Square
Road
East From the north curbline of
Klockner Road to a point 1,250
feet north therefrom
Yardville Hamilton Square
Road
West From Klockner Road to Route NJ
33
Youngs Road Both From the corporate limits of the
Township to Quakerbridge Road
(CR #533)
Youngs Road Both From Quakerbridge Road (CR
#533) to Hughes Drive
§ 485-10. Stopping or standing prohibited at all times on certain
streets.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets
or parts described.
§ 485-9 HAMILTON CODE § 485-10
1:696
Name of Street Sides Location
Alexander Elementary
School (in front of)
driveway
Both From the southeasterly curbline
of Robert Frost Drive for its
entire length
Althea Avenue East From Burnside Avenue to
Prospect Avenue
Bradford Avenue Both Beginning at the intersection of
Arena Drive (CR #620) and
extending 250 feet therefrom
Bunting Avenue Both From a point 108 feet north of
the northerly curbline of High
Street and extending 120 feet in
a northerly direction therefrom
Cedar Lane North Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Chambers Street (CR
#626) and extending to a point
170 feet in an easterly direction
therefrom
Cedar Lane South Beginning at a point 75 feet west
of the westerly curbline of
Chambers Street (CR #626) and
extending to a point 190 feet
east of the easterly curbline of
Chambers Street (CR #626)
Chambers Street (CR
#626)
East Beginning at the southerly
curbline of Liberty Street and
extending to the northerly
curbline of Tindall Avenue
Chapman Avenue North Beginning at a point 330 feet
west from the intersection of the
western curbline of Whitehorse
Avenue (CR #533) and
extending to a point 23 feet
therefrom
Crosswicks Hamilton
Square Road
Both From Route US 130 to Yardville
Allentown Road (CR #524)
Deerwood Drive West Beginning at the northerly
curbline of Route NJ 33 and
extending to a point 124 feet in a
northerly direction therefrom
Deutz Avenue Both From a point 100 feet south of
the south curbline of Lalor
Street (CR #650) to a point 100
feet north of the north curbline
of Lalor Street (CR #650)
§ 485-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-10
1:697
Name of Street Sides Location
Donald Drive Both From the south curbline of
Route NJ 33 (Nottingham Way)
to a point 95 feet south
therefrom
East State Street (CR
#635)
Both Beginning at a point 450 feet
west of the westerly curbline of
Klockner Avenue and extending
to a point 350 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Klockner
Avenue
East State Street (CR
#635) [Added
10-18-2016 by Ord. No.
16-048]
North From the most westerly property
line of 2560 East State Street
extending in a southwesterly
direction to the east side of
Sculptors Way
East State Street (CR
#635)
South Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Sculptors Way and
extending to a point 235 feet in
an easterly direction therefrom
East State Street
Extension
Both From Stratford Avenue to
Nottingham Way (CR #652)
Edinburg Road (CR #535) Both From a point 150 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Hughes
Drive to a point 150 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Hughes
Drive
Extonville Road Both From the north edge of the Orr
Bridge (over Crosswicks Creek)
and extending to a point 330
feet in a northerly direction
therefrom
Fetter Avenue East From South Broad Street to
South Clinton Avenue
Fisher Place South From the easternmost point of
Fisher Place to a point 155 feet
west therefrom
George Dye Road Both From Route NJ 33 to
Nottingham Way (CR #618)
George Dye Road East From the south curbline of
Route NJ 33 to a point 303 feet
in a southerly direction
therefrom
§ 485-10 HAMILTON CODE § 485-10
1:698
Name of Street Sides Location
George Dye Road West From the south curbline of
Route NJ 33 to a point 190 feet
in a southerly direction
therefrom
Goeke Drive North Beginning at a point 114 feet
from the intersecting curbline of
Elmont Avenue and along the
south side curbline, 100 feet
from the intersecting curbline of
Elmont Avenue
Gropp Avenue Both From a point 125 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Arena
Drive (CR #620) to a point 125
feet south of the southerly
curbline of Arena Drive (CR
#620)
Gropp Avenue East From a point 127 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Martha
Drive and extending 385 feet in
a northerly direction therefrom
Hempstead Road West Beginning at the northerly
curbline of Broad Street (CR
#524) and extending to a point
150 feet in a northerly direction
therefrom
Highland Avenue Both From the southerly curbline of
South Broad Street (CR #524)
and extending to a point 230
feet south therefrom
Hughes Drive Both From a point 150 feet north of
the northerly curbline of
Edinburg Road (CR #535) to a
point 150 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Edinburg
Road (CR #535)
Irvington Place Both From the easterly curbline of
South Broad Street to a point
250 feet northerly therefrom
Joe DiMaggio Place West From South Broad Street (CR
#524) to Fisher Place
Kim Valley Road Both From the south curbline of
South Broad Street (CR #524) to
a point 150 feet south therefrom
§ 485-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-10
1:699
Name of Street Sides Location
Klockner Avenue Both Beginning at a point 350 feet
south of the southerly curbline
of East State Street (CR #635)
and extending to a point 400
feet north of the northerly
curbline of East State Street (CR
#635)
Klockner Road Both From a point 200 feet south of
the southerly curbline of
Hamilton Avenue (CR #606) to a
point 200 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Hamilton
Avenue (CR #606)
Klockner Road Both From Kuser Road to Route US
130
Lacy Avenue Both From the northerly curbline of
South Broad Street (CR #524) to
a point 100 feet north therefrom
Lalor Street (CR #650) South From a point 200 feet west of
the west curbline of Deutz
Avenue to a point 200 feet east
of the east curbline of Deutz
Avenue
Leonard Avenue East From a point 14 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Steward
Street and extending 336 feet in
a southerly direction therefrom
Leonard Avenue Northwest Beginning at a point 113 feet
southwest of the southwesterly
curbline of Steward Street and
extending to a point 180 feet in a
southwesterly direction
therefrom
Liberty Street North Beginning at the easterly
curbline of South Olden Avenue
(CR #622) and extending to a
point 135 feet in and easterly
direction therefrom
Liberty Street Northwest Beginning at the southwesterly
curbline of Newkirk Avenue and
extending to a point 75 feet in a
southwesterly direction
therefrom
§ 485-10 HAMILTON CODE § 485-10
1:700
Name of Street Sides Location
Liberty Street South Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Chambers Street (CR
#626) and extending to a point
165 feet in an easterly direction
therefrom
Liberty Street South Beginning at the westerly
curbline of South Olden Avenue
(CR #622) and extending to a
point 125 feet in a westerly
direction therefrom
Liberty Street Southeast Beginning at a point 75 feet
southwest of the southwesterly
curbline of Newkirk Avenue and
extending to a point 75 feet
northeast of the northeasterly
curbline of Newkirk Avenue
Lillian Avenue West Beginning at 17 Lillian Avenue,
72 feet from the intersecting
curbline
Maddock Avenue East From the easterly curbline, from
South Broad Street to South
Clinton Avenue
Main Street South From Allen Street to Richbell
Road
McCoy Avenue North From First Avenue to Seventh
Avenue
Newkirk Avenue Both Beginning at a point 75 feet
southeast of the southeasterly
curbline of Liberty Street and
extending to a point 75 feet
northwest of the northwesterly
curbline of Liberty Street
Newkirk Avenue East Beginning at the southerly
curbline of Hamilton Avenue (CR
#606) and extending to the
northerly curbline of Liberty
Street
Newkirk Avenue West Beginning at the southerly
curbline of Hamilton Avenue (CR
#606) and extending to a point
75 feet in a southerly direction
therefrom
§ 485-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-10
1:701
Name of Street Sides Location
Norway Avenue West From Route NJ 33 (Greenwood
Avenue) to Hamilton Avenue (CR
#606)
Nottingham Way (CR
#618) [Added 11-6-2013
by Ord. No. 13-043]
Both From East State Street to
Farmingdale Park driveway
(1230 Nottingham Way)
Nottingham Way (CR
#618)
Both From the easterly curbline of
Mario Drive to Route NJ 33
Nottingham Way (CR
#618) [Added 11-6-2013
by Ord. No. 13-043]
Both From Rosalia Avenue to Michael
Drive
Nottingham Way (CR
#618) [Added 11-6-2013
by Ord. No. 13-043]
North From Farmingdale Park
driveway (1230 Nottingham
Way) to Rosalia Avenue
Nottingham Way (CR
#618)
South Beginning at the westerly
curbline of Gregory Drive and
extending to a point 422 feet in a
westerly direction therefrom
Nottingham Way (CR
#618) [Added 11-6-2013
by Ord. No. 13-043]
South From Michael Drive to Charles
Way
Oak Lane East From South Broad Street (CR
#524) to Fisher Place
Oldfield Avenue South Along the southerly side of
Oldfield Avenue from the
westerly curbline of South Broad
Street to a point 100 feet south
therefrom
Park Avenue East From South Clinton Avenue to
Berg Avenue
Park Avenue West From South Clinton Avenue to
Parkinson Avenue
Quakerbridge Plaza Drive Both Beginning at the westerly
curbline of Quakerbridge Road
(CR #533) and extending to a
point 300 feet in a westerly
direction from therefrom
Rennie Street West From the northerly curbline of
South Broad Street to a point
110 feet north therefrom
§ 485-10 HAMILTON CODE § 485-10
1:702
Name of Street Sides Location
Robert Frost Drive Both Beginning at the southwesterly
curbline of Surrey Drive and
extending to its southwesterly
terminus
Scammell Avenue West From Route NJ 33 (Greenwood
Avenue) to Tipton Avenue
Sewell Avenue North From the westerly curbline of
South Broad Street to a point 75
feet west therefrom
Sewell Avenue South From the westerly curbline of
South Broad Street to a point 60
feet west thereof
Shady Lane Both From the northerly curbline of
Route NJ 33 to a point 160 feet
north therefrom
Shady Lane Both From the south curbline of
Route NJ 33 to a point 115 feet
south therefrom
South Broad Street (CR
#524)
Both From the Gropp's Lake Bridge to
the Five Points Intersection
(Yardville Hamilton Square Road
and Church Street (CR #609)
South Broad Street East From the Whitehorse Circle to
the southerly curbline of Rowan
Avenue
South Broad Street East Beginning at the northerly
curbline of Mary Street to the
southerly curbline of Lida Street
South Broad Street West From the Hamilton Township
corporate line - City of Trenton
corporate line to the northerly
curbline of New Cedar Lane
South Broad Street West From the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Chambers
Street (CR 626) to the northerly
curbline of Rowan Avenue
South Broad Street West From the southerly curbline of
Oldfield Avenue to a point 458
feet south of Dewey Avenue
South Broad Street West From a point 515 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Dewey
Avenue to the Whitehorse Circle
§ 485-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-10
1:703
Name of Street Sides Location
South Clinton Avenue Both From the west side curbline of
Whitehorse Avenue (CR #533) to
the east side curbline of Park
Avenue
South Clinton Avenue East Beginning at the southeasterly
curbline of Joseph Street and
extending to a point 175 feet
south of the southeasterly
curbline of Chambers Street (CR
#626)
South Clinton Avenue West Beginning at a point 136 feet
south of the southwesterly
curbline of Joseph Street and
extending to a point 175 feet
south of the southwesterly
curbline of Chambers Street (CR
#626)
South Olden Avenue Both Beginning at the westerly
curbline of Whitehorse Avenue
(CR #533) and extending to a
point 150 feet in a westerly
direction therefrom
South Olden Avenue (CR
#622)
East Beginning at the southerly
curbline of Hamilton Avenue (CR
#606) and extending to a point
218 feet in a southeasterly
direction therefrom
South Olden Avenue (CR
#622)
East Beginning at a point 90 feet
south of the southerly curbline
of Liberty Street and extending
to a point 150 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Liberty
Street
South Olden Avenue (CR
#622)
West Beginning at the southerly
curbline of Liberty Street and
extending to a point 135 feet in a
southerly direction therefrom
Stultz Avenue Both Entire length
Sunnybrae Boulevard Both From Argonne Avenue to South
Broad Street (CR #524)
Sweetbriar Avenue (CR
#649)
Both From Whitehead Road (CR
#616) to Princeton Avenue
Tennis Court Both The entire circle located at the
north end of Tennis Court
§ 485-10 HAMILTON CODE § 485-10
1:704
Name of Street Sides Location
Thropp Avenue East Beginning at the intersection of
South Clinton Avenue and
extending 175 feet south
therefrom
Ward Avenue Both From Nottingham Way (CR
#614) to Route NJ 33
(Greenwood Avenue)
Ward Avenue [Added
2-3-2015 by Ord. No.
15-007]
North From Tipton Avenue to a point
150 feet from Route 33
(Greenwood Avenue)
Whitehorse Hamilton
Square Road
East Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Whitehorse Avenue
(CR #533) and extending to a
point 300 feet in a northerly
direction therefrom
Whitehorse Hamilton
Square Road
West Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Whitehorse Avenue
(CR #533) and extending to a
point 200 feet in a northerly
direction therefrom
Yardville Allentown Road
(CR #524)
South From the lateral extension of the
westerly curbline of Carlisle
Avenue to a point 152 feet in an
easterly direction therefrom
Yardville Hamilton Square
Road
West From the southerly curbline of
Nottingham Way (CR #618) to a
point 90 feet south therefrom
Yardville Hamilton Square
Road
West From the northerly curbline of
Route NJ 33 to a point 232 feet
north therefrom
§ 485-11. Parking prohibited for street cleaning.
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle upon any
street between the specified hours and days described.
Name of Street Sides Days and Hours Location
Atlantic Avenue East Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Walnut Avenue to
Hamilton Avenue
(CR #606)
Atlantic Avenue West Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Walnut Avenue to
Hamilton Avenue
(CR #606)
§ 485-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-11
1:705
Name of Street Sides Days and Hours Location
Austin Avenue East Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Austin Avenue West Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Connecticut Avenue East Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Walnut Avenue to
Quincy Avenue
Connecticut Avenue West Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Quincy Avenue to
Walnut Avenue
East State Street (CR
#635)
East Monday 1:00 p.m.
to 3:00 p.m.
Norway Avenue to
Sculptors Way
East State Street (CR
#635)
West Monday 8:00 a.m.
to 10:00 a.m.
Norway Avenue to
Sculptors Way
Francis Avenue East Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Francis Avenue West Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Genesee Street North Thursday 8:30
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Park Avenue to
Cedar Lane
Genesee Street South Wednesday 8:30
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Cedar Lane to Park
Avenue
Hollywood Drive East Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Joan Terrace to area
opposite Parker
Place
Hollywood Drive East Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Leese Avenue to
Nottingham Way (CR
#614)
Hollywood Drive East Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Park Lane to Parker
Place
Hollywood Drive North Thursday 12:30
p.m. to 2:30 p.m.
Nottingham Way (CR
#614) to Joan
Terrace
Hollywood Drive North Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Parker Place to area
opposite Joan
Terrace
§ 485-11 HAMILTON CODE § 485-11
1:706
Name of Street Sides Days and Hours Location
Hollywood Drive North Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Area opposite Parker
Place to Leese
Avenue
Hollywood Drive South Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Nottingham Way (CR
#614) to Joan
Terrace
Hollywood Drive South Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Parker Place to Joan
Terrace
Hollywood Drive West Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Joan Terrace East Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Route NJ 33
(Greenwood Avenue)
to Hollywood Avenue
Joan Terrace West Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Route NJ 33
(Greenwood Avenue)
to Hollywood Drive
Johnston Avenue East Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Johnston Avenue West Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Leese Avenue West Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Liberty Street North Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
South Olden Avenue
(CR #622) to
Hamilton Avenue
(CR #606)
Liberty Street South Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Chambers Street
(CR #626) to
Hamilton Avenue
(CR #606)
Lynwood Avenue East Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Lynwood Avenue West Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
§ 485-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-11
1:707
Name of Street Sides Days and Hours Location
Massachusetts
Avenue
West Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Mervine Place East Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Mervine Place North Wednesday 12:30
p.m. to 2:30 p.m.
Waverly Place to
Parker Place
Mervine Place South Thursday 12:30
p.m. to 2:30 p.m.
Waverly Place to
Parker Place
Moffatt Avenue East Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Moffatt Avenue West Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Newkirk Avenue East Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Liberty Street to
Leonard Avenue
Newkirk Avenue West Wednesday 10:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Hamilton Avenue
(CR #606) to Liberty
Street
Newkirk Avenue West Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Liberty Street to
Cedar Lane
Norway Avenue East Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Norway Avenue West Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Route NJ 33
(Greenwood Avenue)
to East State Street
(CR #635)
Park Lane East Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Park Lane West Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Parker Place East Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Waverly Place to
Hollywood Drive
§ 485-11 HAMILTON CODE § 485-11
1:708
Name of Street Sides Days and Hours Location
Parker Place West Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Perry Avenue East Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Perry Avenue West Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Roberts Avenue North Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Roberts Avenue South Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
South Clinton Avenue North Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Park Avenue to
Cedar Lane
South Clinton Avenue South Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Cedar Lane to Park
Avenue
Sykes Avenue North Thursday 10:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Perry Avenue to
Francis Avenue
Sykes Avenue South Wednesday 10:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Perry Avenue to
Francis Avenue
Tuttle Avenue North Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Tuttle Avenue South Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Waverly Place East Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Mervine Place to
Leese Avenue
Waverly Place North Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Leese Avenue to
Parker Place
Waverly Place North Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Park Lane to area
opposite Mervine
Place
§ 485-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-11
1:709
Name of Street Sides Days and Hours Location
Waverly Place South Wednesday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Park Lane to
Mervine Place
Waverly Place West Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Opposite Mervine
Place to Leese
Avenue
Woodlawn Avenue East Thursday 10:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Woodlawn Avenue West Wednesday 10:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
Entire length
§ 485-12. Parking time limited on certain streets. [Amended
1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-005]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit between the
hours listed on any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of Street Side(s) Time Limit/
Hours
Location
Carlisle Avenue South 1 hour/6:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
At or near the
intersection with
Princeton Avenue
East State Street
(CR #635)
West 15 minutes/
9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.
From a point 194 feet
from the southerly
curbline of Roberts
Avenue to a point 40 feet
in a southerly direction
therefrom
Hamilton Avenue
(CR #606)
South 30 minutes/
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Beginning at a point 115
feet east of the easterly
curbline of South Olden
Avenue (CR #622) and
extending to a point 120
feet in an easterly
direction therefrom
Princeton Avenue West 1 hour/6:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
At or near the
intersection with Carlisle
Avenue
Sewell Avenue South 15 minutes/
7:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.
From a point 60 feet
west of the westerly
curbline of South Broad
Street to unnamed alley
§ 485-11 HAMILTON CODE § 485-12
1:710
Name of Street Side(s) Time Limit/
Hours
Location
South Broad Street
(CR #524)
East 15 minutes From a point 106 feet
south of where the
lateral extension of the
south side curbline of
Oak Lane meets with the
east side curbline of
South Broad Street (CR
#524) to a point 115 feet
south therefrom
§ 485-13. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain
streets except for Sundays and public holidays.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified any day (except
Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Mercer Street West 7:00 a.m. to
9:30 a.m. and
3:00 p.m. to
6:30 p.m.
From Hughes Drive to
Nottingham Way (CR
#618)
Paxson Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Monday to
Friday
Beginning 300 feet from
the curbline of Paxson
Avenue at Tarheels Road
and extending 250 feet
north from that point to
the front of University
Heights School
Walker Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Beginning 143 feet west
of Liberty Street and
extending to a point 250
feet west of Liberty
Street
§ 485-14. Parking prohibited during certain months.
No person shall park a vehicle between the dates listed in this section upon
any of the following streets or parts of streets.
§ 485-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-14
1:711
Street Side Months Location
Edwards Avenue SoutheastApril 1 through
September 30
Beginning at a point 149
feet, northeast of the
northeasterly curbline of
Ritz Avenue and
extending 125 feet
northeasterly therefrom
Edwards Avenue West April 1 through
September 30
Beginning at a point 222
feet northeast of the
northeasterly curbline of
Ritz Avenue and
extending 74 feet in a
northeasterly direction
Irvington Place East April 1 through
September 30
Beginning at a point 274
feet north of the
northeasterly curbline of
Ritz Avenue and
extending 40 feet in a
northerly direction
Irvington Place West April 1 through
September 30
Beginning at a point 280
feet north of the
northeasterly curbline of
Ritz Avenue and
extending 72 feet in a
northerly direction
§ 485-15. Parking of trucks, semitrailers, etc., at night.
§ 485-16. Commuter parking prohibited; residential parking
permits for certain streets. [Added 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-005]
A. No truck, bus, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer shall be parked between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any street in the Township,
except for on state highways. This prohibition shall apply to any vehicle
having six or more wheels or any vehicle rated for loads of more than
one ton.
B. Excluded from the prohibition set out in Subsection A of this section are
emergency or service vehicles while actually engaged in emergency
service calls, or any government emergency vehicles with no more than
a GVWR of 19,500 which are for on-call purposes. [Amended 3-7-2017
by Ord. No. 17-003]
A. No person using public transportation services shall park a vehicle on
any residential street.
B. No person shall park a vehicle on the following streets unless an
appropriate and current parking permit as issued by the Township is
displayed on said vehicle: [Amended 10-1-2013 by Ord. No. 13-039]
§ 485-14 HAMILTON CODE § 485-16
1:712
§ 485-17. Residential permit parking.
§ 485-18. Angle parking.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby established as angle
parking at an angle so indicated below.
Name of Street Side(s) Angle Location
(Reserved)
Name of Street
Amherst Avenue
Basin Road
Boxwood Avenue
Bucknell Avenue
Carlisle Avenue
Evelyn Avenue
Lehigh Avenue (also known as South Lehigh Avenue)
Princeton Avenue
Rutgers Avenue
Sandalwood Avenue
Trinity Avenue
Vetterlein Avenue
C. Upon conviction of violating this section, the following penalties shall
apply: $100 first offense; $200 second offense; $500 each subsequent
offense.
A. No person shall park a vehicle on streets or parts of streets as
described within the following sections unless an appropriate and
current parking permit as issued by the Township is displayed on said
vehicle for those streets or parts of streets as described or listed within
the following sections: [Amended 5-6-2014 by Ord. No. 14-023]
Name of Street
Adella Avenue
Rosalia Avenue
Victor Avenue
B. Violations and penalties. Upon conviction of violating this section, the
following penalties shall apply: $100 first offense; $200 second offense;
$500 each subsequent offense. [Added 9-16-2014 by Ord. No.
14-053]
§ 485-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:713
§ 485-19. Handicapped parking. [Amended 8-19-2007 by Ord. No.
07-024; 10-22-2007 by Ord. No. 07-030; 12-12-2007 by Ord. No.
07-036; 8-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-045; 8-21-2008 by Ord. No.
08-046; 12-17-2008 by Ord. No. 08-074; 2-18-2009 by Ord. No.
09-005; 2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-006; 7-22-2009 by Ord. No.
09-024; 8-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-026; 9-16-2009 by Ord. No.
09-028; 12-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-033; 1-20-2010 by Ord. No.
10-001; 4-7-2010 by Ord. No. 10-009; 7-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-023;
9-23-2010 by Ord. No. 10-026; 9-23-2010 by Ord. No. 10-027;
10-6-2010 by Ord. No. 10-033; 12-1-2010 by Ord. No. 10-044;
2-2-2011 by Ord. No. 11-002; 2-16-2011 by Ord. No. 11-004;
2-16-2011 by Ord. No. 11-005; 4-20-2011 by Ord. No. 11-013;
5-18-2011 by Ord. No. 11-020; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 11-027;
7-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-023; 10-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-033;
10-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-034; 12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-041;
1-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-001; 1-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-002;
2-8-2012 by Ord. No. 12-003; 2-8-2012 by Ord. No. 12-004;
2-23-2012 by Ord. No. 12-006; 3-7-2012 by Ord. No. 12-007;
3-22-2012 by Ord. No. 12-010; 4-4-2012 by Ord. No. 12-013;
4-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-014; 6-7-2012 by Ord. No. 12-023;
6-7-2012 by Ord. No. 12-025; 6-20-2012 by Ord. No. 12-026;
7-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-036; 8-22-2012 by Ord. No. 12-039;
9-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-045; 10-17-2012 by Ord. No. 12-049;
12-5-2012 by Ord. No. 12-051]
A. Handicapped parking on streets. In accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following street locations are designated as
handicapped parking spaces. Such spaces are for use by persons who
have been issued special identification cards or plates or placards by
the Motor Vehicle Commission or a temporary placard issued by the
Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these
spaces. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-027]
Street Location
1936 East State Street Extension
(Mercer County Route 535)
[Added 3-19-2019 by Ord. No.
19-011]
Beginning at a point 760 feet
north of the curbline of Whitehead
Road and extending to a point 782
feet north of the curbline of
Whitehead Road on the west curb
of East State Street Extension
162 Johnston Avenue (space
located on Johnston Avenue)
Beginning at a point 51 feet north
of the curbline of Walnut Avenue
and extending to a point 72 feet
north of the curbline of Walnut
Avenue on the east curb of
Johnston Avenue
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:714
Street Location
162 Johnston Avenue (space
located on Walnut Avenue)
Beginning at a point 50 feet east
of the curbline of Johnston Avenue
and extending to a point 71 feet
east of the curbline of Johnston
Avenue on the north curb of
Walnut Avenue
B. Handicapped parking on streets for private residences. In accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6, the following on-street
locations are designated as handicapped parking spaces in front of
private residences occupied by handicapped persons. Such spaces are
for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be
permitted in these spaces.
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Adella
Avenue (29)
17-020 Beginning at a point 134
feet west of the curbline
of Rosalia Avenue and
extending to a point 154
feet west of the curbline
of Rosalia Avenue on the
south curb of Adella
Avenue
Annabelle
Avenue
East Beginning at a point 108
feet southwest of the
southeast corner of
Bowhill Avenue and
Annabelle Avenue and
extending southwesterly
to a point 22 feet
therefrom
Annabelle
Avenue (35)
19-037 Beginning at a point 353
feet south of the curbline
of South Broad Street
and extending to a point
374 feet south of the
curbline of South Broad
Street on the east
curbline of Annabelle
Avenue
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:715
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Annabelle
Avenue (105)
13-025 Beginning at a point 106
feet west of Bowhill
Avenue and extending to
a point 84 feet west of
Bowhill Avenue on the
northern curbline on
Annabelle Avenue
Annabelle
Avenue (108)
15-037 East Beginning at a point 133
feet south of the curbline
of Bowhill Avenue and
extending to a point 155
feet west of the curbline
of Bowhill Avenue on the
east curb of Annabelle
Avenue
Annabelle
Avenue (109)
15-045 West Beginning at a point 127
feet south of the curbline
of Bowhill Avenue and
extending to a point 147
feet south of the curbline
of Bowhill Avenue on the
west curb of Annabelle
Avenue
Annabelle
Avenue (111)
17-034 Beginning at a point 147
feet south of the curbline
of Bowhill Avenue and
extending to a point 168
feet south of the curbline
of Bowhill Avenue on the
west curb of Annabelle
Avenue
Annabelle
Avenue
East Beginning at a point 191
feet south of Bowhill
Avenue and extending to
a point 213 feet south of
Bowhill Avenue on the
eastern curbline on
Annabelle Avenue
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:716
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Applegate
Drive (199)
16-058 West Beginning at a point 50
feet north of the curbline
of Hughes Drive and
extending to a point 70
feet north of the curbline
of Hughes Drive on the
west curb of Applegate
Drive
Atlantic
Avenue (809)
18-043 North Beginning at a point 43
feet east of the curbline
of Hobart Avenue and
extending to a point 65
feet east of the curbline
of Hobart Avenue on the
north curb of Atlantic
Avenue
Barricklo
Street (57)
19-041 Beginning at a point 177
feet north of the curbline
of Bow Hill Avenue and
extending to a point 199
feet north of the curbline
of Bow Hill Avenue on
the west curbline of
Barricklo Street
Barricklo
Street (137)
19-025 Beginning at a point 415
feet north of the curbline
of Benton Road and
extending to a point 436
feet north of the curbline
of Benton Road on the
west curb of Barricklo
Street
Beal Street
(101)
16-003
Beal Street
(113)
14-042 East Beginning at a point 108
feet north of the curbline
of Sylvan Avenue and
extending to a point 130
feet north of the curbline
of Sylvan Avenue on the
east curb of Beal Street
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:717
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Beal Street North Beginning at a point 195
feet northeast of the
most northerly corner of
South Olden Avenue (CR
#622) and Sylvan
Avenue and extending
northeasterly to a point
22 feet therefrom
Beal Street Beginning at a point 130
feet west of the curbline
of Sylvan Avenue and
extending to a point 142
feet of the curb line of
Sylvan Avenue
Beaumont
Road (31)
16-034 East Beginning at a point 160
feet south of the curbline
of Elton Avenue and
extending to a point 180
feet south of the curbline
of Elton Avenue on the
east curb of Beaumont
Road
Benson
Avenue
West Beginning at a point 168
feet north of South Olden
Avenue and extending to
a point 188 feet north of
South Olden Avenue on
the western curbline on
Benson Avenue
Berg Avenue
(615)
18-015
Berg Avenue
(630)
14-042 14-069
Berg Avenue
(633)
14-027 14-075
Berg Avenue
(635)
14-026
Brafman
Drive (20)
16-057
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:718
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Bunting
Avenue (311)
13-016 Beginning at a point 98
feet south of High Street
and extending to a point
120 feet south of High
Street on the western
curbline on Bunting
Avenue
Charlotte
Avenue
19-045
Charlotte
Avenue
19-056 Beginning at a point 152
feet south of the curbline
of Hamilton Avenue and
extending to a point 172
feet south of the curbline
of Hamilton Avenue on
the west curb of
Charlotte Avenue
Charlotte
Avenue (14)
16-010 East Beginning at a point 223
feet south of the curbline
of Hamilton Avenue and
extending to a point 245
feet south of the curbline
of Hamilton Avenue on
the east curb of
Charlotte Avenue
Charlotte
Avenue (37)
14-061 West Beginning at a point 457
feet south of the curbline
of Hamilton Avenue and
extending to a point 479
feet south of the curbline
of Hamilton Avenue on
the west curbline of
Charlotte Avenue
Charlotte
Avenue (54)
16-037 North Beginning at a point 158
feet west of the curbline
of Liberty Street and
extending to a point 177
feet west of the curbline
of Liberty Street on the
north curb of Charlotte
Avenue
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:719
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Connecticut
Avenue (279)
13-016 West Beginning at a point 154
feet north of Greenwood
Avenue and extending to
a point 174 feet north of
Greenwood Avenue on
the western curbline on
Connecticut Avenue
Connecticut
Avenue (371)
19-016 Beginning at a point 546
feet east of the curbline
of Greenwood Avenue
and extending to a point
567 feet east of the
curbline of Greenwood
Avenue on the south curb
of Connecticut Avenue
Deutz Avenue
(1214)
19-021
Deutz Avenue
(1348)
19-41 Beginning at a point 328
feet south of the curbline
of High Street and
extending to a point 350
feet south of the curbline
of High Street on the
east curb of Deutz
Avenue
Deutz Avenue
(1407)
19-025 Beginning at a point 385
feet north of the curbline
of Gibbs Avenue and
extending to a point 406
feet north of the curbline
of Gibbs Avenue on the
west curb of Deutz
Avenue
Diana Court
(1) (space
located on
Karl Suess
Drive)
18-025
Dickinson
Avenue (123)
14-069
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:720
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Dickinson
Avenue
Beginning at a point 65.6
feet west of the curbline
of Warner Drive and
extending to a point 87.6
feet west of the curbline
of Warner Drive
Durand
Avenue
Beginning at a point 121
feet south of the curbline
of Henry Street and
extending to a point 141
feet of the curbline of
Henry Street
East Franklin
Street (229)
15-015 West Beginning at a point 186
feet south of the curbline
of Dunbar Street and
extending to a point 206
feet south of the curbline
of Dunbar Street on the
west curb of East
Franklin Street
East Franklin
Street (307)
17-037 Beginning at a point 60
feet north of the curbline
of Dunbar Street and
extending to a point 82
feet north of the curbline
of Dunbar Street on the
south curb of East
Franklin Street
East Franklin
Street (410)
15-044
East Howell
Street (419)
16-042
East State
Street (1623)
15-028
East State
Street (1627)
13-015
East State
Street (1631)
(space
located on
Park Lane)
16-051
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:721
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
East State
Street
Extension
Beginning at a point 99
feet south of the curbline
of Stratford Avenue and
extending to a point 143
feet of the curbline of
East State Street
Edward Court
(9) (space
located on
Karl Seuss
Drive)
18-049 Beginning at a point 110
feet north of the curbline
of Nottingham Way and
extending to a point 132
feet north of the curbline
of Nottingham Way on
the west curb of Karl
Seuss Drive
Elizabeth
Avenue
18-044
Elizabeth
Avenue
Beginning at a point 0
feet west of the northern
curbline of Davis Avenue
and extending to a point
22 feet west on the
northern curbline on
Elizabeth Avenue
Elizabeth
Avenue
Beginning at a point 177
feet south of Barnt
DeKlyn Avenue and
extending to a point 155
feet south of Barnt
DeKlyn Avenue on the
western curbline on
Elizabeth Avenue
Elizabeth
Avenue (18)
19-032
Elizabeth
Avenue
(1324)
14-049
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:722
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Elizabeth
Avenue
(1336)
15-015 West Beginning at a point 377
feet south of the curbline
of Atlantic Avenue and
extending to a point 397
feet south of the curbline
of Atlantic Avenue on the
west curb of Elizabeth
Avenue
Elizabeth
Avenue
(1424)
13-008
Finley Avenue
(109)
17-004 North Beginning at a point 51
feet west of the curbline
of Holmes Avenue and
extending to a point 71
feet west of the curbline
of Holmes Avenue on the
north curb of Finley
Avenue
Fitzrandolph
Avenue (70)
16-054
Fitzrandolph
Avenue (109)
16-002 19-008
Francis
Avenue (3)
19-033 Beginning at a point 127
feet east of the curbline
of Hamilton Avenue and
extending to a point 149
feet east of the curbline
of Hamilton Avenue on
the south curbline of
Francis Avenue
Francis
Avenue (16)
14-050 East Beginning at a point 127
feet north of the curbline
of Sykes Avenue and
extending to a point 147
feet north of the curbline
of Sykes Avenue on the
east curb of Francis
Avenue
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:723
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Francis
Avenue (117,
Apt. A)
17-031 Beginning at a point 111
feet east of the curbline
of Tuttle Avenue and
extending to a point 132
feet east of the curbline
of Tuttle Avenue on the
south curb of Francis
Avenue
Genesee
Street (1423)
13-035
Genesee
Street (1434)
17-043 19-047
Genesee
Street (2039)
(space
located on
west side of
Rowan
Avenue)
16-019 Beginning at a point 29.6
feet south of the curbline
of Genesee Street and
extending to a point 49.6
feet south of the curbline
of Genesee Street on the
west curb of Rowan
Avenue
Getz Avenue
(48)
15-054
Greenwood
Avenue
(1612)
16-008
Greenwood
Avenue
(1798)
13-007 19-047
Greenwood
Avenue
(1838)
16-001 North Beginning at a point 60
feet west of the curbline
of Norway Avenue and
extending to a point 81
feet west of the curbline
of Norway Avenue on the
north curbline of
Greenwood Avenue
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:724
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Hamilton
Avenue
(1413)
16-044 East Beginning at a point 71
feet south of the curbline
of Klein Avenue and
extending to a point 91
feet south of the curbline
of Klein Avenue on the
east curb of Hamilton
Avenue
Hamilton
Avenue
(1424)
13-034 North Beginning at a point 103
feet west of Atlantic
Avenue and extending to
a point 125 feet west of
Atlantic Avenue on the
northern curbline on
Hamilton Avenue
Harrison
Avenue (110)
18-053
Herbert
Avenue
West Beginning at a point
227.5 feet northeast of
the northwest corner of
Herbert Avenue and
Route NJ 33 and
extending northeasterly
to a point 22 feet
therefrom
Hewitt
Avenue (355)
17-007 Beginning at a point 301
feet south of the curbline
of High Street and
extending to a point 322
feet south of the curbline
of High Street on the
west curb of Hewitt
Avenue
Hewitt Street Beginning at a point
251.6 feet west of the
curbline of Cherry Street
and extending to a point
269.6 feet west of the
curbline of Cherry Street
Hobart
Avenue (309)
14-042 14-069
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:725
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Hobart
Avenue
Beginning at a point 90.3
feet east of the curbline
of Pacific Avenue and
extending to a point
112.3 feet east of the
curbline of Pacific
Avenue
Hollywood
Drive
East Beginning at a point 61
feet south of Mervine
Place and extending to a
point 83 feet south of
Mervine Place on the
eastern curbline on
Hollywood Drive
Jeremiah
Avenue (147)
18-051 West Beginning at a point 360
feet south of the curbline
of Bowhill Avenue and
extending to a point 382
feet south of the curbline
of Bowhill Avenue on the
west curb of Jeremiah
Avenue
Jeremiah
Avenue (153)
19-038 Beginning at a point 408
feet south of the curbline
of Bowhill Avenue and
extending to a point 430
feet south of the curbline
of Bowhill Avenue on the
east curbline of Jeremiah
Avenue
Joan Terrace
(125)
15-028
Joan Terrace
(159)
16-010 South Beginning at a point 65
feet west of the curbline
of Tipton Street and
extending to a point 87
feet west of the curbline
of Tipton Street on the
south curb of Joan
Terrace
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:726
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Johnston
Avenue (496)
13-045 East Beginning at a point 76
feet north of Elmwood
Avenue and extending to
a point 98 feet north of
Elmwood Avenue on the
eastern curbline on
Johnston Avenue
Johnston
Avenue
East Beginning at a point 204
feet northwest of the
northeasterly corner of
Johnston Avenue and
Route NJ 33 (Greenwood
Avenue) and extending
northeasterly to a point
22 feet therefrom
Johnston
Avenue
Beginning at a point
173.6 feet south of the
curbline of Greenwood
Avenue and extending to
a point 195.6 feet south
of the curbline of
Greenwood Avenue
Johnston
Avenue (158)
(3 spaces)
13-023
Julia Avenue
(space
located on
south side of
Barnt DeKlyn
Avenue)
Beginning at a point 47
feet east of Julia Avenue
and extending to a point
69 feet east of Julia
Avenue on the southern
curbline on Barnt DeKlyn
Avenue
Julia Avenue
(157)
15-029 West Beginning at a point 154
feet north of the curbline
of Barnt Deklyn Road
and extending to a point
174 feet north of the
curbline of Barnt Deklyn
Road on the west curb of
Julia Avenue
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:727
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Klein Avenue
(19)
13-001 West Beginning at a point 317
feet south of Hamilton
Avenue and extending to
a point 297 feet south of
Hamilton Avenue on the
western curbline on
Klein Avenue
Klockner
Road
(space
located on
Collier
Avenue)
Beginning at a point 63
feet east of the curbline
of Klockner Road and
extending to a point 85
feet of the curbline of
Collier Avenue
Lafayette
Avenue (71)
(space
located on
west side of
Sewell
Avenue)
15-015 Beginning at a point 79
feet south of the curbline
of Sewell Avenue and
Lafayette Avenue and
extending to a point 98
feet south of the curbline
of Sewell Avenue and
Lafayette Avenue on the
west curb of Sewell
Avenue
Laurel Court
(1)
(space
located on
Raintree
Drive)
16-003
Liberty Street
(2338) (space
located on
Klein Avenue)
18-008 North Beginning at a point 50
feet west of the curbline
of Liberty Street and
extending to a point 72
feet west of the curbline
of Liberty Street on the
north curb of Klein
Avenue
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:728
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Lida Street
(314)
19-011 Beginning at a point 116
feet north of the curbline
of William Street and
extending to a point 137
feet north of the curbline
of William Street on the
east curb of Lida Street
Lillian
Avenue (23)
18-016 West Beginning at a point 223
feet south of the curbline
of South Clinton Avenue
and extending to a point
245 feet south of the
curbline of South Clinton
Avenue on the west curb
of Lillian Avenue
Lillian
Avenue (257)
17-034 Beginning at a point 68
feet south of the curbline
of Ritz Avenue and
extending to a point 89
feet south of the curbline
of Ritz Avenue on the
west curb of Lillian
Avenue
Lynwood
Avenue
East Beginning at a point 673
feet northwest of the
northeasterly corner of
Lynwood Avenue and
Elizabeth Avenue and
extending northwesterly
to a point 22 feet
therefrom
Lynwood
Avenue (258)
17-012
Lynwood
Avenue (271)
13-016 West Beginning at a point 208
feet north of Greenwood
Avenue and extending to
a point 228 feet north of
Greenwood Avenue on
the western curbline on
Lynwood Avenue
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:729
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Lynwood
Avenue
Beginning at a point 249
feet west of the curbline
of Greenwood Avenue
and extending to a point
271 feet of the curbline
of Lynwood Avenue
Lynwood
Avenue
East Beginning at a point 483
feet north of Elizabeth
Avenue and extending to
a point 505 feet north of
Elizabeth Avenue on the
eastern curbline on
Lynwood Avenue
Main Street
(184)
17-007 Beginning at a point 364
feet south of the curbline
of Church Street and
extending to a point 385
feet south of the curbline
of Church Street on the
west curb of Main Street
Main Street
(216)
In front of 216 Main
Street, beginning at a
point 93 feet west of the
curbline of Church Street
and extending to a point
115 feet of the curbline
of Main Street
Maple Shade
Avenue
East Beginning at a point 238
feet north of South Broad
Street and extending to a
point 260 feet north of
South Broad Street on
the eastern curbline on
Maple Shade Avenue
Marshall
Avenue (41)
18-001
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:730
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Marshall
Avenue (84)
15-010 East Beginning at a point 127
feet north of the curbline
of Bowhill Avenue and
extending to a point 109
feet north of the curbline
of Bowhill Avenue on the
east curb of Marshall
Avenue
Marshall
Avenue (90)
17-007 Beginning at a point 66
feet north of the curbline
of Bowhill Avenue and
extending to a point 87
feet north of the curbline
of Bowhill Avenue on the
east curbline of Marshall
Avenue
Marshall
Avenue (102)
18-043 East Beginning at a point 70
feet south of the curbline
of Bowhill Avenue and
extending to a point 92
feet south of the curbline
of Bowhill Avenue on the
east curb of Marshall
Avenue
Marshall
Avenue (112)
18-060
Marshall
Avenue (112)
East Beginning at a point 92
feet south of the curbline
of Bowhill Avenue and
extending to a point 112
feet south of the cubline
of Bowhill Avenue on the
east curb of Marshall
Avenue
Marshall
Avenue
West Beginning at a point 305
feet south of the
southwesterly corner of
Marshall Avenue and
Lalor Street (CR #650)
and extending southerly
to a point 22 feet
therefrom
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:731
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Massachusetts
Avenue
17-019
Massachusetts
Avenue
South Beginning at a point 27
feet east of Norman
Court and extending to a
point 49 feet east of
Norman Court on the
southern curbline of
Massachusetts Avenue
Massachusetts
Avenue (351,
Apt. 1)
13-029 West Beginning at a point 111
feet south of Erman
Court and extending to a
point 131 feet south of
Erman Court on the
western curbline on
Massachusetts Avenue
Massachusetts
Avenue (375,
2nd floor)
17-014 18-053
Massachusetts
Avenue (401,
Apt. 2)
14-033 West Beginning at a point 131
feet north of Norman
Court and extending to a
point 109 feet north of
Norman Court on the
western curbline on
Massachusetts Avenue
McClellan
Avenue (120)
17-043 Beginning at a point 125
east of the curbline of
Sewell Avenue and
extending to a point 147
feet east of the curbline
of Sewell Avenue on the
north curb of McClellan
Avenue
Mervine
Place
Beginning at a point 346
feet east of the curbline
of Park Lane and
extending to a point 368
feet of the curbline of
Mervine Place
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:732
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Milton
Avenue
Beginning at a point 246
feet north of the curbline
of White Horse-
Mercerville Road and
extending to a point 268
feet of the curbline of
Milton Avenue
Moffatt
Avenue
East Beginning at a point 122
feet northwest of the
most northerly corner of
Moffatt Avenue and
Liberty Street and
extending westerly to a
point 22 feet therefrom
Moffatt
Avenue
Beginning at a point 25
feet south of Moffatt
Avenue and extending to
a point 47 feet south of
Moffatt Avenue on the
western curbline on
Sykes Avenue
Newkirk
Avenue (15)
15-015 16-039
Newkirk
Avenue (31)
16-030
North
Johnston
Avenue
Beginning at a point 43
feet east of the curbline
of Roberts Avenue and
extending to a point 61
feet east of the curbline
of Roberts Avenue
North
Johnston
Avenue (43)
19-024
Norway
Avenue
13-023
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:733
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Norway
Avenue (146)
19-056 Beginning at a point 120
feet north of the curbline
of Walnut Avenue and
extending to a point 142
feet north of the curbline
of Walnut Avenue on the
east curb of Norway
Avenue
Norway
Avenue (632)
15-045 19-053
Nottingham
Way
Beginning at a point 27.9
feet east of the curbline
of Michael Drive and
extending to a point 49.9
feet east of the curbline
of Michael Drive
Nottingham
Way
Beginning at a point 60
feet north of the curbline
of Nottingham Way and
extending to a point 82
feet north of the curbline
of Nottingham Way
Nottingham
Way (1107)
18-008 South Beginning at a point 43
feet east of the curbline
of Roberts Avenue and
extending to a point 65
feet east of the curbline
of Roberts Avenue on the
south curb of
Nottingham Way
Nottingham
Way (1111)
17-036
Nottingham
Way (1289)
(space
located on
Hollywood
Drive)
18-016 West Beginning at a point 59
feet south of the curbline
of Nottingham Way and
extending to a point 81
feet south of the curbline
of Nottingham Way on
the west curb of
Hollywood Drive
Nottingham
Way (1370)
15-018 16-035
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:734
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Nottingham
Way (1374)
14-035
Olympia
Avenue
Beginning at a point 198
feet north of the curbline
of Hobson Avenue and
extending to a point 178
feet of the curbline of
Olympia Avenue
Oregon
Avenue
East Beginning at a point 231
feet south of Dewey
Avenue and extending to
a point 251 feet south of
Dewey Avenue on the
eastern curbline on
Oregon Avenue
Parker Place
(105)
18-043 East Beginning at a point 104
feet north of the curbline
of Hollywood Drive and
extending to a point 126
feet north of the curbline
of Hollywood Drive on
the east curbline of
Parker Place
Parker Place
(107)
15-028
Park Lane
(25)
16-051
Park Lane
(44)
18-044
Park Lane Beginning at a point 67
feet of the curbline of
Balog Avenue and
extending to a point 87
feet of the curbline of
Park Lane
Park Lane
(225)
14-003 West Beginning at a point 160
feet north of Brookside
Avenue and extending to
a point 180 feet north of
Brookside Avenue on the
western curbline on Park
Lane
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:735
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Park Lane
(226)
15-015 East Beginning at a point 293
feet north of the curbline
of Hollywood Drive and
extending to a point 302
feet north of the curbline
of Hollywood Drive on
the east curb of Park
Lane
Park Lane
(228)
19-020 Beginning at a point 259
feet west of the curbline
of Hollywood Drive and
extending to a point 279
feet west of the curbline
of Hollywood Drive on
the north curb of Park
Lane
Park Lane
(233)
19-026
Park Lane Beginning at a point 268
feet east of the curbline
of East State Street and
extending to a point 290
feet along the curbline of
Park Lane
Parkinson
Avenue (236)
19-048 Beginning at a point 96
feet north of the curbline
of Lida Street and
extending to a point 116
feet north of the curbline
of South Lida Street
along the east curbline of
Parkinson Avenue
Parkinson
Avenue (238)
18-043 North Beginning at a point 64
feet west of the curbline
of Lida Street and
extending to a point 8
feet west of the curbline
of Lida Street on the
north curb of Parkinson
Avenue
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:736
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Parkinson
Avenue (243)
15-029 South Beginning at a point 25
feet west of the curbline
of Lida Street and
extending to a point 45
feet west of the curbline
of Lida Street on the
south curb of Parkinson
Avenue
Parkinson
Avenue
Beginning at a point
104.6 feet east of Samuel
Street and extending to a
point 126.6 feet east of
the curbline of Samuel
Street
Quakerbridge
Road (2716)
(space
located on
north side of
Pollman
Avenue)
15-045 Beginning at a point 50
feet west of the curbline
of Quakerbridge Road
and extending to a point
68 feet west of the
curbline of Quakerbridge
Road on the north curb
of Pollman Avenue
Randall
Avenue (223)
17-040
Randall
Avenue (245)
15-015 South Beginning at a point 130
feet west of the curbline
of Rowan Avenue and
extending to a point 150
feet west of the curbline
of Rowan Avenue on the
south curb of Randall
Avenue
Reed Avenue
(86)
13-001 East Beginning at a point 109
feet north of Bowhill
Avenue and extending to
a point 87 feet north of
Bowhill Avenue on the
eastern curbline on Reed
Avenue
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:737
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Reeger
Avenue (31)
19-033 Beginning at a point 198
feet south of the curbline
of Lalor Street and
extending to a point 218
feet south of the curbline
of Lalor Street on the
west curbline of Reeger
Avenue
Reeger
Avenue
Beginning at a point 258
feet south of the curbline
of Lalor Street and
extending to a point 280
feet of the curbline of
Reeger Avenue
Roberts
Avenue
(1727)
16-003
Runyon Drive
(3)
16-035
Ruskin
Avenue
West Beginning at a point 308
feet north of Camden
Avenue and extending to
a point 288 feet north of
Camden Avenue on the
western curbline on
Ruskin Avenue
Ruth Avenue Beginning at a point 95
feet west of the curbline
of Ritz Avenue and
extending to a point 117
feet of the curbline of
Ruth Avenue
Samdin
Boulevard
(243)
14-060
Samdin
Boulevard
Beginning at a point 197
feet north of the curbline
of Exton Avenue and
extending to a point 219
feet of the curbline of
Samdin Boulevard
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:738
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Samuel
Street (5)
14-042 West Beginning at a point 91
feet north of the curbline
of South Broad Street
and extending to a point
111 feet north of the
curbline of South Broad
Street on the west curb
of Samuel Street
Samuel
Street
West Beginning at a point
125.5 feet northeast of
the northwest corner of
South Broad Street and
Samuel Street and
extending northeasterly
to a point 22 feet
therefrom
Samuel
Street (17)
13-002
Samuel
Street (23)
16-058 West Beginning at a point 42
feet south of the curbline
of Genesee Street and
extending to a point 62
feet south of the curbline
of Genesee Street on the
west curb of Samuel
Street
Samuel
Street (113)
16-037 North Beginning at a point 125
feet west of the curbline
of South Clinton Avenue
and extending to a point
144 feet west of the
curbline of South Clinton
Avenue on the north curb
of Samuel Street
Schiller
Avenue
East Beginning at a point 182
feet northwest of the
northwest corner of
Schiller Avenue and West
Park Avenue and
extending northwesterly
to a point 22 feet
therefrom
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:739
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Schiller
Avenue (332)
16-043 19-045
Schiller
Avenue (336)
15-005 North Beginning at a point 181
feet west of the curbline
of Sewell Avenue and
extending to a point 203
feet west of the curbline
of Sewell Avenue on the
north curb of Schiller
Avenue
Schiller
Avenue (342)
14-080 North Beginning at a point 137
feet west of the curbline
of Sewell Avenue and
extending to a point 159
feet west of the curbline
of Sewell Avenue on the
north curb of Schiller
Avenue
Schiller
Avenue (346)
15-041 North Beginning at a point 137
feet west of the curbline
of Sewell Avenue and
extending to a point 117
feet west of the curbline
of Sewell Avenue on the
north curb of Schiller
Avenue
Schiller
Avenue (404)
(space
located on
east side of
Sewell
Avenue)
13-041 19-017 East
Schiller
Avenue (434)
15-009
Schiller
Avenue (448)
15-029 17-042
Schiller
Avenue (520)
13-011
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:740
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Schiller
Avenue (525)
14-042 South Beginning at a point 165
feet east of the curbline
of Harrison Avenue and
extending to a point 187
feet east of the curbline
of Harrison Avenue on
the south curb of Schiller
Avenue
Schiller
Avenue (528)
17-033
Schiller
Avenue (539)
19-041 Beginning at a point 287
feet west of the curbline
of Buchanan Avenue and
extending to a point 309
feet west of the curbline
of Buchanan Avenue on
the south curb of Schiller
Avenue
Schiller
Avenue (555)
19-010 Beginning at a point 162
feet west of the curbline
of Buchanan Avenue and
extending to a point 184
feet west of the curbline
of Buchanan Avenue on
the south curb of Schiller
Avenue
Schiller
Avenue
Beginning at a point 236
feet east of the curbline
of Harrison Avenue and
extending to a point 258
feet along the curbline of
Schiller Avenue
Schiller
Avenue
Beginning at a point 82
feet north of the curbline
of Sewell Avenue and
extending to a point 104
feet of the curbline of
Schiller Avenue
Schiller
Avenue (728)
13-023
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:741
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Sewell
Avenue
East Beginning at a point 83
feet north of the eastern
curbline of McClellan
Avenue and extending to
a point 105 feet north on
the eastern curbline on
Sewell Avenue
South Broad
Street (1728)
17-043 Beginning at a point 124
feet west of the curbline
of Joseph Street and
extending to a point 146
feet west of the curbline
of Joseph Street on the
north curb of South
Broad Street
South Broad
Street (1732)
13-001 East Beginning at a point 126
feet north of Joseph
Street and extending to a
point 106 feet north of
Joseph Street on the
eastern curbline on
South Broad Street
South Broad
Street (1736)
13-025 West Beginning at a point 65
feet west of Joseph
Street and extending to a
point 87 feet west of
Joseph Street on the
western curbline of
South Broad Street
South Clinton
Avenue
(2025)
19-001 19-047
South Clinton
Avenue
(2401)
17-012
South Clinton
Avenue
(2504) (space
located on
Rennie
Street)
19-026
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:742
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
South Olden
Avenue
East Beginning at a point 85
feet north of Partridge
Avenue and extending to
a point 107 feet north of
Partridge Avenue on the
eastern curbline on
South Olden Avenue
South Olden
Avenue (876)
19-048 Beginning at a point 70
feet east of the curbline
of South Olden Avenue
and extending to a point
90 feet east of the
curbline of South Olden
Avenue along the south
curbline of Tuttle Avenue
South Olden
Avenue (816)
14-033 East Beginning at a point 117
feet south of the curbline
of Liberty Street and
extending to a point 135
feet south of the curbline
of Liberty Street on the
east curb of South Olden
Avenue
South Olden
Avenue (848)
15-018 North Beginning at a point 121
feet west of the curbline
of Beal Street and
extending to a point 141
feet west of the curbline
of Beal Street on the
north curb of South
Olden Avenue
South Olden
Avenue (876)
17-007 19-047
South Olden
Avenue (876)
19-048 Beginning at a point 41
feet north of the curbline
of Beal Street and
extending to a point 62
feet north of the curbline
of Beal Street on the
west curb of South Olden
Avenue
South Olden
Avenue (902)
16-009
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:743
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Spruce Street South Beginning at a point 257
feet west of Spruce
Court and extending to a
point 279 feet west of
Spruce Court on the
southern curbline on
Spruce Street
Stenton Court
(9-B)
13-007 14-007
Stenton Court
(46-B)
13-041 East Beginning at a point 47
feet north of Bowhill
Avenue and extending to
a point 69 feet north of
Bowhill Avenue on the
eastern curbline on
Stenton Court
Sykes Avenue
(93)
15-047 South Beginning at a point 274
feet west of the curbline
of Francis Avenue and
extending to a point 295
feet west of the curbline
of Francis Avenue on the
south curbline of Sykes
Avenue
Tindall
Avenue (112)
13-042 East Beginning at a point 61
feet north of Hutchinson
Avenue and extending to
a point 81 feet north of
Hutchinson Avenue on
the eastern curbline on
Tindall Avenue
Tindall
Avenue (157)
19-025 Beginning at a point 137
feet south of the curbline
of Woolsey Street and
extending to a point 159
feet south of the curbline
of Woolsey Street on the
east curb of Tindall
Avenue
Tindall
Avenue (171)
19-017
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:744
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Tindall
Avenue (353)
18-051 East Beginning at a point 102
feet south of the curbline
of Bernadine Avenue and
extending to a point 124
feet south of the curbline
of Bernadine Avenue on
the east curb of Tindall
Avenue
Tindall
Avenue (615)
14-061 East Beginning at a point 135
feet north of Scully
Avenue and extending to
a point 157 feet north of
Scully Avenue on the
east curb of Tindall
Avenue
Tindall
Avenue
West Beginning at a point 133
feet west of the curbline
of Fairmount Avenue and
extending to a point 155
feet west of the curbline
of Fairmount Avenue
Tindall
Avenue
Beginning at a point 47
feet east of the curbline
of Tindall Avenue and
extending to a point 69
feet along the curbline of
Woolsey Street
Tindall
Avenue
East Beginning at a point 190
feet south of Woolsey
Street and extending to a
point 210 feet south of
Woolsey Street on the
eastern curbline of
Tindall Avenue
Tuttle Avenue
(for 694
South Olden
Avenue)
13-018
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:745
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Van Kannel
Avenue (129)
16-002 East Beginning at a point 25
feet east of the curbline
of Van Kannel Avenue
and extending to a point
44 feet east of the
curbline of Van Kannel
Avenue on the south curb
of Woodside Avenue
Victor Avenue
(14)
19-025 Beginning at a point 150
feet east of the curbline
of East State Street and
extending to a point 171
feet east of the curbline
of East State Street on
the north curb of Victor
Avenue
Victor Avenue
(24)
16-019 North Beginning at a point 250
feet east of the curbline
of East State Street and
extending to a point 270
feet east of the curbline
of East State Street on
the north curb of Victor
Avenue
Victor Avenue
(32)
13-001 East Beginning at a point 130
feet north of Rosalia
Avenue and extending to
a point 110 feet north of
Rosalia Avenue on the
eastern curbline of Victor
Avenue
Victor Avenue
(35)
15-028
William
Street
Beginning at a point
112.6 feet east of the
curbline of Rennie Street
and extending to a point
134.6 feet east of the
curbline of Rennie Street
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:746
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
William
Street
Beginning at a point 191
feet south the of curbline
of Cedar Lane and
extending to a point 213
feet of the curbline of
William Street
William
Street
South Beginning at a point 114
feet west of Lily Street
and extending to a point
136 feet west of Lily
Street on the southern
curbline on William
Street
William
Street (921)
15-005 South Beginning at a point 95
feet west of the curbline
of Chambers Street and
extending to a point 117
feet west of the curbline
of Chambers Street on
the south curb of William
Street
William
Street (1312)
14-006 15-006
William
Street (1312)
16-019 North Beginning at a point 110
feet east of the curbline
of Rennie Street and
extending to a point 130
feet east of the curbline
of Rennie Street on the
north side of William
Street
William
Street (1319)
14-070 14-078
Wilson
Avenue (143)
17-011
William
Street (829)
18-022 South Beginning at a point 125
feet east of the curbline
of Cedar Lane and
extending to a point 147
feet east of the curbline
of Cedar Lane on the
south curb of William
Street
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:747
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
William
Street (921)
18-007
William
Street (1321)
19-051 Beginning at a point 152
feet north of the curbline
of Mary Street and
extending to a point 172
feet north of the curbline
of Mary Street on the
west curbline of William
Street
Woodlawn
Avenue
Beginning at a point 200
feet north of the curbline
of Greenwood Avenue
and extending to a point
280 feet of the curbline
of Woodlawn Avenue
Woodlawn
Avenue
19-035
Woodlawn
Avenue
Beginning at a point 261
feet east of Walnut
Avenue and extending to
a point 281 feet east of
Walnut Avenue on the
southern curbline on
Lynwood Avenue
Woodlawn
Avenue (11)
17-027 17-033
Woodlawn
Avenue (207)
16-043 South Beginning at a point 69
feet east of the curbline
of Walnut Avenue and
extending to a point 90
feet east of the curbline
of Walnut Avenue on the
south curb of Woodlawn
Avenue
Woodlawn
Avenue (211)
17-034 Beginning at a point 111
feet south of the curbline
of Walnut Avenue and
extending to a point 132
feet south of the curbline
of Walnut Avenue on the
west curb of Woodlawn
Avenue
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:748
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Woodlawn
Avenue (214)
18-038
Woodlawn
Avenue (223)
16-043 South Beginning at a point 229
feet east of the curbline
of Walnut Avenue and
extending to a point 249
feet east of the curbline
of Walnut Avenue on the
south curb of Woodlawn
Avenue
Woodlawn
Avenue (223)
14-033 16-020
Woodlawn
Avenue (229)
16-043 South Beginning at a point 289
feet east of the curbline
of Walnut Avenue and
extending to a point 309
feet south of the curbline
of Walnut Avenue on the
south curb of Woodlawn
Avenue
Woodlawn
Avenue (241)
13-001 West Beginning at a point 278
feet north of Greenwood
Avenue and extending to
a point 256 feet north of
Greenwood Avenue on
the western curbline on
Woodlawn Avenue
Woodlawn
Avenue (242)
19-010 Beginning at a point 234
feet west of the curbline
of Greenwood Avenue
and extending to a point
256 feet west of the
curbline of Greenwood
Avenue on the north curb
of Woodlawn Avenue
Woodlawn
Avenue (243)
18-036 18-053 West
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:749
Street Name
(Number)
Enacted
(Ord.
No.)
Repealed
(Ord.
No.) Side Location
Woodlawn
Avenue (245)
15-041 West Beginning at a point 195
feet north of the curbline
of Greenwood Avenue
and extending to a point
215 feet north of the
curbline of Greenwood
Avenue on the west curb
of Woodlawn Avenue
Woodlawn
Avenue (247)
15-040
Yardville -
Hamilton
Square Road
(2595)
18-015
C. Handicapped parking in municipal parking lots and Board of Education
property. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-1 and
39:4-197, the following off-street parking yards and Board of Education
property are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such spaces
are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards issued by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a
temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall
be permitted to park in these areas.
Property Number of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
D. Handicapped parking on all other private property. In accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the following off-street parking
locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such spaces are for
use by persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates
or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park
in these spaces.
Property Number of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
E. Handicapped parking in municipal parks. In accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the following off-street parking locations
are designated as handicapped parking. Such spaces are for use by
persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates or
placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park
in these spaces.
§ 485-19 HAMILTON CODE § 485-19
1:750
Property Number of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
F. Handicapped parking on postal properties. In accordance with 40
U.S.C. 318B and a written request from the postmaster, the off-street
locations are hereby designated as handicapped parking, pursuant to
P.L. 1989, c.201(1) eff. 6-1-1990. Such spaces are for use by persons
who have been issued special identification cards, plates or placards by
the Motor Vehicle Commission or a temporary placard issued by the
Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these
spaces.
Property Number of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
G. Signs, pavement markings, installation and maintenance. The owners of
the premises referred to Subsections C and D shall provide and install
signs and pavement markings for each parking space reserved for the
use of handicapped persons. All signs and markings shall be in
accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD). The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and
pavement markings shall be the responsibility of the owner said
property. The owner shall, subsequent to initial procurement and
installation, maintain such signs and pavement markings in good
condition at no cost or expense to the Township. The owner shall be
responsible for the repair and restoration of same.
H. Any person parking a motor vehicle in a restricted parking space
without a special vehicle identification card in violation of § 485-19 shall
be liable to a fine of $250 for the first offense and, for subsequent
offenses, a fine of at least $250 and up to 90 days' community service on
such terms and in such form as the court shall deem appropriate, or any
combination thereof.165
165. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 485-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-19
1:751

ARTICLE III
Traffic Regulations
§ 485-20. Through streets. [Amended 10-22-2008 by Ord. No.
08-062]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Abbott Road Between Paxson Avenue and Flock Road
Atlantic Avenue Between Hamilton Avenue (CR #606) and
Route NJ 33 (Greenwood Avenue)
Barricklo Street Between Bowhill Avenue and 10 feet south
of the southerly curbline of Bigelow Road
Berg Avenue Between Cedar Lane and Park Avenue
Bowhill Avenue—Schiller
Avenue
Between Stenton Court and Oldfield
Avenue
Bradford Avenue Between Arena Drive (CR #620) and
Whitehorse Mercerville Road (CR #533)
Carnegie Avenue—Bucknell
Avenue—Basin Road
Between the Hamilton Township corporate
line—Lawrence Township corporate line
west intersect and the Hamilton Township
corporate line—Lawrence Township
corporate line east intersect
Cedar Lane Between Route US 206 (South Broad
Street) and Chambers Street (CR #626)
Cedar Lane Between Chambers Street (CR #626) and
South Olden Avenue (CR #622)
Cedar Lane Between South Olden Avenue (CR #622)
and Newkirk Avenue
Coleridge Avenue Between South Broad Street (CR #524)
and Elton Avenue
Collier Avenue Between Klockner Avenue and Kentucky
Avenue
Colonial Avenue Between Arena Drive (CR #620) and South
Clinton Avenue
Cornell Avenue Between Klockner Road and Donald Drive
Crescent Avenue Between Fenwood Avenue and Elmore
Avenue
Crosswicks Hamilton Square
Road
Between Route US 130 and Yardville
Allentown Road (CR #524)
§ 485-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-20
1:753
Name of Street Limits
Crosswicks Hamilton Square
Road
Between Yardville Allentown Road (CR
#524) and South Broad Street (CR #672)
Cypress Lane Between Whitehorse Mercerville Road (CR
#533) and Hamilton Avenue (CR #606)
Cypress Lane Between Whitehorse Mercerville Road (CR
#533) and Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road
Dancer Drive Between Lakeside Boulevard and a point
50 feet east of Birch Street
Davis Avenue Between Hamilton Avenue (CR #606) and
Elizabeth Avenue
Deacon Drive Between Paxson Avenue and Youngs Road
Deutz Avenue Between Lalor Street (CR #650) and South
Street-Gibbs Avenue
Donald Drive-Jencohallo
Avenue
Between Nottingham Way (Route NJ 33)
and Klockner Road
East Brown Street Between Hutchinson Street and Woolsey
Street
East Franklin Street Between South Olden Avenue (CR #622)
and Woolsey Street
East Howell Street Between Hutchinson Street and Woolsey
Street
East Park Avenue Between South Clinton Avenue and Pitman
Avenue
East State Street Extension Between Klockner Avenue and Nottingham
Way (CR #652)
Edgebrook Road166 Between Crosswicks Hamilton Square
Road and the Hamilton Township corporate
line—Robbinsville Township corporate line
Elmore Avenue Between Grayson Avenue and Clifford
Avenue
Englewood Boulevard Between Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road and a point 50 feet east of Mohawk
Way
Estates Boulevard Between Whitehorse Mercerville Road (CR
#533) and Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road
Estates Boulevard Between Yardville Hamilton Square Road
and George Dye Road
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 485-20 HAMILTON CODE § 485-20
1:754
Name of Street Limits
Estates Boulevard Between George Dye Road to a point 50
feet east of Tiberi Court.
Extonville Road Between Old York Road and the Hamilton
Township corporate line—Chesterfield
Township corporate line
Fetter Avenue Between Arena Drive (CR #620) and South
Clinton Avenue
Finley Avenue Between Whitehorse Mercerville Road (CR
#533) and Kenwood Terrace
Flock Road Between Hughes Drive and a point 50 feet
west of Crestwood Drive
Flock Road Between Hughes Drive and Mercer Street
George Dye Road Between Klockner Road and Estates
Boulevard
George Dye Road Between Estates Boulevard and Route NJ
33
Grand Avenue Between Cedar Lane and a point 50 feet
east of the easterly curbline of Mary Street
Gropp Avenue Between South Broad Street (CR #524)
and Arena Drive (CR #620)
Gropp Avenue Between Arena Drive (CR #620) and
Englewood Boulevard
Hansen Avenue Between Lakeside Boulevard and a point
50 feet east of Birch Street
Hempstead Road Between Kuser Road and Englewood
Boulevard
Hempstead Road Between Englewood Boulevard and Arena
Drive (CR #620)
Hempstead Road Between Arena Drive (CR #620) and South
Broad Street (CR #524)
Highland Avenue Between South Broad Street (CR #524)
and a point 50 feet south of Grandview
Avenue
Hobson Avenue Between South Broad Street and Emeline
Avenue
Hoover Avenue Between Edinburg Road (CR #535) and
Nottingham Way (CR #618)
Hughes Drive Between Mercer Street and Edinburg Road
(CR #535)
Hughes Drive Between Edinburg Road (CR #535) and
Quakerbridge Road (CR #533)
§ 485-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-20
1:755
Name of Street Limits
Hutchinson Street Between Liberty Street and Cedar Lane
Independence
Avenue—Emeline
Avenue—Camden Avenue
Between Rowan Avenue and Ruskin Avenue
Johnston Avenue Between East State Street (CR #635) and
Route NJ 33 (Greenwood Avenue)
Johnston Avenue Between Route NJ 33 (Greenwood Avenue)
and Hamilton Avenue (CR #606)
Joni Avenue Between Noa Court and Joni Avenue
Klockner Avenue Between East State Street Extension and
Route NJ 33 (Nottingham Way)
Klockner Road Between Route NJ 33 (Nottingham Way)
and Hamilton Avenue (CR #606)
Klockner Road Between Hamilton Avenue (CR #606) and
Whitehorse Mercerville Road (CR #533)
Klockner Road Between Whitehorse Mercerville Road (CR
#533) and Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road
Klockner Road Between Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road and Yardville Hamilton Square Road
Klockner Road Between Yardville Hamilton Square Road
and Kuser Road
Klockner Road Between Kuser Road and Route US 130
Kuser Road Between Whitehorse Mercerville Road (CR
#533) and Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road
Kuser Road Between Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road and Yardville Hamilton Square Road
and Route US 130
Leonard Avenue Between Newkirk Avenue and Kuser Road
(CR #619)
Lida Street Between Berg Avenue and Pitman Avenue
Main Street Between South Broad Street (CR #672)
and the Hamilton Township corporate
line—Bordentown Township corporate line
Manor Boulevard Between Yardville Allentown Road (CR
#524) and a point 50 feet north of Hauser
Avenue
Mason Avenue Between Liberty Street and Leonard
Avenue
§ 485-20 HAMILTON CODE § 485-20
1:756
Name of Street Limits
Mercer Street167 Between Nottingham Way (CR #618) and
the Hamilton Township corporate
line—Robbinsville Township corporate line
Merrick Road Between Yardville Allentown Road (CR
#524) and Edgebrook Road
Newkirk Avenue Between Liberty Street and South Olden
Avenue (CR #622)
Norway Avenue Between Hamilton Avenue (CR #606) and
Route NJ 33 (Greenwood Avenue)
Norway Avenue Between Route NJ 33 (Greenwood Avenue)
and East State Street (CR #635)
Old York Road Between Church Street (CR #672) and the
Hamilton Township corporate line—Upper
Freehold Township corporate line
Parkinson Avenue Between Cedar Lane and East Park Avenue
Paxson Avenue Between Nottingham Way (CR #618) and
Edinburg Road (CR #535)
Paxson Avenue Between Flock Road (CR #649) and
Hughes Drive
Pitman Avenue Between Cedar Lane and a point 10 feet
east of Reeves Avenue
Princeton Avenue Between Carlisle Avenue and Bucknell
Avenue
Redfern Avenue Between South Olden Avenue (CR #622)
and Woolsey Avenue
Redfern Avenue Between Woolsey Avenue and Hutchinson
Street
Redwood Avenue Between Arena Drive (CR #620) and South
Clinton Avenue
Regina Avenue Between Nottingham Way (CR #652) and a
point 50 feet north of Peabody Lane
Rennie Street Between Berg Avenue and Pitman Avenue
Richmond Avenue Between Klockner Road and Donald Drive
Ruskin Avenue Between Hobson Avenue and Route US 206
Sandalwood Avenue Between Sweetbriar Avenue (CR #649)
and Bucknell Avenue
Sawmill Road Between Old York Road and Extonville
Road
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 485-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-20
1:757
Name of Street Limits
Shady Lane Between Route NJ 33 and Estates
Boulevard
Shady Lane Between Rivulet Way and Whitehall Road
South Broad Street Between Whitehorse Avenue (CR #533)
and the Hamilton Township corporate
line—City of Trenton corporate line. A yield
sign shall be placed on Lalor Street (CR
#650) at South Broad Street.
South Clinton Avenue Between Cedar Lane and Chambers Street
(CR #626)
South Clinton Avenue Between Chambers Street (CR #626) and
Whitehorse Avenue (CR #533)
South Olden Avenue Between Whitehorse Avenue (CR #533)
and Arena Drive (CR #620)
Springdale Avenue Between Carlisle Avenue and Yardville-
Allentown Road (CR #524)
Steward Street Between Liberty Street and Leonard
Avenue
Sunnybrae Boulevard-
Intervale Road
Between South Broad Street (CR #524)
and Elton Avenue
Sylvan Avenue Between Liberty Street and Cedar Lane
Sylvan Avenue Between Cedar Lane and Newkirk Avenue
Sylvan Avenue Between Newkirk Avenue and Tampa
Avenue
Tindall Avenue Between Woolsey Avenue and East
Franklin Street
Trenton Avenue Between Shady Lane and Estates
Boulevard
Ward Avenue Between Route NJ 33 (Greenwood Avenue)
and Hamilton Avenue (CR #606)
Wert Avenue Between South Olden Avenue (CR #622)
and Pitman Avenue
West Park Avenue Between South Broad Street and Schiller
Avenue
West Park Avenue Between Schiller Avenue and
Independence Avenue
West Park Avenue Between Independence Avenue and 50 feet
south of Wescott Avenue
Whitehorse Hamilton Square
Road
Between Whitehorse Avenue (CR #533)
and Route NJ 33
Wilfred Avenue Between Cedar Lane and East Park Avenue
§ 485-20 HAMILTON CODE § 485-20
1:758
Name of Street Limits
Winslow Avenue Between Route NJ 33 (Nottingham Way)
and Elmore Avenue
Woodside Avenue Between Arena Drive (CR #620) and South
Clinton Avenue
Woolsey Avenue Between Cedar Lane and Liberty Street
Yardville Hamilton Square
Road
Between South Broad Street (CR #524)
and Route NJ 33
Yardville Hamilton Square
Road
Between NJ Route 33 and Nottingham Way
(CR #618)
Youngs Road Between Hughes Drive and Quakerbridge
Road (CR #533)
Youngs Road Between Quakerbridge Road (CR #533)
and Hamilton Township corporate
line—Lawrence Township corporate line
§ 485-21. Stop intersections. [Amended 9-22-2006 by Ord. No.
06-029]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Agabiti Court and McGalliard Avenue Agabiti Court
Arlington Avenue and Claredon
Avenue
Arlington Avenue
Barnt-DeKlyn Road and Andrew
Street
Andrew Street
Bromley Avenue and Scammell
Avenue
Scammell Avenue
Carlisle Avenue and Arlington Avenue Arlington Avenue
Carlisle Avenue and Princeton Avenue Princeton Avenue
Carlisle Avenue and Vetterlein Avenue Vetterlein Avenue
Carlisle Avenue and Woodside Avenue Carlisle Avenue
Church Street and Old York Road Old York Road
Churchill Avenue and Exton Avenue Exton Avenue
Clarendon Avenue and Woodside
Avenue
Woodside Avenue
Clifford Avenue and Eaton Avenue Eaton Avenue
Clifford Avenue and Lowell Avenue Lowell Avenue
Damon Avenue and Quimby Avenue Quimby Avenue
§ 485-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-21
1:759
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
East Franklin Street and Bergen
Street
Bergen Street
East McGalliard Avenue and Lacy
Avenue
Lacy Avenue
East Park Avenue and Genesee Street Genesee Street
Elton Avenue and Appollo Drive Appollo Drive
Elton Avenue and Coleridge Avenue Coleridge Avenue
Elton Avenue and Intervale Road Intervale Road
Exton Avenue and Edward Avenue Edward Avenue
Exton Avenue and Irvington Place Irvington Place
Extonville Road and Ellisdale Road Ellisdale Road
Fenwood Avenue and Clifford Avenue Fenwood Avenue
Fenwood Avenue and Crescent
Avenue
Crescent Avenue
Great Oak Road and Shell Flower
Lane
Shell Flower Lane
Harrison Avenue and McClellan
Avenue
Harrison Avenue
Hollyknoll Drive and Cynthia Lane-
Hollyknoll Court
Cynthia Lane-Hollyknoll Court
Hollywood Drive and Parker Place Parker Place
Homestead Avenue and Exton Avenue Homestead Avenue
Irvington Place and Ritz Avenue Ritz Avenue
Johnston Avenue and Lawton Avenue Lawton Avenue
Johnston Avenue and Roberts Avenue Roberts Avenue
Kay Road and Elton Avenue Elton Avenue
Kenwood Terrace and Damon Avenue Damon Avenue
Kino Boulevard and Stamford Road Stamford Road
Lake Avenue and McClellan Avenue
[Added 11-18-2014 by Ord. No.
14-074]
McClellan Avenue
Lake Avenue and Randall Avenue
[Added 11-18-2014 by Ord. No.
14-074]
Randall Avenue
Laura Avenue and Evelyn Avenue Evelyn Avenue
Leese Avenue-Hollywood Drive and
Hollywood Drive
Hollywood Drive
Lenox Avenue and Manor Boulevard Manor Boulevard
§ 485-21 HAMILTON CODE § 485-21
1:760
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Lillian Avenue and Exton Avenue Lillian Avenue
Lincoln Avenue-Cartlidge Avenue and
Maxwell Drive-Spicer Avenue
Maxwell Drive-Spicer Avenue
Locust Avenue and Lacy Avenue Lacy Avenue
Macon Drive and Preston Way Preston Way
Maddock Avenue and Exton Avenue Exton Avenue
Maddock Avenue and Exton Avenue Maddock Avenue
Maddock Avenue and West
McGalliard Avenue
Maddock Avenue
Magowan Avenue and Chinnick
Avenue
Chinnick Avenue
Manor Boulevard and Murray Avenue Murray Avenue
Maple Shade Avenue and Park Avenue Park Avenue
Maple Shade Avenue and Exton
Avenue
Maple Shade Avenue
Marshall Avenue and Baker Avenue Baker Avenue
Mary Street and Field Avenue Field Avenue
Michael McCorristin Road and Peter
Rafferty Drive
Peter Rafferty Drive
Miry Brook Road and Shawnee Drive Shawnee Drive
Morton Avenue and Harcourt Drive Harcourt Drive
Nebraska Avenue and Montana
Avenue
Montana Avenue
North Hamilton Avenue and
Lexington Avenue
Lexington Avenue
North Hamilton Avenue and Norcross
Circle
Norcross Circle
Old Olden Avenue and Reeves Avenue Reeves Avenue
Parker Place and Waverly Place Waverly Place
Peter Rafferty Drive and Ray Dwier
Drive (west intersect)
Ray Dwier Drive
Phillips Avenue and Lacy Avenue Lacy Avenue
Pope Avenue and Scattergood Avenue Scattergood Avenue
Quimby Avenue and Garden Avenue Garden Avenue
Randall Avenue and Lake Avenue
[Repealed 11-18-2014 by Ord. No.
14-074]
Razorback Drive and Terrapin Lane Razorback Drive
§ 485-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-21
1:761
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Robin Drive and Wolfpack Court Wolfpack Court
Robin Drive and Wolfpack Road Wolfpack Road
Rowan Avenue and Independence
Avenue
Independence Avenue
Rowan Avenue and McClellan Avenue McClellan Avenue
Rowan Avenue and Overlook Avenue Overlook Avenue
Rowan Avenue and Randall Avenue Randall Avenue
Rutgers Avenue and Carlisle Avenue Carlisle Avenue
Second Avenue and Assunpink
Boulevard
Assunpink Boulevard
Spruce Street and Colonial Avenue Colonial Avenue
Stamford Road and Delotto Drive Delotto Drive
Stenton Court and Bowhill Avenue Bowhill Avenue
Tampa Avenue and Sylvan Avenue Sylvan Avenue
Tantum Drive and Maxwell Drive Maxwell Drive
Tettemer Avenue and Maxwell Drive Maxwell Drive
Vetterlein Avenue and Amherst
Avenue
Amherst Avenue
Wesley Avenue and Beal Street Beal Street
Wesley Avenue and Edmund Street Edmund Street
Wesley Avenue and Ellwood Street Ellwood Street
West Elton Avenue and Intervale Road Intervale Road
William Street and Samuel Street Samuel Street
Wilson Avenue and Baker Avenue Baker Avenue
§ 485-22. Multiway stop intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections herein
described are designated as multiway stop intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Signs On
(Reserved)
§ 485-23. Yield intersections. [Amended 10-22-2008 by Ord. No.
08-062]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
§ 485-21 HAMILTON CODE § 485-23
1:762
Intersection Yield Sign(s) On
George Dye Road and Estates
Boulevard
All approaches
North Hamilton Avenue and Norcross
Circle
Norcross Circle
§ 485-24. One-way streets.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be
permitted on the sides indicated below.
Name of Street Direction of
Travel
Limits
Adella Avenue East From East State Street (CR #635)
to Rosalia Avenue
Amsterdam Road East From Beaumont Road to Elton
Avenue
Annabelle Avenue South From South Broad Street to Bow
Hill Avenue
Beal Street West From South Olden Avenue (CR
#622) to Newkirk Avenue
Beaumont Road West From Amsterdam Road to Elton
Avenue
Berkley Street North From Lenhardt Avenue to
Nottingham Way (CR #618)
Bernadine Avenue North From Redfern Street to Liberty
Street
Bunting Avenue South From Lalor Street (CR #650) to
Henry Street
Camp Avenue East Southerly lane, from Steward
Street to Newkirk Avenue
Camp Avenue West Northerly lane, from Steward
Street to Newkirk Avenue
Charlotte Avenue
[Added 3-18-2014
by Ord. No. 14-013]
North From Liberty Street to Hamilton
Avenue (CR #606)
Clearview Avenue East From Stevenson Avenue to
Quakerbridge Road (CR #533)
Coolidge Avenue North From Damico Avenue to Hamilton
Avenue (CR #606)
Deutz Avenue North From Henry Street to Lalor Street
(CR #650)
§ 485-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-24
1:763
Name of Street Direction of
Travel
Limits
Dickinson Avenue North From Richland Avenue to Route NJ
33 (Greenwood Avenue)
Edmund Street West From Newkirk Avenue to South
Olden Avenue (CR #622)
Ellwood Street East From South Olden Avenue (CR
#622) To Newkirk Avenue
Fairmount Avenue South From Redfern Street to Liberty
Street
Francis Avenue
[Added 3-18-2014
by Ord. No. 14-013]
South From Hamilton Avenue (CR #606)
to Liberty Street
Garden Avenue North From Milton Avenue to Knapp
Avenue
Getz Avenue South From Nottingham Way (CR #618)
to Lenhardt Avenue
Graffam Avenue North From South Olden Avenue (CR
#622) to Sylvan Avenue
Hewitt Street South From Lalor Street (CR #650) to
Henry Street
Hovey Avenue North From South Olden Avenue (CR
#650) to Sylvan Avenue
Joseph Street West Between Chambers Street (CR
#626) and South Clinton Avenue
Klein Avenue [Added
3-18-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-013]
South From Hamilton Avenue (CR #606)
to Liberty Street
Lafayette Avenue West From Oldfield Avenue to New Cedar
Lane
Milton Avenue West From Whitehorse Avenue (MC
Route 533) to Garden Avenue
Norway Avenue North From Greenwood Avenue (Route NJ
33) to East State Street (CR #635)
Old Olden Avenue East From Toronita Avenue to Reeves
Avenue
Olivia Avenue West From Rosalia Avenue to East State
Street (CR #635)
Park Lane South From East State Street (CR #635)
to Route NJ 33 (Greenwood
Avenue)
§ 485-24 HAMILTON CODE § 485-24
1:764
Name of Street Direction of
Travel
Limits
Reed Avenue South From Lalor Street (CR #650) to
Bow Hill Avenue
Rosalia Avenue Northeast From Nottingham Way (CR #614)
to Victor Avenue
Rowan Avenue168 North From South Broad Street to South
Clinton Avenue
Sam Naples Road Southeast From Hamilton Avenue (CR #606)
to Ward Avenue
Scammell Avenue South From Route NJ 33 (Greenwood
Avenue) to Tipton Street
Schiller Avenue East From New Cedar Lane to Oldfield
Avenue
Scully Avenue North From Redfern Street to Liberty
Street
Stults Avenue East Entire length
Tipton Street East From Bromley Avenue to Joan
Terrace
Victor Avenue West From Rosalia Avenue to East State
Street (CR #635)
Yardville-Hamilton
Square Road
South From Nottingham Way (CR #618)
to Route NJ 33
§ 485-25. Routes for trucks over _____ tons.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
are hereby designated as routes for vehicles over _____ tons. All trucks
having a total combined gross vehicle weight (GVW) of vehicle plus load in
excess of _____ tons shall be excluded from all streets, except from those
streets listed which form a part of the system of truck routes. Vehicles will
be permitted on all streets for the purpose of the pickup and delivery of
materials.
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 485-26. Vehicles over designated weight excluded from certain
streets.
Vehicles over the gross vehicle weight (GVW) are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets.
168. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 485-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-26
1:765
Name of Street
GVW
(tons) Location
Acres Drive 4 Entire length
Adella Avenue 4 Entire length
Alley in Whitehead
Manor
4 From First Avenue to Seventh
Avenue
Applegate Drive 4 Entire length
Beech Avenue 4 Between South Broad Street and
Exton Avenue
Bismark Avenue 4 Entire length
Brown Drive 4 Entire length
Burtis Avenue 4 Entire length
Churchill Avenue 4 Between South Broad Street and
Arena Drive (CR #620)
Coleman Road 4 Entire length
Colonial Avenue 4 Between South Broad Street and
Arena Drive (CR #620)
Compton Way 4 Entire length
Cubberly Avenue 4 Entire length
Fetter Avenue 4 Between South Broad Street and
Arena Drive (CR #620)
Finley Avenue 4 Between Riley Avenue and
Whitehorse Mercerville Road (CR
#533)
Flock Road 4 Between Hughes Drive and a point
10 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Crestwood Drive
Flock Road 4 Between Mercer Street and Hughes
Drive
Forman Drive 4 Entire length
Francine Drive 4 Entire length
Green Briar Drive 4 Entire length
Hempstead Road 4 From Broad Street (CR #524) to
Arena Drive (CR #620)
Holmes Avenue 4 Entire length
Homestead Avenue 4 Between South Broad Street and
Exton Avenue
Hoover Avenue 4 Entire length
Hunter Avenue 4 Between South Broad Street and
West McGalliard Avenue
§ 485-26 HAMILTON CODE § 485-26
1:766
Name of Street
GVW
(tons) Location
Irvington Place 4 Between Samdin Boulevard and
Exton Avenue
Jonathan Drive 4 Between Nottingham Way (CR
#618) and Daniels Avenue
Lander Drive 4 Between Nottingham Way (CR
#618) and Daniels Avenue
Lansing Avenue 4 Entire length
Lillian Avenue 4 Between South Broad Street and
Exton Avenue
Lions Road 4 Entire length
Maddock Avenue 4 Between South Broad Street and
Arena Drive (CR #620)
Maple Shade Avenue
(Colonial Manor)
4 Between South Broad Street and
Exton Avenue
Maple Shade Avenue
(Hamilton Square)
4 Between Mercer Street and Park
Avenue
Marcia Drive 4 Entire length
Mario Drive 4 Entire length
Marshall Avenue 4 Entire length
McAdoo Avenue 4 Entire length
Miles Avenue 4 Entire length
Miry Brook Road-Green
Briar Drive
4 Between Mercer Street and
Nottingham Way (CR #618)
Mount Drive 4 Entire length
Norcross Circle 4 Entire length
North Crest Avenue 4 Entire length
Nottingham Way (CR
#618)
10 From Whitehorse Mercerville Road
(CR #533) to Route NJ 33
Olivia Avenue 4 Entire length
Olympia Avenue 4 Entire length
Oregon Avenue 4 Entire length
Park Avenue 4 Entire length
Paxson Avenue 4 Between Edinburg Road (CR #535)
and Nottingham Way (CR #618)
Paxson Avenue 4 Between Hughes Drive and Flock
Road (CR #649)
§ 485-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-26
1:767
Name of Street
GVW
(tons) Location
Redwood Avenue 4 Between South Broad Street and
Arena Drive (CR #620)
Riley Avenue 4 Entire length
Rosalia Avenue 4 Entire length
Samdin Boulevard 4 Between South Broad Street and
Exton Avenue
South Clinton Avenue 4 From Chambers Street (CR #626)
to Whitehorse Avenue (CR #533)
Sunset Boulevard 4 Entire length
Sylvan Avenue 4 Between Newkirk Avenue and
Liberty Street
Tally Road 4 Entire length
Thropp Avenue 4 Between South Broad Street and
Arena Drive (CR #620)
University Drive 4 Entire length
Victor Avenue 4 Entire length
Victoria Avenue 4 Entire length
Weslevan Drive 4 Entire length
Wilson Avenue 4 Entire length
Woodside Avenue 4 Between South Broad Street and
Arena Drive (CR #620)
§ 485-27. Turn prohibitions.
No person shall turn at the below described locations as indicated.
Location
Direction
of Travel
Turn
Prohibited At Intersection of
Atlantic Avenue North Left Hamilton Avenue (CR
#606)
Clearview Avenue East Left Quakerbridge Road (CR
#533)
Driveway exit located
at southwest corner
of Route NJ 33 and
Whitehorse-
Mercerville Road (CR
#533)
North Left Route NJ 33
§ 485-26 HAMILTON CODE § 485-27
1:768
Location
Direction
of Travel
Turn
Prohibited At Intersection of
Driveway exit located
at southwest corner
of Sloan Avenue (CR
#649) and
Quakerbridge Road
(CR #533)
North Left Quakerbridge Road (CR
#533)
East State Street
Extension
Both U-turn Between Route I-295
overpass and Nottingham
Way (CR #652)
Lily Street West Right Chambers Street
Old Olden Avenue West Right Reeves Avenue
Paxson Avenue Both U-turn Between the northernmost
intersection of Tarheels
Road to the southernmost
intersection of Tarheels
Road
Quakerbridge Road
(CR #533)
North Left Clearview Avenue
Quakerbridge Road
(CR #533)
South Right Clearview Avenue
South Broad Street Both U-turn Cedar Lane
South Broad Street Both U-turn Harrison Avenue
South Broad Street Both U-turn Lalor Street
South Broad Street Both U-turn Maple Shade Avenue
South Broad Street Both U-turn Parent Avenue
South Broad Street Both U-turn Samdin Boulevard
South Broad Street North U-turn Entrance to the Colonial
Memorial Park Cemetery
South Broad Street North All New Cedar Lane
South Broad Street South U-turn New Cedar Lane
South Olden Avenue West U-turn Between Route I-295 and
the westerly curbline of
Toronita Avenue
South Olden Avenue West Left Reeves Avenue
South Olden Avenue West Left Entrance to Route I-295
§ 485-28. Right turn only. [Amended 1-21-2009 by Ord. No. 09-003]
No person shall make a turn at the below listed location other than a right
turning movement.
§ 485-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-28
1:769
Location
Direction
of Travel
Turn
ProhibitionAt Intersection
Driveway exit
opposite Armour
Avenue
East Left Klockner Road
Driveway exit
opposite Chewalla
Boulevard
South Left NJ Route 33 (Nottingham
Way)
Klockner Road North Left Driveway entrance
opposite Armour Avenue
NJ Route 33
(Nottingham Way)
East Left Driveway entrance
opposite Chewalla
Boulevard
§ 485-29. No turn on red.
No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any location listed:
Intersection Days; Times Movement Prohibited
Yardville-Hamilton
Square Road and
Estates Boulevard
[Added 11-15-2016
by Ord. No. 16-052]
Monday through Friday,
September 1 to June
30; 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Restricted right turn on
red at all 4 turning
points
§ 485-30. Mid-block crosswalks.
The following locations are hereby established as mid-block crosswalks.
Name of Street Location
Joni Avenue From a point 200 feet north of the north side
curbline of Crestpoint Drive and extending 8
feet north therefrom
Klockner Road From a point 1,585 feet west of Yardville
Hamilton Square Road to a point 10 feet west
therefrom
Kuser Road Beginning 215 feet east of the east side
curbline of Hempstead Road and extending 10
feet east therefrom
Kuser Road From a point 975 feet west of the west side
curbline of Michael McCorristan Road and
extending 10 feet west therefrom
Nottingham Way (CR
#618)
From a point 480 feet west of Gregory Drive
to a point 12 feet east therefrom
§ 485-28 HAMILTON CODE § 485-30
1:770
Name of Street Location
Nottingham Way (CR
#618)
From a point 323 feet east of the east side
curbline of Mario Drive and extending 6 feet
east therefrom
Park Avenue From a point 220 feet west of the west side
curbline of Parkinson Avenue extending to a
point 10 feet west therefrom
Park Avenue From a point 240 feet east of the east side
curbline of South Clinton Avenue extending to
a point 10 feet east therefrom
Tarheels Road From a point 630 feet north of Bulldog Lane to
a point 10 feet north therefrom
Whitehorse Hamilton
Square Road
Beginning at a point 320 feet south of the
south side curbline of Pannick Drive and
extending 10 feet south therefrom
§ 485-31. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described are designated as lane use reservations, and
traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection or Location Movement
South Broad Street and
entrance to Colonial
Memorial Park Cemetery
Northbound left lane of South Broad Street
reserved for left turn only
South Broad Street and
Harrison Avenue
Northbound left lane of South Broad Street
reserved for left turn only
South Broad Street
between Hobson Avenue
and Hunter Avenue
Center lane of South Broad Street for left turn
only, in either direction, except at signalized
intersections marked or signed otherwise
South Broad Street and
Lalor Street (CR #650)
Northbound left lane of South Broad Street
for left turn only
South Broad Street and
Joseph Street
Southbound left lane of South Broad Street
reserved for left turn only
South Broad Street and
Maple Shade Avenue
Southbound left lane of South Broad Street
reserved for left turn only
South Broad Street and
Parent Avenue
Northbound left lane of South Broad Street
reserved for left turn only
South Broad Street and
Samdin Boulevard
Southbound left lane of South Broad Street
reserved for left turn only
§ 485-32. Exclusive lane use.
The lane locations described are hereby designated as exclusive lanes for
use by certain vehicles as indicated.
§ 485-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-32
1:771
Name of Street Type of Vehicle Direction Limits
(Reserved)
§ 485-33. Bicycle routes/lanes. [Amended 7-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-031; 9-3-2008 by Ord. No. 08-049]
The lane locations described are hereby designated as bicycle lanes. Bicycle
lanes shall be a minimum of four feet in width, pursuant to the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
Name of Street Side Lane Width Limits
George Dye Road Both 5 feet From a point 70 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Peter
Rafferty Drive to a point 775 feet
north of the northerly curbline of
Estates Boulevard
George Dye Road Both 5 feet From a point 195 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Carl
Sandburg Drive to a point 195
feet south of New Jersey Route
33
§ 485-34. Speed limits.169 [Amended 2-7-2006 by Ord. No. 6-009;
7-22-2009 by Ord. No. 09-023]
A. The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described below and made a part of this chapter are hereby
established at the rate of speed indicated.
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Limits
Approval
Date
Basin Road 35 From Bucknell
Avenue to the
Township line
3-11-1986
Bucknell Avenue 25 From Carnegie Road
to Basin Road
3-11-1986
Carnegie Road 30 From the Township
line to Bucknell
Avenue
3-11-1986
Cedar Lane—Leonard Avenue
169. Editor's Note: See also § 485-36, Flashing school speed limit 25 mph zone.
§ 485-32 HAMILTON CODE § 485-34
1:772
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Limits
Approval
Date
Zone 1 35 From Chambers
Street (CR #626) to
the center of
Woolsey Street
6-28-1979
Zone 2 40 From the center of
Woolsey Street to a
point 550 feet south
of the center of
South Olden Avenue
(CR #622)
6-28-1979
Zone 3 35 From a point 550
feet south of the
center of South
Olden Avenue (CR
#622) to Newkirk
Avenue
6-28-1979
Zone 4 40 From Newkirk
Avenue to Kuser
Road
6-28-1979
School zone 25 In the St. Anthony
High School area in
Zone 4, during
recess or while
children are going to
or leaving school
during opening or
closing hours
6-28-1979
Cypress Lane 40 Between Hamilton
Avenue (CR #606)
and Whitehorse
Mercerville Road
(CR #533)
12-2-1992
Cypress Lane 30 Between Whitehorse
Mercerville Road
(CR #533) and
Whitehorse
Hamilton Square
Road
4-30-1993
§ 485-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-34
1:773
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Limits
Approval
Date
Cypress Lane
[Added 10-2-2018
by Ord. No.
18-048]
25 From a point 550
feet west of I-295
concrete transition
slab to a point 492
feet east of the
easterly curbline of
Rockwood Avenue
East State Street—East State Street Extension (CR #635)
Zone 1 35 From the westerly
Township line
(vicinity of Logan
Avenue) to the
center of Whitehead
Road (CR #616)
6-28-1979
Zone 2 45 From the center of
Whitehead Road (CR
#616) to the center
of Klockner Avenue
6-28-1979
Zone 3 50 From the center of
Klockner Avenue to a
point 275 feet west
of the center of
Berrell Avenue
6-28-1979
Zone 4 40 From the center of
Berrell Avenue to
Nottingham Way (CR
#652).
The speed limit as
provided for in
N.J.S.A. 39:4-98a
shall be retained
through the school
zone at Our Lady of
Sorrows School in
Zone 4.
6-28-1979
Edgebrook Road 40 Entire length 9-1-1981
Extonville Road 40 Between a point
1,900 feet south of
Old York Road and
Old York Road
8-6-1986
§ 485-34 HAMILTON CODE § 485-34
1:774
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Limits
Approval
Date
Extonville Road 40 Between the
Township of
Hamilton and the
Township of
Chesterfield
corporate line, 550
feet south of Russell
Drive
8-6-1986
Extonville Road 35 Between a point 550
feet south of Russell
Drive and 1,900 feet
south of Old York
Road
8-6-1986
Hughes Drive
Zone 1 35 From Mercer Street
to Mercerville
Edinburg Road (CR
#535)
11-12-1987
Zone 2 40 From Mercerville
Edinburg Road (CR
#535) to Youngs
Road
11-12-1987
Zone 3 35 From Youngs Road
to Quakerbridge
Road (CR #533)
11-12-1987
Iron Bridge Road 35 From centerline of
Crosswicks Creek
Bridge to a point 450
feet north therefrom
3-20-2018
Johnston Avenue
Zone 1 30 From Hamilton
Avenue (CR #606) to
Eleanor Avenue
9-8-1989
Zone 2 25 From Eleanor
Avenue to Route NJ
33 (Greenwood
Avenue)
9-8-1989
Klockner Road—Crosswicks Hamilton Square Road
§ 485-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-34
1:775
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Limits
Approval
Date
Zone 1 35 From Sloan Avenue
(CR #649) to
Hamilton Avenue
(CR #606), except
25 miles per hour
when passing
through Klockner
School zone and
Nottingham High
School zone during
recess when the
presence of children
is clearly visible
from the roadway or
while children are
coming to or leaving
school
1-16-1987
Zone 2 40 From Hamilton
Avenue (CR #606) to
Whitehorse
Mercerville Road
(CR #533)
1-16-1987
Zone 3 35 From Whitehorse
Mercerville Road
(CR #533) to
Whitehorse
Hamilton Square
Road
1-16-1987
Zone 4 40 From Whitehorse
Hamilton Square
Road to Yardville
Hamilton Square
Road, except 30
miles per hour when
passing through
Steinert High School
zone during recess
when the presence
of children is clearly
visible from the
roadway or while
children are coming
to or leaving school
1-16-1987
§ 485-34 HAMILTON CODE § 485-34
1:776
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Limits
Approval
Date
Zone 5 35 From Yardville
Hamilton Square
Road to Kuser Road
1-16-1987
Zone 6 45 From Kuser Road to
2,350 feet west of
Route US 130
1-16-1987
Zone 7 40 From 2,350 feet
west of Route US
130 to South Broad
Street (CR #672)
1-16-1987
Kuser Road 25 From White Horse-
Hamilton Square
Road to Country
Lane-Summerton
Boulevard
Kuser Road 35 From Country Lane-
Summerton
Boulevard to
Yardville-Hamilton
Square Road
Newkirk Avenue 35 From South Olden
Avenue (CR #622) to
Leonard Avenue
9-8-1989
Sculptors Way (See Ward Avenue
Extension)
Sloan Avenue (CR #649)
Zone 1 40 From Klockner
Avenue to a point
2,300 feet east
therefrom
6-28-1979
Zone 2 45 From a point 2,300
feet east of Klockner
Avenue to
Quakerbridge
Mercerville Road
(CR #533)
6-28-1979
§ 485-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-34
1:777
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Limits
Approval
Date
South Broad Street 35 From Whitehorse
Avenue to the
Hamilton Township-
City of Trenton
corporate line,
except "25 mph
when flashing"
school speed zone
within the Holy
Angels Catholic
School zone
South Clinton Avenue
Zone 1 35 From Whitehorse
Avenue (CR #533) to
Chambers Street
(CR #626) except for
a school limit of 25
mph from 200 feet
south of Park Avenue
to 190 feet north of
Rowan Avenue,
while children are
going to and from
school during
opening and closing
hours
6-28-1979
Zone 2 30 From Chambers
Street (CR #626) to
the northerly
Hamilton Township
corporate line-City of
Trenton corporate
line (Cedar Lane)
6-28-1979
Sweetbriar Avenue (CR #649)
Zone 1 40 Between Whitehead
Road (CR #616) and
Rutgers Avenue
1-13-1982
Zone 2 35 Between Rutgers
Avenue and Coleman
Road
1-13-1982
Tattletown Road 35 Entire length 1-16-1987
Uncle Petes Road 40 Entire length 8-6-1986
§ 485-34 HAMILTON CODE § 485-34
1:778
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Limits
Approval
Date
Ward Avenue 35 Between Hamilton
Avenue (CR #606)
and Nottingham Way
(CR #614)
12-2-1992
Ward Avenue
Extension
(Sculptors Way)
40 Between Nottingham
Way (CR #614) and
East State Street
Extension (CR #635)
12-2-1992
Whitehorse
Hamilton Square
Road
Zone 1 35 From Whitehorse
Mercerville Road
(CR #533) to a point
1,215 feet north of
Goeke Drive
6-28-1979
Zone 2 40 From a point 1,215
feet north of Goeke
Drive to Route NJ 33
6-28-1979
Zone 3 35 From Route NJ 33 to
Nottingham Way (CR
#618)
6-28-1979
School zone 25 In the Albert Grice
Middle School area
in Zone 1, during
recess and while
children are going to
or leaving school
during opening and
closing hours
6-28-1979
Yardville Hamilton Square Road
Zone 1 35 From South Broad
Street (CR #672) to
a point 800 feet
north of Elton
Avenue
Zone 2 45 From a point 800
feet north of Elton
Avenue to the center
of Klockner Road
§ 485-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-34
1:779
§ 485-35. No passing zones.
No passing zones are hereby established and shall be maintained upon the
following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street; Location Sketch Number Sketch Date
Basin Road NPZ-3220 3-19-1985
Bucknell Avenue NPZ-3220 3-19-1985
Carnegie Road NPZ-3220 3-19-1985
Church Street, entire length (CR
#609)
NPZ-119-B 11-13-1979
Crosswicks Hamilton Square Road,
entire length
NPZ-119-B 11-13-1979
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Limits
Approval
Date
Zone 3 40 From the center of
Klockner Road to the
center of Route NJ
33
School zone 30 In the Joseph
Steinert Memorial
Hamilton High
School East and the
Emily C. Reynolds
Memorial Middle
School in Zone 3,
during recess or
while children are
going to or leaving
school during
opening or closing
hours
Youngs Road 35 Between
Quakerbridge Road
(CR #533) and the
Hamilton Township
corporate
line—Lawrence
Township corporate
line
3-21-1995
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to affect
the above-designated speed limits.
§ 485-34 HAMILTON CODE § 485-35
1:780
Name of Street; Location Sketch Number Sketch Date
Cypress Lane, entire length from
Hamilton Avenue (CR #606) to
Whitehorse Avenue (CR #533), a
distance of 7,660 feet
(No sketch
necessary)
Cypress Lane, entire length from
Whitehorse Mercerville Road (CR
#533) to Whitehorse Hamilton
Square Road, a distance of 3,380
feet
(No sketch
necessary)
Edgebrook Road NPZ-2860 10-30-1979
Emeline Avenue—Independence
Avenue, entire length between
Alfred Avenue and Rowan Avenue
(No sketch
necessary)
Estates Boulevard, both directions
between Klockner Road and
Whitehorse Hamilton Square Road
(No sketch
necessary)
Extonville Road NPZ-2882 2-7-1980
Flock Road (CR #649), both
directions between Mercer Street
and Crestwood Drive
(No sketch
necessary)
George Dye Road, entire length (No sketch
necessary)
Groveville Allentown Road, both
directions from South Broad Street
(CR #672) to Yardville Allentown
Road (CR #524)
(No sketch
necessary)
Hughes Drive, entire length
between Mercer Street and
Quakerbridge Road (CR #533)
(No sketch
necessary)
Klockner Road—Klockner Avenue,
entire length between Route US
130 and Sloan Avenue (CR #649)
(No sketch
necessary)
Lamberton Road, entire length NPZ-2853 10-23-1979
Liberty Street, entire length from
Chambers Street (CR #626) to
Hamilton Avenue (CR #606)
(No sketch
necessary)
Mercer Street NPZ-608 8-31-73
Merrick Road, entire length NPZ-2859 10-30-1979
Nottingham Way (CR #618) from
Mario Drive to Route NJ 33
(No sketch
necessary)
Old York Road NPZ-3262 9-4-1985
§ 485-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-35
1:781
Name of Street; Location Sketch Number Sketch Date
Paxson Avenue, both directions
from Flock Road (CR #649) to
Hughes Drive
(No sketch
necessary)
Paxson Avenue, between
Nottingham Way (CR #618) and
Kino Boulevard, a distance of 5,570
feet
(No sketch
necessary)
Sawmill Road, entire length
[Added 11-18-2014 by Ord. No.
14-073]
(No sketch
necessary)
Sloan Road (CR #649), entire
length
NPZ-119-B 11-13-1979
South Clinton Avenue, from Cedar
Lane to Whitehorse Avenue (CR
#533)
NPZ-3285 6-10-1986
Uncle Pete's Road, entire length NPZ-2854 10-23-1979
Whitehorse Hamilton Square Road NPZ-3313 4-27-1987
Youngs Road NPZ-3237 5-8-1985
§ 485-36. Flashing school speed limit 25 mph zone. [Added
10-18-2005 by Ord. No. 05-040]
Flashing school speed limit 25 miles per hour (mph) zones are hereby
designated at the following locations:
§ 485-35 HAMILTON CODE § 485-36
1:782
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Klockner Road-Crosswicks-
Hamilton Square Road at
Klockner School and
Nottingham High School
Zone 1 35 Between Sloan Avenue and
Hamilton Avenue, except for
25 mph when passing
through the Klockner School
zone and for 25 mph when
passing through Nottingham
High School zone, while "25
mph when flashing" signs
are operating during recess,
when the presence of
children is clearly visible
from the roadway or while
children are going to or
leaving school, during
opening or closing hours
Zone 2 40 Between Hamilton Avenue
and White Horse-Mercerville
Road
Zone 3 35 Between White Horse-
Mercerville Road and White
Horse-Hamilton Square Road
Zone 4 40 Between White Horse-
Hamilton Square Road and
Yardville-Hamilton Square
Road, except for 25 mph
when passing through the
Steinert High School zone
during recess, when the
presence of children is
clearly visible from the
roadway or while children
are going to or leaving
school, during opening or
closing hours
Zone 5 35 Between Yardville-Hamilton
Square Road and 1,260 feet
west of George Dye Road
Zone 6 45 Between 1,260 feet west of
George Dye Road and 2,350
feet west of Route US 130
§ 485-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-36
1:783
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Zone 7 40 Between 2,360 feet west of
Route US 130 and Broad
Street
South Clinton Avenue at
Hamilton High School West
Zone 1 35 Between White Horse
Avenue and Chambers
Street, except for 25 mph
when passing through the
Hamilton High School West
zone, while "25 mph when
flashing" signs are operating
during recess, when the
presence of children is
clearly visible from the
roadway or while children
are going to or leaving
school, during opening or
closing hours
Zone 2 30 Between Chambers Street
and Cedar Lane
White Horse-Hamilton Square
Road at Grice Middle School
Zone 1 35 Between White Horse-
Mercerville Road and 1,215
feet north of Goeke Drive,
except for 25 mph when
passing through the Grice
Middle School zone while
"25 mph when flashing"
signs are on during recess,
when the presence of
children is clearly visible
from the roadway or while
children are going to or
leaving school, during
opening or closing hours
Zone 2 40 Between 1,215 feet north of
Goeke Drive and Route NJ 33
Zone 3 35 Between Route NJ 33 and
Nottingham Way
§ 485-36 HAMILTON CODE § 485-37
1:784
§ 485-37. Bus stops. [Amended 2-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-010;
10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-033; 2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-008;
2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-009; 2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-010;
4-22-2010 by Ord. No. 10-016; 4-22-2010 by Ord. No. 10-017;
3-16-2011 by Ord. No. 11-008, ; 4-20-2011 by Ord. No. 11-010;
8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 11-025, ; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 11-026;
10-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-036; 12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-046;
5-16-2012 by Ord. No. 12-021; 6-20-2012 by Ord. No. 12-029;
7-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-034; 3-5-2013 by Ord. No. 13-009;
6-18-2013 by Ord. No. 13-022; 9-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-033;
3-17-2015 by Ord. No. 15-012; 8-18-2015 by Ord. No. 15-034;
11-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-046; 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 16-047;
3-7-2017 by Ord. No. 17-008; 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-041;
12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-066]
The locations described are hereby designated as bus stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall be
permitted to occupy said location.
Along Arena Drive (CR 620), eastbound, on the southerly side thereof at:
a. Reeves Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Reeves Avenue and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom (location 32021)
b. Bradford Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of Bradford
Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom (location 30701)
c. Colonial Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Colonial Avenue and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom (location 22218)
Along Arena Drive (CR 620), westbound, on the northerly side thereof at:
a. Between Bradford Avenue and Maddock Avenue (mid-block)
Beginning 250, feet west of the westerly curbline of Bradford Avenue
and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom (location 31111)
b. East Taylor Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of East Taylor Avenue and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom (location 22124)
Along Central Avenue, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
a. Ridge Avenue (far side) (prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of Ridge
Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom (location 30594)
§ 485-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-37
1:785
b. Arena Drive (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Arena Drive and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom (location 22188)
Along Central Avenue, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
a. Arena Drive (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Arena Drive and extending 150
feet southerly therefrom (location 22230)
Along Chambers Street (CR 626), eastbound, on the southerly side thereof
at:
a. Cedar Lane (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Cedar Lane and extending 100
feet easterly therefrom (location 30702)
Along Chambers Street (CR 626), westbound, on the northerly side thereof
at:
a. Cedar Lane (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Cedar Lane and extending 105
feet easterly therefrom (location 22205)
b. East Howell Street (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of East Howell Street and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom (location 22206)
c. Redfern Street (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Redfern Street and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom (location 22208)
Along East Park Avenue, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
a. Parkinson Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of Parkinson
Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom (location 22215)
b. Field Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Field Avenue and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom (location 22216)
Along East Park Avenue, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
a. Ridge Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Ridge Avenue and extending
105 feet northerly therefrom (location 32264)
b. Field Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Field Avenue and extending
105 feet northerly therefrom (location 22199)
§ 485-37 HAMILTON CODE § 485-37
1:786
c. Parkinson Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Parkinson Avenue and
extending 100 feet southerly therefrom (location 22200)
Along East State Street (CR 635), eastbound, on the southerly side thereof
at:
a. South Johnston Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of South Johnston Avenue and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom (location 30703)
Along East State Street (CR 635), westbound, on the northerly side thereof
at:
a. South Johnston Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of South Johnston Avenue and
extending 100 feet westerly therefrom (location 30704)
Along East State Street Extension (CR 635), eastbound, on the southerly
side thereof at:
a. Sculptors Way (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Johnston Avenue and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom (location 30705)
b. Fairgrounds Road (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Fairgrounds Road and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom (location 30706)
c. Nebraska Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Nebraska Avenue and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom (location 30935)
Along East State Street Extension (CR 635), westbound, on the northerly
side thereof at:
a. Norcross Circle (near side) (prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the easterly curbline of Norcross
Circle and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom (location 31554)
b. Nebraska Avenue (far side) (prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of Nebraska
Avenue and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom (location 30936)
c. Fairgrounds Road (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Fairgrounds Road and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom (location 30707)
d. Between Sculptors Way and North Fairgrounds Road (mid-block)
Beginning 200 feet east of the easterly curbline of Sculptors Way and
extending 135 feet easterly therefrom (location 30708)
§ 485-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-37
1:787
Estates Boulevard, eastbound, on the southerly side thereof at:
a. Whitehorse-Mercerville Road (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Whitehorse - Mercerville Road
and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom (location 31330)
Estates Boulevard, westbound, on the northerly side thereof at:
a. Whitehorse-Mercerville Road (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Whitehorse - Mercerville Road
and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom (location 31331)
Along Hamilton Avenue (CR 606), eastbound, on the southerly side thereof
at:
a. South Olden Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of South Olden Avenue and
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom (location 22147)
b. Francis Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Francis Avenue and extending
100 feet easterly therefrom (location 31264)
c. Newkirk Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Newkirk Avenue and extending
100 feet easterly therefrom (location 22309)
d. Johnston Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Johnston Avenue and extending
100 feet easterly therefrom (location 30712)
e. Kuser Road (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Kuser Road and extending 100
feet easterly therefrom (location 22310)
f. Pope Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Pope Avenue extending 105 feet
westerly therefrom (location 32550)
g. Cypress Lane (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Cypress Lane and extending 105
feet westerly therefrom (location 22311)
h. Klockner Road (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Klockner Road and extending
100 feet easterly therefrom (location 22148)
i. Between Salem Place and Birkshire Road (mid-block)
Beginning 100 feet east of the easterly curbline of Salem Place and
extending 135 feet easterly therefrom (location 22149)
§ 485-37 HAMILTON CODE § 485-37
1:788
j. Birkshire Road (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Birkshire Road and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom (location 30709)
Along Hamilton Avenue (CR 606), westbound, on the northerly side thereof
at:
a. Meade Drive (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Meade Drive and extending 105
feet westerly therefrom (location 30710)
b. Between Salem Place and Birkshire Road (mid-block)
Beginning 125 feet east of the prolongation of the easterly curbline
of Salem Place and extending 135 feet easterly therefrom (location
30711)
c. Klockner Road (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Klockner Road and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom (location 22150)
d. Donald Drive (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Donald Drive and extending 105
feet easterly therefrom (location 22305)
e. Brook Lane (far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of Brook Lane
and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom (location 30714)
f. Haslach Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Haslach Avenue and extending
100 feet westerly therefrom (location 22151)
g. Atlantic Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Atlantic Avenue and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom (location 30715)
Along Klockner Avenue, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
[Amended 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-057]
a. Armour Avenue (near side).
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Armour Avenue and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom (location 33012)
b. Smith Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of Smith
Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom (location 30751)
§ 485-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-37
1:789
c. Hamilton Lakes Drive (near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the southerly curbline of Hamilton
Lakes Drive and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom (location
30575)
d. Collier Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Collier Avenue and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom (location 30576)
Along Klockner Avenue, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
[Amended 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-057]
a. Collier Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Collier Avenue and extending
100 feet southerly therefrom (location 30579)
b. Hamilton Lakes Drive (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Hamilton Lakes Drive and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom (location 30580)
c. Smith Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Smith Avenue and extending
100 feet southerly therefrom (location 30581)
d. Armour Avenue (far side - prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the southerly curbline of Armour
Avenue and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom (location 33013)
Along Klockner Road, eastbound, on the southerly side at:
a. Between East State Street Extension and Sloan Avenue (mid-block)
[Amended 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-057]
Beginning 283 feet east of the easterly curbline of East State Street
Extension and extending 135 feet easterly therefrom (location 30938)
b. Between Whatley Road and Snowball Lane (far side)
Beginning 554 feet west of the the westerly curbline of Whatley Road
and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom (location 31265)
c. Whatley Road (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Whatley Road and extending 100
feet easterly therefrom (at address 2210) (location 30569)
d. Back Creek Drive (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Back Creek Drive and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom (location 31857)
Along Klockner Road, westbound, on the northerly side thereof at:
§ 485-37 HAMILTON CODE § 485-37
1:790
a. Back Creek Drive (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Back Creek Drive and extending
100 feet westerly therefrom (location 31856)
b. Whatley Road (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Whatley Road and extending 105
feet easterly therefrom (across from 2210) (location 30572)
c. Between East State Street Extension and Sloan Avenue (mid-block)
[Amended 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-057]
Beginning 210 feet east of the easterly curbline of East State Street
Extension and extending 135 feet easterly therefrom (location 30937)
Along Kuser Road, eastbound, on the southerly side thereof at:
a. Whitehorse-Hamilton Square Road (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Whitehorse - Hamilton Square
Road and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom (location 22194)
b. Hempstead Road (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Hempstead Road and extending
100 feet easterly therefrom (location 30582)
c. Heaton Drive (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Heaton Drive and extending 105
feet westerly therefrom (location 30583)
d. Summerton Boulevard (near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of Summerton
Boulevard and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom (location
30581)
e. Albert E. Bonacci Drive (far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the easterly curbline of Albert E.
Bonacci Drive and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom (location
22152)
Along Kuser Road, westbound, on the northerly side thereof at:
a. Albert E. Bonacci Drive (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Albert E. Bonacci Drive and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom (location 22153)
b. Country Lane (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Country Lane and extending
100 feet westerly therefrom (location 22222)
§ 485-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-37
1:791
c. Willow Bend Drive (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Willow Bend Drive and
extending 100 feet westerly therefrom (location 30585)
d. Hempstead Road (near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the easterly curbline of Hempstead
Road and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom (location 30587)
e. Whitehorse-Hamilton Square Road (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Whitehorse - Hamilton Square
Road and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom (location 22225)
Along Lalor Street (CR 650), eastbound, on the southerly side thereof at:
a. Hewitt Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Hewitt Avenue and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom (location 22346)
b. Stenton Court (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Stenton Court and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom (location 22240)
c. Caroline Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Caroline Avenue and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom (location 22241)
d. Julia Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Julia Avenue and extending 105
feet westerly therefrom (location 22243)
e. South Broad Street (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of South Broad Street and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom (location 22244)
Along Lamont Avenue, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
a. Entrance to Senior Citizen High Rise (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of the Senior Citizen High Rise
and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom (location 22234)
Along Lamont Avenue Circle, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
a. Entrance to Senior Citizen High Rise (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of the Senior Citizen High Rise
and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom (location 31239)
Along Mercerville-Edinburg Road, eastbound, on the southerly side thereof
at:
§ 485-37 HAMILTON CODE § 485-37
1:792
a. Nottingham Way (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Nottingham Way and extending
150 feet easterly therefrom (location 30717)
b. Lansing Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Lansing Avenue and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom (location 30718)
c. Marshall Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of Marshall
Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom (location 30179)
d. Paxson Avenue (far side)170
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Paxson Avenue and extending
100 feet easterly therefrom (location 30720)
e. Hughes Drive (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Hughes Drive and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom (location 22295)
Along Mercerville-Edinburg Road, westbound, on the northerly side
thereof at:
a. Hughes Drive (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Hughes Drive and extending 105
feet easterly therefrom (location 30721)
b. Paxson Avenue (far side)171
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Paxson Avenue and extending
100 feet westerly therefrom (location 30722)
c. Stamford Road (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Stamford Road and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom (location 22332)
d. Delotto Drive (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Delotto Drive and extending 100
feet westerly therefrom (location 30723)
Along Mercerville-Quakerbridge Road (CR 533), northbound, on the
easterly side thereof at:
a. Edinburg Road and Pollman Street (mid-block)
Beginning 500 feet north of the northerly curbline of Edinburg Road
and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom (location 22157)
170. Editor’s Note: A portion of Paxson Avenue, in the area of Mercer County Park was
renamed Richard J. Coffee Boulevard 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-059.
171. Editor’s Note: A portion of Paxson Avenue, in the area of Mercer County Park was
renamed Richard J. Coffee Boulevard 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-059.
§ 485-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-37
1:793
b. New Street (near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the southerly curbline of New Street
and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom (location 30724)
c. Brookwood Road (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Brookwood Road and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom (location 30725)
d. Tally Road (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Tally Road and extending 100
feet northerly therefrom (location 30726)
e. Between Cooney Avenue and Nami Lane (mid-block)
Beginning 270 feet north of the northerly curbline of Cooney Avenue
and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom (location 30727)
f. Nami Lane (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Nami Lane and extending 100
feet northerly therefrom (location 32399)
g. Youngs Road (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Youngs Road and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom (location 22300)
h. Hughes Drive (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Hughes Drive and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom (location 30728)
Along Mercerville-Quakerbridge Road (CR 533), southbound, on the
westerly side thereof at:
a. Hughes Drive (far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the southerly curbline of Hughes
Drive and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom (location 30729)
b. Between Nami Lane and Youngs Road (mid-block)
Beginning 353 feet north of the northerly curbline of Nami Lane and
extending 135 feet northerly therefrom (at address 3620) (location
30730)
c. Quakerbridge Plaza Drive (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Quakerbridge Plaza Drive and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom (location 30731)
d. Brookwood Road (near side) (prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of Brookwood
Road and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom (location 22158)
§ 485-37 HAMILTON CODE § 485-37
1:794
e. New Street (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of New Street and extending 100
feet southerly therefrom (location 30732)
f. Pollman Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Pollman Avenue and extending
105 feet northerly therefrom (location 22303)
g. Youngs Road (near side). Beginning at the northerly curbline of
Youngs Road and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom (location
31001) [Added 5-7-2019 by Ord. No. 19-023]
Along Nottingham Way (CR 614), eastbound, on the southerly side thereof
at:
a. Hollywood Drive (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Hollywood Drive and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom (location 22306)
b. Between Sculptors Way and Warner Road (mid-block)
Beginning 458 feet west of the westerly curbline of Sculptors Way
and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom (at address 274) (location
31269)
c. Regina Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Regina Avenue and extending
100 feet easterly therefrom (location 22330)
d. Berkley Street (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Berkley Street and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom (location 30733)
e. Shady Lane (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Shady Lane and extending 105
feet westerly therefrom (location 30734)
f. Birtin Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Birtin Avenue and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom (location 31555)
g. Lander Drive (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Lander Drive and extending 105
feet westerly therefrom (location 30735)
h. Deerwood Drive (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Deerwood Drive and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom (location 30736)
§ 485-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-37
1:795
i. Paxson Avenue Extension (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Paxson Avenue Extension and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom (location 22275)
j. Aberfoyle Drive (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Aberfoyle Drive and extending
100 feet easterly therefrom (location 22336)
k. Crest Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Crest Avenue and extending 100
feet easterly therefrom (location 22337)
l. Sunset Boulevard (near side) (prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of Sunset
Boulevard and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom (location
30737)
m. George Dye Road (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of George Dye Road and extending
100 feet easterly therefrom (location 30738)
n. Mario Drive (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Mario Drive and extending 100
feet easterly therefrom (location 22339)
Along Nottingham Way (CR 614), westbound, on the northerly side thereof
at:
a. Mario Drive (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Mario Drive and extending 105
feet easterly therefrom (location 22334)
b. George Dye Road (near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the easterly curbline of George Dye
Road and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom (location 22341)
c. Sunset Boulevard (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Sunset Boulevard and extending
100 feet westerly therefrom (location 22342)
d. North Crest Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of North Crest Avenue and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom (location 22343)
e. Aberfoyle Drive (near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the easterly curbline of Aberfoyle
Drive and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom (location 22315)
§ 485-37 HAMILTON CODE § 485-37
1:796
f. Park Avenue (far side) (prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of Park Avenue
and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom (location 30739)
g. Paxson Avenue Extension (near side) (prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the easterly curbline of Paxson
Avenue Extension and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom (location
22255)
h. Lander Drive (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Lander Drive and extending 105
feet easterly therefrom (location 30740)
i. Marshall Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Marshall Avenue and extending
100 feet westerly therefrom (location 31556)
j. Shady Lane (near side) (prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the easterly curbline of Shady Lane
and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom (location 30741)
k. Berkeley Street (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Berkeley Street and extending
100 feet westerly therefrom (location 22258)
l. Regina Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Regina Avenue and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom (location 22136)
m. Between Sculptors Way and Warner Road (mid-block)
Beginning 460 feet west of the westerly curbline of Sculptors Way and
extending 135 feet westerly therefrom (location 31270)
n. Karl Suess Drive (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Karl Suess Drive and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom (location 30742)
Along Quakerbridge Plaza Drive, eastbound, on the southerly side thereof
at:
a. Between Quakerbridge Road and Thomas J. Rhodes Industrial Drive
(mid-block) Beginning 650 feet west of the westerly curbline of
Quakerbridge Road and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom (at
Quakerbridge Plaza Building 5 at shelter) (location 22156)
Along Quakerbridge Plaza Drive, westbound, on the northerly side thereof
at:
§ 485-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-37
1:797
a. Between Quakerbridge Road and Thomas J. Rhodes Industrial Drive
(mid-block) Beginning 250 feet west of the westerly curbline of
Quakerbridge Road and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom
(across from Quakerbridge Plaza Building 1 at shelter) (location
22154)
Along Sculptors Way, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
a. Between Nottingham Way and Fairgrounds Road (mid-block)
Beginning 200 feet north of the northerly curbline of Nottingham Way
and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom (location 30589)
b. Fairgrounds Road (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Fairgrounds Road and
extending 100 feet northerly therefrom (location 22236)
Along Sculptors Way, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
a. Fairgrounds Road (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Fairgrounds Road and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom (location 22237)
b. Between Nottingham Way and Fairgrounds Road (mid-block)
Beginning 270 feet north of the northerly curbline of Nottingham Way
and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom (location 30590)
Along Sloan Avenue (CR 649), eastbound, on the southerly side thereof at:
a. Douglas Avenue (near side) (prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of Douglas
Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom (location 32546)
Along Sloan Avenue (CR 649), westbound, on the northerly side thereof at:
a. Fairlawn Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Fairlawn Avenue and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom (location 32545)
Along South Broad Street, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
a. Maple Shade Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Maple Shade Avenue and
extending 100 feet northerly therefrom (location 22162)
b. Homestead Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Homestead Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom (location 22344)
c. Woodside Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Woodside Avenue and
extending 100 feet northerly therefrom (location 22163)
§ 485-37 HAMILTON CODE § 485-37
1:798
d. Fetter Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Fetter Avenue and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom (location 30592)
e. Maddock Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Maddock Avenue and
extending 100 feet northerly therefrom (location 22164)
f. Between Beech Avenue and Irvington Place (mid-block)
Beginning 100 feet north of the northerly curbline of Beech Avenue
and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom (location 22165)
g. Between Lake Avenue and Samdin Boulevard (mid-block)
Beginning 200 feet south of the prolongation of the southerly curbline
of Lake Avenue and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom (location
22166)
h. Mary Street (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Mary Street and extending 100
feet northerly therefrom (location 22167)
i. Lily Street (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Lily Street and extending 100
feet northerly therefrom (location 22168)
j. Samuel Street (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Samuel Street and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom (location 22169)
Along South Broad Street, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
a. New Cedar Lane (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of New Cedar Lane and extending
100 feet southerly therefrom (location 22170)
b. Sewell Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Sewell Avenue and extending
100 feet southerly therefrom (location 22171)
c. Buchanan Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Buchanan Avenue and
extending 100 feet southerly therefrom (location 22172)
d. Rowan Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Rowan Avenue and extending
105 feet northerly therefrom (location 22173)
§ 485-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-37
1:799
e. West Park Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of West Park Avenue and
extending 100 feet southerly therefrom (location 22174)
f. Between Oldfield Avenue and Beech Avenue (mid-block)
Beginning 150 feet south of the southerly curbline of Oldfield Avenue
and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom (location 22175)
g. Harcourt Drive (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Harcourt Drive and extending
100 feet southerly therefrom (location 22177)
h. Hobson Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Hobson Avenue and extending
100 feet southerly therefrom (location 22178)
i. Parent Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Parent Avenue and extending
105 feet northerly therefrom (location 22323)
Along South Broad Street (CR 672), eastbound, on the southerly side
thereof at:
a. Pebble Creek Drive (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Pebble Creek Drive and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom (location 22278)
b. Between Gropp Avenue and Hempstead Road (mid-block)
Beginning 219 feet east of the easterly curbline of Gropp Avenue and
extending 135 feet easterly therefrom (location 22248)
c. Winding Way (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Winding Way and extending 100
feet easterly therefrom (location 22281)
d. Between Oak Lane and Yardville-Hamilton Square Road (mid-block)
[Added 7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-034]
Beginning 132 feet east of the easterly curbline of Oak Lane and
extending 135 feet easterly therefrom (location 32922)
Along South Broad Street (CR 672), westbound, on the northerly side
thereof at:
a. Yardville-Hamilton Square Road (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Yardville-Hamilton Square Road
and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom (location 22249)
§ 485-37 HAMILTON CODE § 485-37
1:800
b. Oak Lane (far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of Oak Lane
and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom (location 30743)
c. Sunnybrae Boulevard (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Sunnybrae Boulevard and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom (location 22273)
d. Argonne Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Argonne Avenue and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom (location 22274)
e. Between Gropp Avenue and Hempstead Road (mid-block)
Beginning 455 feet east of the easterly curbline of Gropp Avenue and
extending 135 feet easterly therefrom (location 22250)
f. Lacy Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Lacy Avenue and extending 100
feet westerly therefrom (location 22276)
Along South Clinton Avenue, eastbound, on the southerly side thereof at:
a. Lily Street (far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the easterly curbline of Lily Street
and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom (location 22212)
b. Mary Street (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Mary Street and extending 105
feet westerly therefrom (location 22213)
Along South Clinton Avenue, westbound, on the northerly side thereof at:
a. Mary Street (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Mary Street and extending 105
feet easterly therefrom (location 22202)
b. Lily Street (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Lily Street and extending 105
feet easterly therefrom (location 22203)
Along State Highway Route 33 (Greenwood Avenue), eastbound, on the
southerly side thereof at:
a. Massachusetts Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Massachusetts Avenue and
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom
b. Lynwood Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Lynwood Avenue and extending
100 feet easterly therefrom
§ 485-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-37
1:801
c. Bromley Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Bromley Avenue and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom
d. Between Dickinson Avenue and Ward Avenue (mid-block)
Beginning 250 feet east of the easterly curbline of Dickinson Avenue
and extending 135 feet easterly therefrom
e. Between Ward Avenue and Donald Drive (mid-block)
Beginning 380 feet east of the easterly curbline of Ward Avenue and
extending 135 feet easterly therefrom
Along State Highway Route 33 (Greenwood Avenue), westbound, on the
northerly side thereof at:
a. Between Ward Avenue and Williamson Avenue (mid-block)
Beginning 380 feet west of the westerly curbline of Ward Avenue and
extending 135 feet westerly therefrom
b. Between Dickinson Avenue and Ward Avenue (mid-block)
Beginning 250 feet west of the prolongation of the westerly curbline
of Dickinson Avenue and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom (at
Hamilton Township Municipal Building)
c. Bromley Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Bromley Avenue and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom
d. Lynwood Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Lynwood Avenue and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom
e. Massachusetts Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Massachusetts Avenue and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom
Along State Highway Route 33 (Nottingham Way), eastbound, on the
southerly side thereof at:
a. Donald Drive (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Donald Drive and extending 100
feet easterly therefrom
b. Chewalla Boulevard (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Chewalla Boulevard and
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom
§ 485-37 HAMILTON CODE § 485-37
1:802
c. Klockner Road (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Klockner Road and extending
100 feet easterly therefrom
d. Sterling Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Sterling Avenue and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom
e. Concord Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Concord Avenue and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom
f. Between Vincent Avenue and Crescent Avenue (mid-block)
Beginning 125 feet west of the westerly curbline of Vincent Avenue
and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom
Along State Highway Route 33 (Nottingham Way), westbound, on the
northerly side thereof at:
a. Vincent Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Vincent Avenue and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom
b. Concord Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the easterly curbline of Concord
Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom
c. Sterling Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Sterling Avenue and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom
d. Klockner Road (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Klockner Road and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom
e. Chewalla Boulevard (far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of Chewalla
Boulevard and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom
f. Donald Drive (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Donald Drive and extending 105
feet easterly therefrom
Along State Highway Route 130, northbound, on the easterly side thereof
at:
a. South Gold Drive (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of South Gold Drive and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom
§ 485-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-37
1:803
Along State Highway Route 130, southbound, on the westerly side thereof
at:
a. South Gold Drive (far side)
Beginning at the prolongation northerly curbline of South Gold Drive
and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom
Along Whitehorse Avenue (CR 533), northbound, on the easterly side
thereof at:
a. Locust Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Locust Avenue and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom (location 31345)
b. Arena Drive (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Arena Drive and extending 100
feet northerly therefrom (location 22179)
c. Between Whitehorse-Hamilton Square Road and Wolf Drive (midblock)
Beginning 120 feet south of the the southerly curbline of Whitehorse-
Hamilton Square Road and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom
(location 30745)
d. Wolf Drive (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Wolf Drive and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom (location 22192)
e. Between Kuser Road and South Olden Avenue (mid-block)
Beginning 300 feet south of the southerly curbline of Kuser Road and
extending 135 feet southerly therefrom (location 22193)
Along Whitehorse Avenue (CR 533), southbound, on the westerly side
thereof at:
a. Kuser Road and South Olden Avenue (mid-block)
Beginning 300 feet south of the southerly curbline of Kuser Road and
extending 135 feet southerly therefrom (location 22180)
b. Dodge Drive (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Dodge Drive and extending 105
feet northerly therefrom (location 30746)
c. Orchard Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Orchard Avenue and extending
105 feet northerly therefrom (location 30747)
d. South Clinton Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of South Clinton Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom (location 30748)
§ 485-37 HAMILTON CODE § 485-37
1:804
Along Whitehorse-Hamilton Square Road, northbound, on the easterly side
thereof at:
a. Estates Boulevard (far side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of Estates
Boulevard and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom (location
30595)
Along Whitehorse-Hamiltoin Square Road, southbound, on the westerly
side thereof at:
a. Estates Boulevard (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Estates Boulevard and
extending 100 feet southerly therefrom (location 32744)
Along Whitehorse-Mercerville Road (CR 533), northbound, on the easterly
side thereof at:
a. Justice Samuel Alito Way (far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Justice Samuel Alito Way and
extending 100 feet northerly therefrom (location 22253)
b. Cypress Lane (near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the southerly curbline of Cypress
Lane and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom (location 22269)
c. Between Klockner Road and Cypress Lane (mid-block)
Beginning 630 feet south of the southerly curbline of Klockner Road
and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom (location 30749)
Along Whitehorse-Mercerville Road (CR 533), southbound, on the westerly
side thereof at:
a. Klockner Road (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Klockner Road and extending
100 feet southerly therefrom (location 22261)
b. Cypress Lane (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Cypress Lane and extending
105 feet northerly therefrom (location 22262)
c. Justice Samuel Alito Way (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Justice Samuel Alito Way and
extending 100 feet southerly therefrom (location 22263)
Along Yardville-Allentown Road (CR 524), eastbound, on the southerly side
thereof at:
§ 485-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-37
1:805
a. Manor Boulevard (near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of Manor
Boulevard and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom (location
30750)
§ 485-38. Articulated bus stops.
The locations described are hereby designated as articulated bus stops. No
vehicle other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall
be permitted to occupy said location between the hours indicated.
Name of Street Hours
(Reserved)
(Minimum distances)
Near side: 155 feet
Far side: 140 feet
Mid-block: 170 feet
§ 485-39. Loading zones.
The locations described are hereby designated as loading zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in said location during the times indicated other than
for the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
Name of Street Time Side(s) Location
Bow Hill Avenue All South Beginning at a location 100
feet west of the southwest
curbline of Reeger Avenue
and extending 185 feet in a
westerly direction
Charlotte Avenue Friday 10:00
a.m. to 12:00
noon
West From a point 35 feet south of
the southerly curbline of
Hamilton Avenue (CR #606)
to a point 115 feet in a
southerly direction
South Broad
Street
All West Beginning 458 feet from the
southerly curbline of Dewey
Avenue to a point 55 feet
southerly therefrom
(NOTE: Minimum length for all loading zones is 50 feet. No loading zone
may be established in any area where it is prohibited to stand or park by
statute. N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.)
§ 485-37 HAMILTON CODE § 485-40
1:806
§ 485-40. Taxi stands.172
The locations described are hereby designated as taxi stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy said locations during the
times indicated.
Street Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 485-41. Control for the movement and the parking of traffic on
public and private property.
A. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on municipal
property and Board of Education property. In accordance with the
provisions N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following municipal and Board of
Education property shall have the movement of traffic controlled by the
type of regulation indicated. No person shall operate or park a vehicle
in violation of the regulations indicated.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
B. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on all other
private property. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1,
the regulations of Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes are hereby
made applicable to the properties listed below.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
C. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on municipal
park property. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the
regulations of Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes are hereby
made applicable to the properties listed below.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
D. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on United States
Post Office property. In accordance with 40 U.S.C. 318B and a written
request from the Postmaster, the following various traffic regulations
are hereby made applicable to the properties listed below as follows.
No person shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations
listed below.
Property Regulations
(Reserved)
172. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 454, Taxicabs and Limousines, § 454-20, Taxi stands.
§ 485-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-41
1:807
E. Signs, pavement markings, installation and maintenance. The owners of
the premises referred to in Subsections A and B shall provide and
install signs and pavement markings as required, which signage and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices. The cost for the procurement and installation of signs
and pavement markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of said
property. The owner shall, subsequent to initial procurement and
installation, maintain such signs and pavement markings in good
condition at no cost or expense to the Township. The owner shall be
responsible for the repair and restoration or replacement of same.
§ 485-41 HAMILTON CODE § 485-41
1:808
Chapter 496
VENDING MACHINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 215.
Food vending machines — See Ch. 235, Art. II.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 285.
Newspaper vending machines — See Ch. 306.
§ 485-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 485-41
1:809

ARTICLE I
Cigarette and Merchandise Vending Machines
[Adopted as Ch. 150, Art. I, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 496-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINE — Any automatic vending machine used
for the sale of cigarettes and matches and controlled by the insertion of
coins.
MERCHANDISE VENDING MACHINE — Any automatic vending machine
used for the sale of merchandise, including food and food products, and
controlled by the insertion of coins.
§ 496-2. Identification of owner to be posted on machines.
The owner of all cigarette vending machines and merchandise vending
machines hereafter located within the Township shall post in a conspicuous
place thereon the name and the address of the true owner thereof.
§ 496-3. Use of cigarette vending machines by minors.173
No person shall use or permit the use of any cigarette vending machine by
any person under the age of 19 years.
§ 496-4. Refund of coins lost in machines.
All vending machines shall be equipped with a properly functioning
mechanism by which all coins shall be automatically refunded if the
machine is out of order or empty or, in the alternative, shall have a metal
label permanently affixed to the machines notifying any persons who shall
lose coins in an empty or malfunctioning machine of the name and address
and telephone number of the person to whom they may apply for an
appropriate refund.
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 496-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 496-4
1:811

ARTICLE II
Attendants
[Adopted as Ch. 150, Art. II, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 496-5. Attendant required at coin-operated businesses during
certain hours.
No person shall operate, conduct or carry on a business which may be
operated in whole or in part by the depositing of a coin or a token in a slot
or other aperture of or connected with a machine or device and operated
within a permanently constructed building unless the proprietor or other
person in charge of the premises where the installation is located is on duty
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 496-6. Posting of regulations.
Any person operating a coin-operated business within the meaning of this
article shall keep posted a copy of this article at each entrance thereto and
at two other conspicuous places upon the premises. Copies of this article
will be furnished, upon request, by the Municipal Clerk of the Township.
§ 496-7. Exemptions.
A. Coin-operated businesses which are required to pay a state license fee
are not included within the terms of this article.
B. Coin-operated businesses in apartment houses where there is a fulltime
attendant on the premises shall not be included within the terms of
this article.
§ 496-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 496-7
1:813

ARTICLE III
Licensing of Food and Beverage Vending Machines
[Adopted as Ch. 150, Art. III, Div. 2, of the 1994 Code of
Ordinances]
§ 496-8. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
MECHANICAL FOOD VENDING MACHINE — Any automatic vending
machine used for the storage or sale of food or drink and operated and
controlled by the insertion of coins.
§ 496-9. License required.
No mechanical food vending machine shall be maintained for operation
within the Township unless a license for such operation has been issued
therefor by the Township upon application and the payment of the required
license fee.
§ 496-10. Application.
In addition to the requirements of § 285-2, the following application
information is required for purposes of this article:
§ 496-11. Display.
The license required by this article shall be posted permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises where the
device is to be operated.
§ 496-12. Transfer.
A. The age of the applicant. No license shall be issued to any applicant
unless he shall be over 21 years of age and a United States citizen.
B. The location where the machine is to be maintained for operation.
C. A description of the machine to be covered by the license, including the
name of the manufacturer and serial number, if any.
D. The name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for
the operation, maintenance and servicing of the machine.
A. The license required by this article may be transferred from one
machine or device to another similar machine upon application to the
Township and by giving a description and the serial number of the new
machine or device. Not more than one machine shall be operated under
one license, and the applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a
license for each and every machine displayed or operated by him.
§ 496-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 496-12
1:815
§ 496-13. Fee. [Amended 5-20-2014 by Ord. No. 14-034; 5-3-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-016174]
Every applicant, before being granted a license under this article, shall
pay an annual fee per machine, as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, for the
privilege of operating or maintaining for operation each mechanical food
vending machine.
§ 496-14. Standards for machines.
No mechanical food vending machine shall be maintained for operation in
the Township unless it shall meet all requirements and regulations of the
Township Division of Health and be approved upon any inspection made
pursuant to such regulations.
§ 496-15. Use of machines as gambling device; exemptions.
§ 496-16. Parking requirements.
No license shall be issued under this article for more than two vending
machines at any one location if the vending machines are outside any
building or within a building used primarily for sales through vending
machines, unless off-street parking space is provided in the ratio of parking
space for two automobiles for each machine over two machines. Parking
space for an automobile, for the purpose of this section, shall be defined to
be 200 square feet, which space shall be approved by the Chief of Police
and shall be immediately adjoining the location of the vending machine.
B. If the licensee shall move his place of business to another location
within the Township, the license may be transferred to the new location
by application to the Township, giving the street and number of the new
location. The new location shall be approved by the Chief of Police and
the Township Building Inspector in the same manner as provided in
§ 285-4.
A. If the Chief of Police shall have reason to believe any mechanical
vending device is used as a gambling device, the machine shall be
destroyed by the police.
B. The provisions of this article shall not apply to cigarette vending
machines, cigar vending machines or any vending machine for the sale
of merchandise not in excess of $0.10 or to machines used solely for the
purpose of vending prepared food products located on the premises of
an employer not accessible to the general public but only for the
convenience of his employees.
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 496-12 HAMILTON CODE § 496-16
1:816
Chapter 502
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development — See Ch. 550.
§ 496-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 496-16
1:817

ARTICLE I
Bacteriological Tests
[Adopted as Ch. 152, Art. II, Div. 2, of the 1994 Code of Ordinances]
§ 502-1. Tests required for drinking water.
§ 502-2. Payment of costs.
When any owner of a well shall request the Township to cause such
examination to be made through facilities of the state, such owner shall
reimburse the Township for any charges which the state may require.
A. Pursuant to rules promulgated by the Department of Environmental
Protection of the state, any waters used for drinking and culinary
purposes must be examined for bacteriological quality.
B. Any owner of a well must provide for such examination prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Division of Inspections or
certificate of approval by the Division of Health of the Township.
§ 502-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 502-2
1:819
Part III: Land Use Legislation
Chapter 530
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution control — See Ch. 90.
Construction codes — See Ch. 167.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 385.
Solid waste — See Ch. 420.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 427.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 536.
Land development — See Ch. 550.
Site investigation and soil sampling — See Ch.
565.
Soil removal — See Ch. 572.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 577.
Stream Buffer Conservation Zone — See Ch.
583.
§ 530-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Environmental Impact
Statement Ordinance."
§ 530-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules, regulations, standards and
procedures for mandating the preparation of an environmental impact study
by the applicant when it is deemed necessary by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment during its review of subdivision and site plan
development applications.
§ 530-3. General requirements. [Amended 11-2-1994 by Ord. No.
94-048]
A. In the review of an applicant's plan, the administrative officer shall
consider the potential adverse and positive environmental impacts of
any proposed project as major factors in its findings. An environmental
impact statement will be required of the applicant if it is determined by
the administrative officer and affirmed by the reviewing board that
there may be adverse environmental impacts associated with the plan
as submitted, which require further analysis.175
B. The environmental impact statement should describe, with suitable
sketches and plans, the proposed project. The section shall summarize
rather than duplicate the site plan and building plan. This should
include a survey and description of the environmental features of the
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 502-2 HAMILTON CODE § 530-3
1:820
§ 530-4. Sewerage facilities.
It must be shown that sewerage can be disposed of through facilities
adequate to preclude pollution to other water systems.
§ 530-5. Water supply.
It must be shown that an adequate potable water supply is available and not
threatened by nearby land uses.
property. The scope and detail of the impact statement will be
determined by the administrative officer.176
C. An impact study shall consider the topography, surface water bodies,
surface water quality, aquatic biota, soils, geology, groundwater,
vegetation, wildlife and archaeological and historic features. Forest
vegetation is to be classified by type and age class. Map scales shall be
no larger than one inch equals 100 feet or as required by the
administrative officer.
A. Compliance with state and municipal health regulations should be
demonstrated.
B. If disposal is on site, data on underlying geology, soils analysis,
percolation tests for every five acres, topography, location of aquifers,
depth and capacity of all wells within 500 feet of the site and any other
pertinent data should be included.
C. If disposal is off site, indicate the sewerage, plant design capacity,
monthly average flows for the past 12 months, proposed future project
usage and, if applicable, the capacity of the plant to treat industrial or
commercial waste.
D. The statement should document stream quality data from the state,
federal or other sources, stream flow, plans for sewage treatment
facilities, including municipal, county, state, regional or federal plans,
and flows expected from other approved subdivisions or site plans
which are dependent upon the sewage treatment facility in question.
A. Compliance with state and local regulations should be demonstrated.
B. If the supply is from public facilities, including private water
companies, the amount of diversion granted by the Division of Water
Resources of the Department of Environmental Protection of the State
of New Jersey (maximum gallons of water pumped during any month),
present diversion (maximum gallons of water during the past 24
months) and diversion expected from other approved subdivisions and
site plans which are dependent upon the present diversion granted by
the Division of Water Resources should be included in the impact study.
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 530-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-5
1:821
§ 530-6. Surface drainage.
It must be shown that stormwater runoff from the site is so controlled
on and off site that erosion is neither caused nor worsened and that the
potential of downstream flooding is not increased.
§ 530-7. Stream encroachments.
In the case of streams having a drainage area exceeding 1/2 square mile,
an encroachment permit is required from the Division of Water Resources
for fill or diversion of a water channel, alteration of a stream, or repair
or construction of a bridge, culvert, reservoir, dam, wall, pipeline or cable
crossing. A description of potential damages, including a summary of flood
stages from state and federal sources, should be included.
§ 530-8. Solid waste disposal.
It must be shown that solid waste management will occur during
construction and actual operation.
C. If the supply is from on-site sources, indicate the location and depth of
all private and public water supplies within 500 feet of the proposed
development, the location, depth and adequacy of proposed private and
public water supplies to serve the proposed development, geologic
description and subsurface conditions, including expected groundwater
yield (using published geologic reports or a report by a geologist). For
all realty improvements consisting of more than 50 dwelling units, there
shall be no preliminary development approval until the Division of
Water Resources has determined that the proposed water supply and
sewer disposal facilities are adequate.
A. The volume of stormwater runoff now existing from the site and the
volume to be generated by the proposed development shall be
determined.
B. Data on landscaping, a vegetation map, trees and ground cover, both
existing on site and compared with that proposed, shall be included.
C. Changes of runoff to be caused by the changes of such landscape and all
roofs and paved surfaces shall be determined.
D. A plan for the disposition of stormwater, whether by detention or
retention, on or off site, shall be included.
E. The submission of an erosion and sediment control plan, accompanied
by a review by the Soil Conservation District, shall be included.
A. In the case of construction, the impact study shall include an estimate
of the amount of waste to be generated, over what time span, how
waste will be disposed and how often it will be disposed. The applicant
shall demonstrate an awareness of regulations concerning open
burning and landfilling on site.
§ 530-5 HAMILTON CODE § 530-8
1:822
§ 530-9. Air quality.
It must be shown that no visible smoke or deleterious chemical changes are
produced in the atmosphere by heating or incinerating devices or by any
processing of materials.
§ 530-10. Critical impacts.
Plans shall include any area, condition or feature which is environmentally
sensitive or which, if disturbed during construction, would adversely affect
the physical, social or historical environment of the region.
§ 530-11. Environmental impact assessment.177
The environmental impact statement shall contain a concise summary of the
environmental impact assessment for the proposed project. This summary
will evaluate the adverse and positive environmental effects of the project,
should it be implemented, and the public benefits expected to be derived
from the project. The applicant will be required to submit six copies of all
documents being submitted as part of the environmental impact statement.
B. In the area of actual operation, the impact study shall indicate how
much, where and how frequently waste generated will be disposed,
what steps will be taken to recover scrap and recyclable materials, if
any hazardous waste would be a part of the proposed operation, what
steps will be taken to prevent blowing litter and the manner in which
on-site waste collection areas will be screened from public view.
A. Critical impact areas include but are not limited to stream corridors,
streams, wetlands, estuaries, slopes greater than 20%, high acid or
highly erodible soils, areas of high water table, mature stands of native
vegetation, aquifer recharge and discharge areas and archaeologically
sensitive areas.
B. A statement of impact upon critical areas and a listing of adverse
impacts which cannot be avoided shall be included.
C. Environmental protective measures, procedures and schedules to
minimize damage to critical impact areas shall be indicated.
D. A list of all licenses, permits and other approvals required by municipal,
county, regional or state law and the status of each shall be included.
E. An assessment of the environmental impact of the project shall be
included.
F. A listing of steps proposed to minimize environmental damage to the
site and region during construction and operation shall be included.
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 530-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-11
1:823
Table of Environmental Impact Statement
Requirements
Type of Proposed Project
Environmental
Impact
Statement
Section
Residential:
Single
Unit
Residential:
2 to 5
Units
Residential:
More
than 5
Units
Shopping
and
Service
Industrial
Uses
The proposed
project
X X X
Existing
conditions of
the site and
affected off-site
areas (includes
groundwater,
surface
geology,
subsurface
geology, soils,
ground cover,
flora, fauna,
drainage, land
use,
vegetation,
wildlife and
archaeological
and historical
features)
X* X X* X
Sewerage
facilities
X X X
Water supply X X X X
Surface
drainage
X X X X
Stream
encroachments
X X X X
Solid waste
disposal
X X X
Air quality X X
Critical
impacts
X X X X
Summary
environmental
assessment
X X X X
§ 530-11 HAMILTON CODE § 530-11
1:824
* All or specific items may be exempted by administrative officer.
Chapter 536
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 167.
Fees — See Ch. 215.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 427.
Environmental impact — See Ch. 530.
Land development — See Ch. 550.
Site investigation and soil sampling — See Ch.
565.
Soil removal — See Ch. 572.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 577.
Stream Buffer Conservation Zone — See Ch.
583.
§ 530-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-11
1:825

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 536-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance of the Township of Hamilton."
§ 536-2. Applicability of provisions. [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-013]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Hamilton, Mercer County, New Jersey.
§ 536-3. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 536-4. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
A. Considered as minimum requirements.
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body.
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statute.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Hamilton,
Community No. 340246, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Mercer
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," dated July 20, 2016.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Mercer County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions), as shown on Index and Panel(s) 34021C0138F,
34021C0139F, 34021C0143F, 34021C0144F, 34021C0209F,
34021C0217F, 34021C0226F, 34021C0227F, 34021C0228F,
34021C0229F, 34021C0231F, 34021C0232F, 34021C0233F,
34021C0234F, 34021C0236F, 34021C0237F, 34021C0238F,
34021C0239F, 34021C0241F, 34021C0242F, 34021C0244F,
34021C0253F, 34021C0261F, 34021C0263F and 34021C0264F,
whose effective date is July 20, 2016.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory documents
are on file at 2090 Greenwood Avenue, Hamilton Township, New Jersey.
§ 536-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-5
1:827
§ 536-5. Statutory authorization. [Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
16-013]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety and general welfare of
its citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the Township of Hamilton of Mercer
County, New Jersey, does ordain as follows.
§ 536-6. Findings of fact. [Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
§ 536-7. Definitions. [Amended 1-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-008]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common
usage and to give this chapter the most reasonable application.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Director of the Department of
Community Planning and Compliance.[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
16-013]
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding), where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.[Added 6-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-013]
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain), where average
depths are between one and three feet.[Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
16-013]
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Township Engineer's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance from the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM) with a one-percent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
A. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Hamilton are subject to
periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard, which increase flood heights and
velocities and, when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
§ 536-5 HAMILTON CODE § 536-7
1:828
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.[Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
16-013]
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30,
AE, A99 or AH.[Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.[Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published flood insurance study (FIS) including the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM). For Zones AE, AH, AO and A1-A30, the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent
or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.[Added
6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended, through its design and construction, to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
CHANNEL — The bed and banks of the watercourses located within the
boundaries of the Township of Hamilton which convey the normal flow of
said watercourses most of the time.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure that equals
or exceeds 40% of the market value of the structure at the time of the
improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.[Added
6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
DESIGN FLOOD — The flood having a 0.2% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (five-hundred-year flood) or the flood resulting
from 125% of the one-hundred-year flood discharge.
DESIGN FLOOD PROFILE — The elevations of the water surface of the
floodway design flood and the flood hazard area design flood as shown on
the flood maps.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of the special
flood hazard.[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.[Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
§ 536-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-7
1:829
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor or, in the case of a building in a coastal A Zone, to have the bottom
of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor elevated
above the base flood elevation plus freeboard by means of pilings, columns
(posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and
adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area
of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient
to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In areas of coastal
A Zone, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls.[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
ENCROACHMENT LINE — A line, described by metes and bounds, which
defines the boundary between the floodway and flood fringe area in a
nondelineated floodplain and customarily marks the limit of fill to be placed
in a delineated floodplain.
EROSION — The process of the gradual wearing away of land
masses.[Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.[Added 6-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-013]
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry areas from:
FLOOD-CARRYING CAPACITY — The ability of a watercourse or floodplain
to transport floodwaters, as determined by its shape, cross-sectional area,
bed slope, coefficient of hydraulic friction, and upstream and downstream
channel configurations, as used in accepted engineering practices.
FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION — A determination of the water
surface elevations of the design flood, that is, the flood level that has a 0.2%
or greater chance of occurrence in any given year (five-hundred-year flood).
FLOOD FRINGE — The portion of the flood hazard area outside the
floodway. 178
A. Inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface water from any
source.
B.
178. Editor's Note: The definition of "flood hazard boundary maps," which formerly
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013.
§ 536-7 HAMILTON CODE § 536-7
1:830
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
FLOODPLAIN — The relatively flat area adjoining the channel which has
been or may be covered by floodwater of the watercourse.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Any zoning ordinance,
subdivision regulation, site plan ordinance, building code, health regulation
and any special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading
ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
16-013]
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduces or eliminates
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.[Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
16-013]
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without accumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 of a foot on all other streams.[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
16-013]
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.[Added 6-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-013]
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.[Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:[Added 6-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-013]
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
§ 536-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-7
1:831
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
the basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely
for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.[Amended
6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational
vehicle.[Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.[Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
16-013]
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
NEW JERSEY FLOOD HAZARD AREA DESIGN FLOOD — The flood having a
0.2% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (design flood).
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.[Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
16-013]
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 536-7 HAMILTON CODE § 536-7
1:832
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:[Added 6-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-013]
REGULATORY FLOOD — The one-hundred-year flood or the flood with a
one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year along
nondelineated watercourses or the flood hazard area design flood along
delineated watercourses. 179
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start"
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. "Permanent
construction" does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways;
nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a "substantial
improvement," the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.[Amended
6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground. For insurance coverage purposes, the term "structure" means a
walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site. For
the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of
construction, alteration or repair but does not include building materials
or supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair,
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
D.
179. Editor's Note: The definition of "special flood hazard area or flood hazard area," which
formerly immediately followed this definition, was repealed 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013.
§ 536-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-7
1:833
unless such material or supplies are within an enclosed building on the
premises.[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 40% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. "Substantial damage" also means flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two or more separate occasions during a tenyear
period, for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood
event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the
structure before the damages occurred.[Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
16-013]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure during a ten-year period, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 40% of the market value of the structure
before the start of construction of the improvement. "Substantial
improvement" also means "cumulative substantial improvement." This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of
the actual repair work performed, or repetitive loss. The term does not,
however, include either:[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
VARIANCE — A grant of relief to a person by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment from the requirements of this chapter, which permits
construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter because
enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.[Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
§ 536-8. Statement of purpose.
It is hereby found that the Assunpink Creek, Miry Run, Pond Run and other
waterways in the Township of Hamilton are subject to recurring flooding,
most recently in 1971 and 1975; that such flooding damage endangers
life and public and private property and facilities; that this condition is
aggravated by development and encroachments in the floodplain; and that
the most appropriate method of alleviating such conditions is through
regulation of such developments and encroachments. It is, therefore,
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
B.
§ 536-7 HAMILTON CODE § 536-8
1:834
determined that the special and paramount public interest in the floodplain
justifies the regulation of property located therein as provided in this
chapter, which is in the exercise of the police power of the municipality,
for the protection of the persons and property of its inhabitants and for the
preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare. Among the
purposes of this chapter are:
A. To prevent loss of life.
B. To prevent the installation of structures which increase flood heights.
C. To prevent excessive property damage.
D. To reduce public expenditures for emergency operations, evacuations
and restorations.
E. To prevent damages to transportation and utility systems.
F. To remove the impediment to community growth created by recurrent
flooding.
G. To prevent further unwise development in unprotected floodplains, thus
reducing future expenditures for protective measures.
H. To prevent pollution of watercourses during floods by preventing the
placing and storing of explosive, toxic and otherwise dangerous
materials within the special flood hazard area.
I. To preserve, protect and enhance the natural environment of the
floodplain.
J. To protect individuals or corporations from buying lands which are
unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazard.
K. To protect the public from dangers caused by materials being swept
onto nearby downstream lands.
L. To protect and enhance the public's health by minimizing the
degradation of stream water quality.
M. To protect wildlife and fishing areas by preserving and enhancing the
environment of the floodplain.
N. To regulate the construction of or substantial improvement to buildings
and other facilities in locations that would likely be damaged by floods
or where they would be washed away and cause damage to downstream
properties.
O. To prevent installation of structures and restrict land uses which would
increase the size of the floodplain and/or the stream velocities, erosion
and siltation.
§ 536-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-9
1:835
§ 536-9. Methods of reducing flood losses. [Amended 6-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-013]
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required. In order to
accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
A. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters.
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage.
E. Prevent or regulate construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.
F. Require all proposed development in the floodplain to be reviewed by
the Township Engineer, Planner, Building Inspector, Environmental
Commission, Health Division and Planning Board.
G. Upon the transfer or purchase of a property, the person transferring or
selling the property or his agent shall disclose to the transferee or
purchaser any flood hazards and similarly advise of the necessity of
flood insurance. This shall also be applicable to real estate agencies,
and the disclosure shall appear on the multiple-listing service (MLS)
form and/or the facts sheet of said property.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction to be placed or substantially improved and
substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
I. Construction materials and methods.
§ 536-9 HAMILTON CODE § 536-9
1:836
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
J. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements, the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
K. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
L. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement, and which are subject to flooding, shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
§ 536-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-9
1:837
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior
walls of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding,
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers
or other covering or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
M. Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base
flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in § 536-4, Basis for
establishing areas of special flood hazard, or in § 536-12, Use of other
base flood data, the following standards are required:
(1) Residential construction.
(a) New construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, together with the attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the base
flood elevation plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14,
Table 2-1, whichever is more restrictive.
(b) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's FIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in feet
plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade (at least three
feet if no depth number is specified). And require adequate
drainagepaths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(2) Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all
new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE
Zone shall have the lowest floor, including basement, together with
the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, either:
(a) Elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot or
as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive; and
(b) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's
DFIRM to elevate above the depth number specified in feet
plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade (at least three
feet if no depth number is specified). And require adequate
drainagepaths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures; or
(c) Be floodproofed so that, below the base flood level plus one
foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1, whichever is
§ 536-9 HAMILTON CODE § 536-9
1:838
more restrictive, the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(d) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(e) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 536-13A(3).
N. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
Subsection H(2) of this section.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive.
O. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§ 536-4 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following
provisions apply:
(1) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development, unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachment shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(2) If Subsection O(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with § 536-7, Methods of reducing
flood losses.
(3) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development shall not
§ 536-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-9
1:839
§ 536-10. Substantial damage review. [Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
16-013]
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
0.2 of a foot at any point.
A. After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
B. Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Division.
C. Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 536-9M(1), Specific standards, residential construction, and M(2),
Specific standards, nonresidential construction.
§ 536-9 HAMILTON CODE § 536-10
1:840
ARTICLE II
Development Permit; Site Plan
§ 536-11. Application for development permit; notice requirements.
[Amended 1-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-008]
A. Establishment of development permit. [Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
16-013]
(1) A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins, including placement of manufactured homes,
within any area of special flood hazard established in § 536-4.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the administrative officer and may include, but not be
limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing
or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities,
and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following
information is required:
(a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure
has been floodproofed;
(c) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential
structure meet the floodproofing criteria in § 536-9M(2); and
(d) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(2) The administrative officer is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
B. All developments within the larger of the following areas shall require a
permit or permits from the State Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) unless specifically exempted as provided in this
chapter:
(1) Within the floodplain and/or less than 25 feet back from the top of
the channel bank; or
(2) Along the watercourses that have a total contributory drainage
area greater than 50 acres, DEP engineering standards and
environmental standards shall be applicable. However, DEP
engineering standards may not apply for areas less than 50 acres.
(3) Fifty feet from the top of the channel bank along waters:
(a) Containing deposits of acid-producing soils;
§ 536-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-11
1:841
(b) Classified as Category One, FW-1 trout associated or FW-2 as
per DEP standards;
(c) Which are a critical part of the habitat supporting a threatened
or endangered species of plants or a current population of any
species of threatened or endangered animal on a permanent or
temporary basis for any purpose such as resting, breeding or
feeding during any portion of its life cycle; or
(d) Located within documented, historic habitat for threatened or
endangered species of animals, which habitat remains suitable
for breeding, resting or feeding by those species of animal
during any portion of its life cycle.
C. A complete application shall consist of:
(1) Ten copies of a plat plan.
(2) Six copies of all other plans in support of the plat plan.
(3) Photographs of the site.
(4) Application fee.
(5) Application form.
(6) All information as required by this chapter or any other Township
ordinance.
D. Upon submission of a complete application for such a permit to the
administrative officer, the applicant shall notify all property owners
within 200 feet. A list of all property owners within 200 feet will be
prepared by the Township at a cost to the applicant as set forth in
Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code. The applicant will also serve
notice to the general public through a newspaper of general circulation
in the municipality, to the Township Environmental Commission and to
the municipal clerks and environmental commissions of other
municipalities which are within 200 feet of said property. Such
notification shall include the name and the address of the applicant, the
location of the proposed use, an abbreviated description of the
proposed use, an announcement of where and at what time the
complete application may be reviewed and at what date the application
will be heard by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
This should be accomplished at least 10 days prior to the date the
application is heard. It is also the responsibility of the applicant to
provide proof of publication and service to the Township administrative
officer at least one day prior to the date of the meeting. The notice
procedure will conform to § 550-196E of Chapter 550, Land
Development.180
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 536-11 HAMILTON CODE § 536-11
1:842
§ 536-12. Use of other base flood data.
When base flood elevation and floodway data have not been provided in
accordance with § 536-4, Basis for establishing areas of special flood
hazard, the administrative officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source in order to administer § 536-22B.
§ 536-13. Information to be obtained and maintained.
§ 536-14. Alterations of watercourses.
The administrative officer shall:
E. The administrative officer shall review all development permits to
determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval
is required.
F. The administrative officer shall review all development permits to
determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If
located in the floodway, he shall assure that the encroachment
provisions of § 536-24A are met.
A. The administrative officer shall obtain and maintain the following
information:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to the mean sea
level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new
or substantially improved structures and whether or not the
structure contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level).
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 536-22B.
(3) The applicant shall complete and submit a certified FEMA elevation
certificate form. Certificate forms are available from the Township
Engineer's office.
B. The administrative officer shall maintain for public inspection all
records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.
A. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Division and
the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Insurance Administration. [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
16-013]
§ 536-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-14
1:843
§ 536-15. Interpretation of boundaries.
The administrative officer shall make interpretations where needed as to
the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location
of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in § 536-24.
§ 536-16. Site plan approval.
B. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished.
A. In addition to any site plan approval requirements contained in this
chapter, no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, enlarged,
expanded, externally altered or modified, nor shall any paving, fill,
excavation or improvement be permitted within any floodplain unless a
site plan shall have been submitted to the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment for review and approval.
B. Said site plan shall be drawn to a scale not less than one inch equals 50
feet and shall show the following information:
(1) Existing and proposed building and structures.
(2) Proposed finished grade elevations at the corners of any structure
or structures.
(3) Existing topography and proposed grading at contour intervals of
at least two feet.
(4) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
of the lowest habitable floor (including the basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures.
(5) The location, type and size of all existing and proposed storm
drainage facilities and other utilities serving or proposed to service
the premises in question.
(6) The location, size and nature of all existing and proposed drainage
rights-of-way or easements and the location, size and description of
any land to be dedicated to the municipality, county or state.
(7) The layout and size of existing and proposed public or private
streets.
(8) The elevation of any existing or proposed pumping facilities.
(9) The nature and extent of any construction, alteration or repairs.
§ 536-14 HAMILTON CODE § 536-16
1:844
(10) The location, size and nature of the entire lot or lots in question and
contiguous lots owned by the applicant or in which the applicant
has a direct or indirect interest.
(11) Proof of stream encroachment lines obtained from the Department
of Environmental Protection.
(12) The extent of any proposed or previous filling of the land, if any.
(13) The location, type and size of all existing and proposed erosion and
siltation control measures, such as slope protection, soil
stabilization, sedimentation basins, sediment trap headwalls,
aprons and the like.
(14) The location and orientation of all downspouts.
(15) Any other information and data necessary to meet other
requirements of this chapter.
(16) All properties adjacent to or near a nondelineated waterway
deemed by the Township to be a potential flood hazard area.
C. Where required by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
the developer shall furnish information relating to subsurface
conditions based on percolation tests and soil borings or probes. Test
borings or probes shall be performed by a licensed professional
engineer and shall be in accordance with acceptable engineering
standards and practices. Written notification of intention to conduct
such a test shall be forwarded to and received by the Township
Engineer at least 48 hours prior to testing. A detailed report of the test
shall be submitted to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment and the Township Engineer for review.
D. The applicant should be prepared to present evidence that the
proposal:
(1) Has an inherent low flood damage potential.
(2) Either acting alone or in combination with existing or future uses,
will not obstruct flood flows or increase flood heights and/or
velocities or reduce ground absorption of stormwater.
(3) Does not affect adversely the water-carrying or storage capacity of
the channel floodway or flood fringe area.
(4) Does not increase local runoff and erosion.
(5) Does not unduly stress or degrade the natural environment of the
floodplain or degrade the quality of surface water or the quality or
quantity of groundwaters.
(6) Does not require channel modification or relocation.
(7) Is set forth in the zoning ordinance as a permitted use.
§ 536-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-16
1:845
(8) Is not a prohibited use in that portion of the floodplain where it is
proposed to be located.
(9) Does not include improvements which exceed 40% of the
preimprovement market value. Improvements, additions and any
modifications to a structure shall be considered cumulatively, since,
if improvements exceed 40% of the preimprovement market value
of the structure, then the property owner must conform to National
Flood Insurance Program requirements. [Amended 6-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-013]
§ 536-16 HAMILTON CODE § 536-16
1:846
ARTICLE III
Use Restrictions
§ 536-17. Prohibited uses in floodplains.
No person shall hereafter engage in, cause or permit other persons to
engage in prohibited uses within a delineated floodplain. The following uses
shall be prohibited:
§ 536-18. Permitted uses in channels.
Within any channel, structures may be erected, enlarged, expanded and
externally altered, and fill, excavation or other improvements or changes
may be permitted only in connection with stream improvements and
stabilization, which improvements or changes shall have the approval of the
State Department of Environmental Protection, the Mercer County Planning
Board and the Township Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 536-19. Permitted uses in floodways. [Amended 1-3-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-008]
A. Placing, depositing or dumping any vehicles, solid waste, garbage,
refuse, trash, rubbish or debris.
B. Dumping or discharging untreated domestic sewage or industrial
waste, either solid or liquid.
C. Storage or disposal of pesticides.
D. Storage or processing of materials that are buoyant, flammable or
explosive in time of flooding.
E. The storage or processing of hazardous materials that could be
injurious to human, animal or plant life in time of flooding.
F. Critical facilities such as schools, firehouses, nursing homes, hospitals
and other typical life-support systems, including powerhouses and
pumping stations.
A. Within any floodway area, structures may be erected, enlarged,
expanded and externally altered, and fill, excavation or other
improvement or changes may be permitted, only in connection with
stream improvements and stabilizing, which improvements or changes
shall have the approval of the State Department of Environmental
Protection, the Mercer County Planning Board and the Township
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment. The accepted practices
of soil husbandry and farming, as well as recreational uses in the nature
of parks, wildlife preserves, play yards, picnic areas, golf courses and
boat landings, shall be permitted in accordance with the issuance of a
permit as provided in this chapter. Any proposed use involving removal
of trees shall be undertaken in accordance with the approval of the
Township Engineer. Material, equipment or vehicles related to and used
§ 536-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-19
1:847
§ 536-20. Permitted uses in flood fringe areas. [Amended 1-3-1996
by Ord. No. 96-008]
in conjunction with a permitted use shall not be parked or stored in the
floodway area.
B. The following are state nonregulated and are exempt from state DEP
approval and permits. They may be approved administratively by the
administrative officer upon the recommendation of the Township
Engineer without going before the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment of the Township:
(1) Activities that do not further obstruct flood flow or in any way
reduce the cross-sectional area of the floodway open to flow of
water during the regulatory flood, unless the obstruction will be
significant.
(2) Activities that do not require the erection of structures, except
those listed in Subsection C below.
(3) Activities that do not require channel modifications or relocation.
(4) Activities that do not contribute to or cause a violation of any
applicable state water quality standard and/or do not increase offsite
flood drainage potential.
C. The following permitted uses, though not exhaustive, are applicable
under Subsection B above:
(1) Boat-launching ramps constructed at or below grade, bicycle paths,
in-ground swimming pools and associated fences for public safety,
provided the pool is constructed at or below grade and that the
fence is open to allow floodwaters to pass through it; is no higher
than the minimum height required by the BOCA Construction Code
for a fence around a pool; and is placed to minimize the obstruction
to flow to the maximum extent possible.
(2) Open decks attached to residential structures, properly anchored
in accordance with a uniform construction code and all applicable
local building codes.
(3) Minor repair, maintenance or replacement-in-kind of existing
structures which will not change the cross-sectional area open to
flow during the regulatory flood or increase the footprint of the
structure.
(4) Docks and boathouses along bodies of water labeled as a lake,
reservoir or pond that are built on pilings and remain open
underneath to allow water to pass freely. For boathouses, the floor
must be above the regulatory flood elevation.
A. Within any flood fringe area, structures may be constructed, enlarged,
expanded, externally altered or modified, and fill, excavation and other
§ 536-19 HAMILTON CODE § 536-20
1:848
§ 536-21. Preexisting nonconforming structures and uses.
Structures or land uses in any floodplain which existed on or before the
effective date of this chapter may be permitted to continue, subject to the
following conditions:
improvements may be permitted, only after issuance of a permit for
a use allowed by the zoning ordinance and, further, subject to the
conditions set forth in this chapter.
B. The following activities in the flood fringe areas are state nonregulated
and are exempt from state DEP approval and permits. They may be
approved administratively by the administrative officer upon the
recommendations of the Township Engineer without going before the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Township:
(1) Regarding residential and commercial application. Improvements
such as lawns, play areas specifically designed for use by children,
gardens or landscaping, fences, anchored dog houses, auxiliary
utility buildings up to 100 square feet, pole barns which shall
remain permanently open on all sides, driveways at grade,
barbecue pits, open decks attached to residential structures, and
one or more additions to an owner-occupied single-family
residential structure up to a total of 300 square feet.
(2) Regarding private and public recreation. Areas specifically marked
and designated as playing fields or courts including backstops and/
or open bleachers, bicycle paths, picnic grounds, swimming areas,
parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, hunting and
fishing areas, boat-launching ramps constructed at grade, shooting
preserves, hiking and horseback riding trails, driving ranges,
archery ranges, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, fish
hatcheries, anchored auxiliary utility buildings up to 100 square
feet, as well as fences and in-ground and aboveground pools,
provided that they do not displace more than 100 cubic yards of
floodplain storage.
(3) Utility poles and towers and roadway repairs and maintenance at
or below existing grade.
A. If any preexisting structure is destroyed by any means including floods
to an extent of 50% or more of its replacement cost at the time of
destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. No preexisting structure shall be moved, expanded or enlarged unless
the provisions of this chapter are complied with. This provision does not
apply to routine maintenance and repair, provided that such
maintenance and repair does not increase the flood damage potential of
the structure. In any portion of the floodplain, an existing
nonconforming use or structure may be altered or expanded, provided
§ 536-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-21
1:849
that such alteration or expansion does not increase its ground coverage
or flood damage potential.
C. If actual construction of a structure is underway on or before the
effective date of this chapter, then such construction may be completed.
D. Structures in the floodway abandoned for six consecutive months or
longer and structures abandoned for 12 consecutive months or longer
in the flood fringe area after the effective date of this chapter shall not
qualify as preexisting uses.
§ 536-21 HAMILTON CODE § 536-21
1:850
ARTICLE IV
Conditions and Criteria; Procedure
§ 536-22. Conditions.
A. The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment may impose such
conditions on permitted uses as it deems appropriate in order to
promote the public safety, health and welfare; protect public and
private property, wildlife and fisheries; and preserve, protect and
enhance the natural environment of the floodplain. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued unless all conditions or approvals have been
complied with.
B. In all flood hazard areas, the following conditions are required:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(3) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(4) All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into
the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters.
(5) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(6) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.
(7) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
(8) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities,
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
(9) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
(10) Design flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments which are greater
than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.
(11) There shall be imposed controls on operations, sureties, deed
restrictions and maintenance bonds.
§ 536-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-22
1:851
(12) The construction of stormwater detention and/or retention
facilities, channel modifications, dikes, levees and other protective
measures shall be required.
(13) The installation of an adequate flood warning system shall be
required.
(14) The postponement of development until such time as protective
measures are installed or implemented shall be required.
(15)New construction or substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest habitable floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the design flood elevation.
(16)New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to the level of the
design flood elevation or all fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for
the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; the bottoms of
all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings
or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters. Such certification shall be provided to the Township
Engineer. Any or all of the following floodproofing measures may be
required:
(a) Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement.
(b) Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters or
similar devices.
(c) Reinforced walls to resist water pressures.
(d) Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of
water through walls.
(e) Addition of weights to structures to resist flotation.
(f) Installation of pumps to lower water levels of structures.
(g) Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems in a
manner which prevents the entrance of floodwaters.
(h) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
§ 536-22 HAMILTON CODE § 536-22
1:852
§ 536-23. Variances. [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-013]
Variances from the conditions of this chapter may be issued in conformance
with the following provisions:
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
(i) Construction that resists rupture or collapse caused by water
pressure or floating debris.
(j) Installation of valves or controls on sanitary storm drains
which will permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of
sewage or stormwaters into the structure; gravity drainage of
basements may be eliminated by mechanical devices.
(k) Storage facilities for chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials,
flammable liquids and other toxic hazardous materials shall be
situated above the flood hazard design elevation and shall be
floodproofed to prevent flotation of storage containers or
damage to storage containers which could result in the escape
of toxic materials into the floodwaters.
(l) Use of construction materials which are resistant to water
damage.
(17) Fill shall be no lower than one foot above the flood hazard design
elevation (five-hundred-year) and shall extend at such height for a
distance of at least 15 feet beyond the limits of any structure
erected thereon. The fill shall be properly designed and compacted.
The type of fill and compaction shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer.
(18) Structures on fill shall be built so that the basement or, in the event
that there is no basement, the lowest habitable floor is at a
minimum of one foot above the flood hazard design elevation. This
should be accomplished without transporting off-site fill to this site.
Where off-site material is used for fill within the flood hazard area,
a compensatory storage must be created.
(19) Structures not placed on fill shall be otherwise elevated so that the
lowest habitable floor is at a minimum of one foot above the flood
hazard design elevation or shall be floodproofed as set forth in
Subsection B(16).
(20) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
0.2 foot at any point.
§ 536-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-23
1:853
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items in Subsection
K(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing
the variances increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
C. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause:
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in § 536-23K(4), or conflict
with existing local laws or ordinances.
F. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest flood elevation.
G. For the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed
on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of
Historic Places.
H. If an increase in flood levels within any designated floodway would not
occur during the design flood.
I. Upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to
afford relief considering the flood hazards.
J. Upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, a determination that
failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant and a determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
§ 536-23 HAMILTON CODE § 536-23
1:854
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
K. Appeal board:
(1) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as established
by the Township of Hamilton, shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and
decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision or determination made by the administrative
officer in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to
the Superior Court of New Jersey, as provided in the New Jersey
statutes.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, all
relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this
chapter; and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
§ 536-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-23
1:855
§ 536-24. Criteria for approval of developments and variances.
In reviewing the application and arriving at findings, the Planning Board
shall consult with the Township Engineer and other experts and consider
the following criteria, which the applicant shall document in addition to
those set forth in other sections of this chapter:
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 536-23K(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The administrative officer shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
A. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocity caused by encroachments.
B. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others.
C. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the insulation of
these systems from disease, contamination and unsightly conditions
resulting from flooding.
D. The susceptibility of the proposed use to flood damage and the effects
of such damage.
E. The need for a location on a stream, river or other waterway.
F. The availability of alternate locations not subject to flooding.
G. The duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of floodwaters
expected at the site.
H. The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
I. The extent to which the hydraulic capacity of the floodway will be
disrupted.
J. The degree to which the proposed use serves the general public's
health, safety and welfare.
§ 536-23 HAMILTON CODE § 536-24
1:856
§ 536-25. Burden of proof.
No application for development or request for variance relief within the
floodway area shall be approved unless it is affirmatively established by
the applicant that the proposed development is compatible with the public
safety, health and welfare and that it will not endanger public and private
property, wildlife and fisheries or the natural environment of the floodplain.
§ 536-26. Time period for decisions.
The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act upon any
development application provided for in § 536-11 within 60 days of the
date of filing thereof or the date of approval when required by the State
Department of Environmental Protection, whichever is later. Disapproval
shall include written findings of any development plan element contrary to
the provisions or intent of this chapter.
§ 536-27. Unapproved development prohibited.
No person or persons shall engage in development within a delineated
floodplain until a stream encroachment permit has been issued by the
Department of Environmental Protection where appropriate and all
necessary approvals have been obtained from the Township.
K. The degree to which any aspect of the food chain or plant, animal, fish
or human life processes are affected adversely within or beyond the
proposed use area.
L. The degree to which the proposed activity alters natural water flow or
water temperature.
M. The degree to which the proposed use provides facilities for the proper
handling of litter, trash, refuse and sanitary and industrial waste.
N. The degree to which archaeological or historic sites and structures are
endangered or rare species of animals or plants, high-quality wildlife
inhabitants, scarce vegetation types and other irreplaceable land types
will be degraded or destroyed.
O. The degree to which the natural, scenic and aesthetic values at the
proposed activity sites can be retained.
P. The degree to which materials not subject to major damage by floods
are firmly anchored to prevent flotation and are readily removable from
the area within time available after flood warning.
Q. The degree to which virgin land is covered over with impermeable
materials.
§ 536-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-27
1:857

ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 536-28. Fees.181
The fee charged for any site plan or subdivision review located in a
floodplain area shall conform to those fees (if the fee charged in Chapter
550, Land Development, is less than that required by this chapter, the fees
required by this chapter shall apply) as stipulated in the Land Development
Ordinance of the Township of Hamilton. Any application not covered by the
above-mentioned fees will be charged a fee in accordance with the following
schedule.
§ 536-29. Compliance required.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter,
the conditions imposed by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment and other applicable regulations.
§ 536-30. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
16-013182]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the penalties set forth in § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of the Code
of the Township of Hamilton, for each violation, and in addition shall pay
all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the Township of Hamilton from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
A. Single lot, residential: as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township
Code.
B. Subdivision: as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township Code.
C. Industrial-commercial improvements: as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees,
of the Township Code.
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 536-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-31
1:859
§ 536-31. Relationship to other provisions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restriction shall prevail.
§ 536-32. Warning; disclaimer of liability. [Amended 6-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-013]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazards or uses permitted in such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damage. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township
of Hamilton or of any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 536-33. Flood insurance required.
Flood insurance in accordance with the National Flood Insurance Program,
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, shall be
required for all developments in the floodplain.
§ 536-31 HAMILTON CODE § 536-33
1:860
Chapter 550
LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution control — See Ch. 90.
Construction codes — See Ch. 167.
Fees — See Ch. 215.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 385.
Solid waste — See Ch. 420.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 427.
Environmental impact statement — See Ch.
530.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 536.
Site investigation and soil sampling — See Ch.
565.
Soil removal — See Ch. 572.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 577.
Stream Buffer Conservation Zone — See Ch.
583.
§ 536-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 536-33
1:861

ARTICLE I
Title
§ 550-1. Long title.
The long title of this chapter is: "A comprehensive ordinance regulating
and limiting the uses of land and the uses and locations of buildings and
structures; regulating and restricting the height and bulk of buildings and
structures and determining the area of yards and other open spaces;
regulating and restricting the density of population; dividing the Township
of Hamilton into districts for such purposes; adopting a map of said
Township showing boundaries and the classification of such districts;
establishing rules, regulations and standards governing the subdivision of
land within the Township; establishing a Planning Board and a Zoning
Board of Adjustment and establishing fees for applications thereto; and
prescribing penalties for the violation of its provisions."
§ 550-2. Short title.
The short form by which this chapter may be known shall be the "Land
Development Ordinance of the Township of Hamilton."
§ 550-3. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., in order to
promote and protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare,
and in furtherance of the following related and more specific objectives:
A. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
B. To provide adequate light, air and open space.
C. To ensure that the development of the Township of Hamilton does not
conflict with the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the county and the state as a whole.
D. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons and
neighborhoods and the preservation of the environment.
E. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds
by the coordination of public development with land use policies.
F. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements in order to meet the needs of all New
Jersey citizens.
§ 550-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-3
1:863
§ 550-4. Interpretation of standards.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements.
Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or
required by other provisions of law or by other rules or regulations or
resolutions, the provisions of this chapter shall control. Where other laws,
rules, regulations or resolutions require greater restrictions than are
imposed or required by this chapter, the provisions of such other laws,
rules, regulations or restrictions shall control.
§ 550-5. Uses not permitted are prohibited.
All uses not expressly permitted in this chapter are prohibited.
§ 550-6. Time of compliance. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord. No.
93-008]
G. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight.
H. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
I. To promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space,
energy resources and valuable natural resources in the state and to
prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment through
improper use of land.
J. To encourage construction of senior citizen housing consistent with
provisions permitting other residential uses of a similar density in the
same zoning district.
K. To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the
cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land.
L. To encourage planned unit developments which incorporate the best
features of design and relate the type, design and layout of residential,
commercial, industrial and recreational development to the particular
site.
M. To promote utilization of renewable energy resources.
N. To promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of
recyclable materials from municipal solid waste through the use of
planning practices designed to incorporate the state recycling plan
goals and to complement municipal recycling programs.
O. To encourage municipal action to guide the appropriate use of
development of all land in this state in a manner which will promote the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
§ 550-3 HAMILTON CODE § 550-6
1:864
§ 550-7. Definitions. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008;
8-18-1993 by Ord. No. 93-041; 7-21-1994 by Ord. No. 94-033;
11-2-1994 by Ord. No. 94-048; 12-21-1994 by Ord. No. 94-058;
2-21-1996 by Ord. No. 96-017; 9-18-1996 by Ord. No. 96-042;
2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 97-005; 6-18-1997 by Ord. No. 97-015;
9-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-035; 4-7-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009;
3-16-2005 by Ord. No. 05-007; 11-4-2005 by Ord. No. 05-025;
11-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-070; 5-18-2011 by Ord. No. 11-018;
12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-043]
For the purposes of this chapter, certain phrases and words used herein
are defined as follows. Words used in the present tense include the future;
words used in the singular number include the plural number and vice
versa; the word "used" shall include "arranged, designed, constructed,
altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to be used"; the word "lot"
includes the words "plot," "premises" and "tract"; the word "building"
includes the words "structure," "dwelling" or "residence"; the word "shall"
is mandatory and not discretionary. Any word or term not defined herein
shall be used with a meaning of standard usage. Moreover, whenever a term
is used in the chapter which is defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., such
term is intended to have the meaning as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
unless specifically defined to the contrary in this chapter.
A. All applicable requirements shall be met at the time of erection,
enlargement, alteration, moving or change in use of the principal use
and shall apply to the entire structure or structures, whether or not the
entire structure or structures were involved in the erection,
enlargement, alteration, moving or change in use.
B. Expiration of variances, special use permits, and conditional use
approvals.
(1) Variances, special use permits, and conditional use approvals
associated with subdivision and/or site plan approval shall have
expiration dates which coincide with the expiration date of the
subdivision and/or site plan approval, as prescribed by the
Municipal Land Use Law, P.L. 1975, c. 291, compiled as N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
(2) All other variances and/or conditional use approvals not referenced
in Subsection B(1) above shall expire within two years of the
publication of their approval by either the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or the Planning Board unless the applicant has
successfully fulfilled all conditions imposed by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Planning Board and obtained a certificate of
occupancy from the Township. The Zoning Board of Adjustment or
Planning Board may grant one extension, not to exceed one year in
time, for the expiration of a variance and/or a conditional use
approval.
§ 550-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:865
ABOVEGROUND SWIMMING POOL — A water-filled enclosure located
above the level of the surrounding land, having a depth of more than 24
inches.
ABUTTING COUNTY ROAD — Any existing or proposed county road shown
on the adopted County Master Plan or Official Map which adjoins a lot or
parcel of land submitted for subdivision or site plan approval.
ACCELERATION LANE — Added pavement width at an intersection or other
point of access to a public or private street, designed to enable vehicles
entering the roadway to attain a speed which will allow entering vehicles to
merge safely with through traffic.
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — A building, structure or
use which is customarily associated with and is subordinate and incidental
to the principal building, structure or use and which is located on the same
lot therewith. An accessory building attached to the principal building shall
comply in all respects with the requirements applicable to the principal
building.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Director of Community Planning and
Compliance of the Township of Hamilton, Mercer County, New Jersey.
ADVERSE EFFECT — Conditions or situations, including but not limited
to the following examples, creating, imposing, aggravating or leading to
impractical, unsafe or unsatisfactory conditions on a subdivided property
or off-tract property, such as, but not limited to, improper circulation and
drainage rights-of-way as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, as amended;
inadequate drainage facilities; insufficient street widths; unsuitable street
grades; unsuitable street locations to accommodate prospective traffic or
coordinate and compose a convenient system; locating lots in a manner
not adaptable for the intended purposes without danger to health or peril
from flood, fire, erosion or other menace; providing for lots of insufficient
size and neither providing nor making future allowances for access to the
interior portion of the lot or for other facilities required by this chapter.
AERIAL MAP — The most recent aerial map of the subject area as supplied
by the Delaware Valley Regional Planning Commission (DVRPC), Mercer
County or Hamilton Township.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit in a planned retirement
development which is unrestricted except as to an age requirement for
occupancy.
ALTERATIONS OR ADDITIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any change in or
additions to the supporting members of a building, such as walls, columns,
beams, girders, posts or piers, or an enlargement, whether by extension of
a side or by increasing in height, or by moving from one location or position
to another.
AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA and ANTENNA — The arrangement of wires
or metal rods used in the sending and receiving of electromagnetic waves.
AMATEUR RADIO STATION — A radio station operated in the amateur radio
service under license by the Federal Communications Commission.
§ 550-7 HAMILTON CODE § 550-7
1:866
ANCHOR TENANT or MAGNET STORE — The major store or stores within
a planned commercial development which draws customers and thereby
generates business for surrounding stores.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any structure, mast, pole, tripod or
tower utilized for the purpose of supporting an antenna or antennas for the
purpose of transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves by federally
licensed amateur radio operators.
APARTMENT STRUCTURE — A building arranged, intended or designed to
be occupied by three or more families living independently of each other.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application or appeal forms and
all accompanying documents required by this chapter for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-34 or 40:55D-36. Accompanying documents required by this
chapter for approval means all of the information required within the
relevant development application checklists, which are adopted by
ordinance, unless waivers for such information have been granted by the
board having jurisdiction.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board of the Township of
Hamilton, unless a different agency is designated herein, when acting
pursuant to this chapter.
AREA — The Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (PMSA), as defined by
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, within
which the Township of Hamilton is located.
ART CENTER — An art center devoted to a variety of potential art-related
uses and activities; a museum; a sculpture park; an amphitheater; a fine
arts foundry; a technical school for sculpture; a restaurant; a cafe; catering;
offices; museum and gallery shops; art studios; visiting artist housing;
educational workshops and seminars; performing arts facilities; poetry
readings; motion-picture-production facilities; community-oriented art
classes and events; the hosting of sculpture conferences; retail/wholesale
sculpture products and tools; technical research facilities, as well as other
incidental uses related to art or the creation or display of art, and
maintaining the premises and facilities appropriate to such facilities.
ASSISTED LIVING UNIT or CONGREGATE CARE UNIT — A unit in an
assisted living or congregate care facility which is licensed by the New
Jersey State Department of Health to provide apartment-style housing and
congregate dining and at least minimum health services when needed. Such
units shall offer, at a minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom,
a lockable door on the unit entrance, and a kitchenette and, at a maximum,
two bedrooms, two baths, living room, dining area and a kitchen. Assisted
living or congregate care is a level of care between nursing care and
independent living and includes a coordinated array of supportive personnel
and health services, available 24 hours per day, to residents who have
been assessed to need such services. Assisted living or congregate care is
§ 550-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:867
intended to promote resident self-direction and participation in decisions
that emphasize independence, individuality, privacy, dignity and homelike
surroundings. A dedicated infirmary or nursing home component may be
included in the facility.
AUTOMOBILE AND GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — Any premises used
for supplying gasoline and oil, tires, accessories and services for
automobiles at retail direct to the motorist consumer, including the making
of minor repairs, but not including major repairs or spray painting, body,
fender and frame repairs, or complete recapping or retreading of tires.
AUTOMOBILE AND/OR TRAILER SALES AREA — An open area, other than
a street or way, used for the display or sale of new or used automobiles or
trailers and where minor and incidental repair work (other than body and
fender) may be done.
BACKBLADING — To back machines such as bulldozers over ridges with
their blades down so as to obtain finer grades.
BACKFILL — The material used to refill a ditch or other excavation or the
process of doing so.
BASEMENT — A portion of a building having more than 50% of its clear
height below the average finished contact grade along the outside walls of
the building.
BEDROOM — A room planned or used primarily for sleeping.
BOARD — The Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment or other
appointed board or commission.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A building or portion thereof, other than a hotel or
motel, containing not more than one dwelling unit, where meals and/or
lodging are provided for three or more persons in addition to the family unit,
for a valuable consideration.
BREWPUB — Any holder of a restricted brewery license as established and
defined under N.J.S.A. 33:1-10 or its successor statute.[Added 11-21-2017
by Ord. No. 17-041]
BRIDGE — A structure designed to convey vehicles and/or pedestrians over
a watercourse, railroad, street or other obstacle or depression.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The square footage or other area measurement
by which all buildings and accessory buildings occupy a lot as measured on
a horizontal plane around the periphery of the facades and including the
area under the roof of any structure supported by columns but not having
walls, as measured around the outside of the outermost extremities of the
roof above the columns. "Building coverage," for the purpose of this chapter,
shall not be deemed to include the water surface area of a swimming pool.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured to the mean highest
point from the mean elevation of the finished grade at the foundation along
§ 550-7 HAMILTON CODE § 550-7
1:868
the side(s) of the building or structure facing a street or to the street line,
whichever is closer to the foundation. On a corner lot, the height shall
be measured on the street having the greatest slope. In all cases where
this chapter provides for height limitations by reference to a specified
height and a specified number of stories, the intent is to limit the height to
the specified maximum footage and the specified number of stories within
said footage. Structures on the roof housing mechanical apparatus which
services the building are not included in height calculations if they are less
than 10 feet in height and occupy less than 30% of the roof area and are
adequately screened or complement the facades of the front, rear or side
elevations.
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal plane
at average grade level and a vertical plane that coincides with the exterior
surface of the building on any side. In case of a cantilevered section of a
building, the vertical plane will coincide with the most projected surface. All
yard requirements are measured to the "building line."
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
CAMP — Any one or more of the following, other than a hospital, place of
detention or school offering general instructions:
CAMPER —
Type 1: Any area of land or water on which are located two or more
cabins or tents of a design or a character suitable for seasonal living
purposes, regardless of whether such structures are actually occupied
seasonally or otherwise.
A.
Type 2: Any land, including any building thereon, used for any assembly
of persons for what is commonly known as "day camp" purposes; and
any of the foregoing establishments, whether or not operated for profit
and whether or not occupied by adults or by children, either as
individuals, families or groups.
B.
A self-propelled, vehicular structure, built as one unit on a chassis and
designed for temporary living for travel, recreation, vacation or other
short-term uses, which may contain cooking, sleeping and sanitary
facilities.
A.
An immobile structure containing cooking and sleeping facilities for
travel, recreation, vacation or other short-term use and designed to
be attached to the body of another vehicle for transporting from one
location to another.
B.
A portable, vehicular structure built on a chassis, designed for camping,
the body of which is basically rectangular with a flat top not more than
four feet above the surface of the ground. The camper is designed to
have a temporary tent erected above the four-foot level for camping
activities.
C.
§ 550-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:869
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real property,
major construction projects and improvement projects.
CARPORT — Any structure or portion of a building or structure, other
than an attached or detached garage, used for the shelter of self-propelled
vehicles. A "carport" shall be considered as part of the main building.
CARTWAY — The hard or paved surface portion of a street customarily
used by vehicles in the regular course of travel. Where there are curbs, the
cartway is that portion between the curbs. Where there are no curbs, the
cartway is that portion between the edges of the paved or graded width.
CELLAR — A portion of a building having more than 50% of its clear height
below the average finished contact grade along the outside walls of the
building.
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums,
crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when operating in conjunction
with and within the boundaries of such cemeteries. The words
"columbariums," "crematories" and "mausoleums" are defined by reference
to N.J.S.A. 45:27-2. The word "public mausoleum" shall be defined as any
mausoleum containing six or more crypts.183
CHANNEL — The bed and banks of the watercourses located within the
boundaries of the Township of Hamilton which convey the normal flow of
said watercourses most of the time.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — A private establishment for the care of four or
more children between 2 1/2 and five years of age, regardless of whether
any tuition fee, board or other form of compensation is charged.
CHURCH, CATHEDRAL or TEMPLE — A building dedicated exclusively
to the spiritual worship of a higher being or higher moral authority and
specifically excludes schools for religious or secular education; housing
such as a convent or parsonage for teachers, communicants and domestic or
maintenance employees; business offices (except for administrative offices
incidental to the operation of the particular use); rescue missions or the
occasional use for religious purposes of properties not regularly so used;
recreation activities or sporting events as well as social events, including
such things as bingos, wedding receptions and similar type events.
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means as
streets, highways, railways, waterways, tower airways, pipes and conduits,
A portable structure built on a chassis, designed for towing and as
a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, vacation and other shortterm
uses, and having an outside body width not exceeding eight feet
and a length not exceeding 30 feet, and which may contain cooking,
sleeping and sanitary facilities.
D.
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-7 HAMILTON CODE § 550-7
1:870
and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals, stations,
warehouses and other storage buildings or transshipment points.
CLUBHOUSE — A building or portion thereof on premises owned or
operated by a corporation, association or person for a civic, social, cultural,
religious, literary, political, educational or recreational purpose, but not
primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on
as a business, and not including shooting clubs operated for the benefit of
their members and not open to the general public.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area with or related to a site
designated as a development and designed and intended for the use and
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. "Common open
space" may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
COMMON PROPERTY — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or
a combination of land and water, together with the improvements thereon,
designed and intended for the ownership, use and enjoyment of and shared
by the residents and owners of the development. "Common property" may
contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary
and appropriate for the benefit of the residents and owners of the
development. Such property may be owned by a homeowners' association,
condominium regime or other duly constituted organization.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A public, quasi-public or privately maintained
institution devoted to a variety of group activities, civic, social, recreational,
educational and/or cultural, and maintaining the premises and facilities
appropriate to such activities; provided, however, that the premises shall
not include living quarters for persons other than those engaged in the
conduct and/or maintenance of the institution.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use
as contained in the development ordinances and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONSTRUCTION DETAILS — Plans on file in the Division of Engineering
which pertain to the design, construction and installation of all
improvements to the land created by development, i.e., paving (concrete
and bituminous), sanitary and storm sewers and intersection design.
Construction details are hereby incorporated into this chapter as design
standards.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — A qualified person appointed by the
municipal appointing authority to enforce and administer the regulations of
the Uniform Construction Code.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Development other than residential
clusters, planned neighborhoods or planned communities.
§ 550-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:871
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the master plan for the physical
development of the county in which the Township is located with the
accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive and explanatory matter
adopted by the County Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-2 and
40:27-4.
COURT — An open, unoccupied and unobstructed space on a lot, other than
a yard, street or way, bounded by two or more sides of a building, including
a similar area fully open to the sky but not necessarily beginning at the
ground level.
CRAFT BREWERY — Any holder of a limited brewery license as established
and defined under N.J.S.A. 33:1-10 or its successor statute.[Added
11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-041]
CRAFT DISTILLERY — Any holder of a craft distillery license as established
and defined under N.J.S.A. 33:1-10 or its successor statute.[Added
11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-041]
CULVERT — A structure having a bottom designed to convey a watercourse
under a driveway, road, railroad or pedestrian walk and not incorporated in
a closed drainage system.
CURB LEVEL — The officially established grade of the curb in front of the
midpoint of the lot.
DAY CARE, ADULT — A facility providing care for the elderly and/or
functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for a portion of a twentyfour-
hour day.[Added 5-6-2014 by Ord. No. 14-025]
DAYS — Calendar days.
DEBRIS — The nonbiodegradable remains of something broken down or
destroyed.
DECELERATION LANE — Added pavement width at an intersection or other
point of access from a public or private road, designed to enable vehicles
leaving the street or roadway to make the necessary reduction in speed
without interfering with the free movement of through traffic.
DEDICATION FOR ROAD AND OTHER PUBLIC PURPOSES — A dedication
of and acceptance by the Township or county of land for the installation
of utilities, construction, widening, repairing, maintaining or improving
said road and for the construction, reconstruction or alteration of facilities
related to the safety, convenience or carrying capacity of said road,
including curbing, pedestrian walkways, drainage facilities and traffic
control devices and other public purposes.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land
to be developed.
Type A court: a court completely surrounded by building walls and an
interior lot line.
A.
B. Type B court: any court other than a Type A court.
§ 550-7 HAMILTON CODE § 550-7
1:872
DENSITY, NET — The total number of dwelling units for a given tract of
land divided by the number of acres in the tract, excluding primary and
secondary residential streets and parking areas built in conjunction with the
development and recreational areas, open space and other lands set aside
for public use.
DENSITY, OVERALL — The total number of dwelling units for a given tract
of land divided by the number of acres in the tract, including primary and
secondary residential streets and parking areas built in conjunction with the
development and recreational areas, open space, commercial and industrial
properties and other lands set aside for public use.
DESIGN FLOOD — The relative size or magnitude of a flood, expressed
as a design discharge in cubic feet per second, which is developed from
hydrologic criteria, represents a major flood of reasonable expectancy,
reflects both flood experience and flood potential, and is the basis of the
delineation of the floodway and the flood hazard area and of the water
surface elevation thereof.
DESIGN FLOOD PROFILE — The elevations of the water surface of the
floodway design flood and the flood hazard area design flood as shown on
the flood maps.
DETENTION BASIN — A structure designed and maintained to temporarily
hold back the additional runoff attributed to the development of land. The
design of such structures must receive approval from the Mercer County
and Hamilton Township engineering departments.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase or other persons having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT —
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS CALENDAR — The schedule of dates denoting
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment meetings. The calendar
may also include periods of time in which applications for development
shall be submitted and any other dates relevant to the development review
process.
The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure; any
mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure or land or extension of the use of land, for
which permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
A.
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations
located within the area of the special flood hazard.
B.
§ 550-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:873
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — A zoning ordinance, subdivision
ordinance, site plan ordinance, official map ordinance, flood damage
prevention ordinance and any other Township regulation of the use and
development of land, or amendment thereto.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff during and
after construction or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation;
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges; to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical; to lessen nonpoint
pollution; to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions as well as for drainage and the means necessary for water supply
preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRIVEWAY — A means of access for vehicles to and from a property to a
roadway.
DUST-FREE SURFACE — A surface adequately covered with a concrete,
bituminous product or surface-treated macadam, properly drained and
maintained in good condition at all times. Precast concrete blocks which
allow grass to grow through may also be considered a "dust-free surface."
DWELLING NET DENSITY — The ratio between the aggregate number of
dwelling units and portion of the lot or development area used exclusively
for the dwelling units (including all private lands and parking areas, but
excluding accessways and common open space).
DWELLING UNIT —
EASEMENT — A use or burden imposed on real estate by deed or other
legal means to permit the use of land by the public, a corporation or
particular persons for specific uses.
SEMIDETACHED TWO-FAMILY — A freestanding building on one lot,
serving two families, with one wall of an attached garage located on
a side property line. The garage building wall located on the property
line will serve as a common wall for an adjacent attached garage on the
adjoining lot.
A.
SINGLE-FAMILY ZERO-LOT LINE — A freestanding detached building
on one lot, or within a lot held in common ownership, serving one
family, with one wall of the building located on or within five feet of a
side property line. Side, rear or front yards may be enclosed to form
common walled, open courtyards, or patios for each dwelling.
B.
SEMIDETACHED ZERO-LOT LINE — A freestanding building on one
lot, serving one family, with one wall of an attached garage located
on or within five feet of a side property line. The garage building wall
located on the property line will serve as a common wall for an adjacent
attached garage on the adjoining lot.
C.
MULTIFAMILY — A building or portion thereof used or designed as a
residence for three or more dwelling units.
D.
§ 550-7 HAMILTON CODE § 550-7
1:874
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION — A college or university giving general
academic instructions as prescribed by the State of New Jersey. Included
within this term are areas or structures used for administration, housing
of students or faculty, dining halls and social or athletic activities, when
located on the institution's land that is not detached by more than a street
and/or other property owned by the institution from that portion of the
campus where classroom facilities are maintained.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER (EMC) — An electrically activated
changeable sign whose variable message and/or graphic presentation
capability can be electronically programmed by computer from a remote
location. EMCs typically use light-emitting diodes (LEDs) as a lighting
source.[Added 7-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045]
ELEEMOSYNARY OR PHILANTHROPIC INSTITUTION — A private or
nonprivate organization which is not organized or operated for the purpose
of carrying on a trade or business and no part of the net earnings of which
are for the benefit of any member of said organization or individual.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — A Township advisory body created
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice and gravity.
EXCAVATION or CUT — Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a nonprofit
single housekeeping unit, living together as a stable living unit under
a common housekeeping management plan based on an intentionally
structured relationship which contemplates permanency and provides
organization and structure.
FARM —
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT — Any establishment whose principal business
is the sale of foods, frozen desserts or beverages to the customer in a readyto-
consume state for consumption, either within the restaurant building or
PRINCIPAL USES — A lot with at least five acres used for the growing
and harvesting of crops and the raising and breeding of certain animals,
including truck farms, fruit farms, nurseries and greenhouses, dairies
and livestock produce, excepting that commercial piggeries are
prohibited.
A.
ACCESSORY USES — Buildings incidental to farms, such as barns
and packing, grading and storage buildings for produce raised on the
premises, except that no processing of produce shall be permitted;
buildings for keeping of poultry and permitted livestock; garages for
the keeping of equipment and trucks used in farm operations; and one
identification sign not exceeding 15 square feet in area and set back at
least 10 feet from all street and property lines.
B.
§ 550-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:875
for carryout with consumption on or off the premises, and whose design or
method of operation may include the following characteristics:
FILLING — The process of depositing sand, gravel, soil or other materials
of any composition.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board and/or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment taken on a preliminary approved major
subdivision or site plan after all conditions, engineering plans and other
requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required
improvements have been installed or guaranties properly posted for their
completion or approval conditioned upon the posting of such guaranties.
FIREHOUSE — A public purpose for the storage of firefighting equipment,
location of administrative offices and other facilities for use by members of
the fire company, which are permitted in all zoning districts in accordance
with Master Plan provisions and all of the provisions of this chapter.
FIRST AID SQUAD BUILDING — A public use for the storage of the rescue
squad equipment, location of administrative offices and other facilities for
use by the members of the rescue squad, which are permitted in all zoning
districts in accordance with Master Plan provisions and all other provisions
of this chapter.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry areas from:
FLOOD DESIGN — The relative size or magnitude of a flood expressed
as a design discharge in cubic feet per second, which is developed from
hydrologic criteria representing a flood having a 0.2% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. This reflects both flood experience
and flood potential and is the basis of the delineation of the floodway, the
flood hazard area and the water surface elevation thereof.
FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION — A determination of the water
surface elevations of the design flood, that is, the flood level that has a 0.2%
or greater chance of occurrence in any given year.
Foods, frozen desserts or beverages are usually served in edible
containers or in paper, plastic or other disposable containers.
A.
A limited or specialized list of quickly prepared or preprepared food
items, utilizing mechanized standardized preparation and packaging
techniques, is offered for consumption on and off the premises.
B.
Drive-in or outside ordering and service via a separate drive-in lane,
call box and delivery window.
C.
D. No waitress table service.
A. Inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface water from any
source.
B.
§ 550-7 HAMILTON CODE § 550-7
1:876
FLOOD FRINGE — The portion of the flood hazard area outside of the
floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD APPEAL — A request for a review of the Township
Engineer's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance from the Planning Board.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The land in the floodplain subject to a 0.2% or
greater chance of flood in any given year.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — An official map of the Township in
which the boundaries of the flood area having special hazards have been
designated.
FLOOD INSURANCE MAP — An official map of the Township on which has
been delineated the special flood hazard areas in the Township for flood
insurance purposes.
FLOODPLAIN — The relatively flat area adjoining the channel which has
been or may be covered by floodwater of the watercourse.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Any zoning ordinance,
subdivision regulation, site plan ordinance, building code or health
regulation and any special purpose ordinances. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the design flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
FLOOR AREA, FIRST — Measured by using the outside dimensions of a
residential portion of a building, excluding the area of an attached garage.
For a split-level or a tri-level dwelling, the area shall be considered to be the
sum of the areas of the two largest adjoining levels.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of the building or buildings measured from the exterior facing
of exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two buildings.
Only those floor areas which have a ceiling height as prescribed by the
Township Building Code for residential uses and those floor areas either
having a ceiling height of eight feet or more or used for storage space in
nonresidential uses shall be included in the gross floor area.
FLOOR AREA, NET LIVABLE — The aggregate habitable floor area of all
floors used for residential dwelling purposes within outer walls of a building
or of a part of a building separated from all other parts by walls extending
from floor to ceiling without openings therein, excluding basements not
used for living purposes, cellars, rooms for heating equipment, garages and
unenclosed porches, breezeways and other unheated areas, and including
only such floor area under a sloping ceiling for which the headroom is not
less than five feet six inches, and then only if at least 75% of such floor area
has a ceiling height of not less than seven feet six inches; and, if any such
floor that is situated above another story has access to the floor below by
§ 550-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:877
a permanent built-in stairway, such floor area shall be measured from the
inside of each exterior wall, and the thickness of each partition wall shall be
excluded from the total.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The gross floor area, in square feet, of a
building or group of buildings on a lot divided by the area, in square feet,
of the lot. By way of example, a floor area ratio of 0.2 would permit 43,560
square feet x 0.2 = 8,712 square feet of building area to be built on a parcel.
FREIGHT FORWARDING — Establishments primarily engaged in
undertaking the transportation of goods from shippers to receivers. This
use may also include making use of services of other transportation
establishments as instrumentalities in effecting delivery. This use shall not
include the servicing or maintenance of any vehicle.
FRESHWATER(S) — All tidal and nontidal waters having a salinity, due to
natural sources, of less than or equal to 3.5 parts per thousand.
FRESHWATER WETLAND or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or
saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support,
a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation; provided, however,
that the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, in
designating a wetland, shall use the three-parameter approach (that is,
hydrology, soils and vegetation) enumerated in the April 1, 1987, interimfinal
draft Wetland Identification and Delineation Manual developed by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency, and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
FRONTAGE — All the property on one side of a street between lot lines
or between intersecting or intercepting streets or between a street and
railroad right-of-way, waterway and/or dead-end street or city boundary
measured along the street line. An intercepting street shall determine only
the boundary of the frontage on the side of the street which it intercepts.
GARAGE, COMMUNITY — A garage used exclusively for the parking of
automobiles by residents of the neighborhood, customers or persons
engaged in the conduct of establishments in the immediate vicinity of its
location or by those for whom such establishments are conducted.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A detached accessory building or portion of a main
building for the parking or temporary storage of automobiles of occupants
of the main building, and wherein not more than one space is rented to
persons not residents of the lot or not more than one commercial vehicle,
not to exceed one-ton rated capacity or four wheels, is parked or stored.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building used for the care, repair or equipping of
vehicles or where such vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration or
hire.
GARBAGE — Solid waste or animal or vegetable matter from houses,
kitchens, restaurants, hotels, produce markets or any other source of food
of any kind to be thrown away.
§ 550-7 HAMILTON CODE § 550-7
1:878
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan for the
development of a planned development, as provided in § 550-228.
GOLF COURSE — A tract of land containing a full-size, professional golf
course at least 18 holes in length, together with appropriate accessory
uses and structures, such as clubhouses, dining and refreshment facilities,
driving ranges and miniature golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts
and the like, provided that the operation of such are incident and
subordinate to the operation of the golf course.
GOLF DRIVING RANGE — A tract of land containing golf tees, whether
elevated or at grade, for the practice of driving golf balls into an open
field of adequate depth and width. Accessory uses and structures such as
clubhouses, dining and refreshment areas, miniature golf, swimming pools,
batting cages, tennis courts and the like are permitted, provided that the
operation of such is incidental and subordinate to the operation of the golf
driving range.
GOVERNING BODY — The Council of the Township of Hamilton.
GRADE — The average finished grade elevation adjoining a building at
project completion or the slope of a road, path, driveway, swale or other
surface.
GRADE, ESTABLISHED — The elevation of the center line of streets as
officially established by Township, county or state authorities.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surfaces of lawns, walks and roads
brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs related thereto.
GRADING — Any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling or any combination
thereof and shall include the land in its cut or fill position.
GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY-GENERATING
FACILITY — A solar or photovoltaic facility mounted on open land.
HABITABLE FLOOR — Any floor, including the basement, usable for living
purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation,
or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a
habitable floor.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or other enclosed floor space located in
a basement or first or upper story of a dwelling, arranged for living,
recreation, eating or sleeping purposes.
HEALTH CARE FACILITY — A nonresidential facility or institution, whether
public or private, principally engaged in providing services for health
maintenance and the treatment of mental or physical conditions. Health
care facilities include general or special hospitals, public health centers,
diagnostic centers, treatment centers, rehabilitation centers, outpatient
clinics and dispensaries. They may include laundries, cafeterias, gift shops,
laboratories and medical offices as accessory uses.
HEALTH SERVICES — Health care facilities as well as establishments
providing support to the medical profession and patients, such as medical
§ 550-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:879
and dental laboratories, blood banks, oxygen, and miscellaneous types of
medical supplies and services.
HELISTOP — Any area used for the taking off or landing of helicopters
for the purpose of picking up and discharging of passengers or cargo.
The use does not include fueling, maintenance or service facilities.[Added
5-6-2014 by Ord. No. 14-025]
HISTORIC SITE — Any building, structure, area or property that is
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this state,
its communities or the nation, and which has been so designated.
HOME OCCUPATION — A lawful activity carried out for profit, conducted as
an accessory use by a resident in the resident's dwelling unit. For purposes
of this definition, a lawyer's office or medical or dental office shall not be
included as a home occupation.
HOSPITAL —
HOTELS — A building designed for occupancy primarily as a temporary
abode of individuals, with or without meals, in which:
INDEPENDENT LIVING UNIT — A self-contained unit for an older adult or
adults who are capable of caring for themselves but for whom dining, social
and health-related services are provided within the development through
contractual arrangements with the owner/manager, either as a complete
package or on an a la carte basis.
An institution or facility engaged primarily in the diagnosis and
treatment of human illness, injury, diseases, pain, deformity or physical
condition, where emergency, surgical, obstetrical, convalescent, and
other medical and nursing care is rendered to two or more nonrelated
individuals on both an inpatient basis with overnight stays for periods
exceeding 24 hours and an outpatient basis, delivered at or through
facilities located on a single parcel or contiguous parcels of land.
Assisted living, congregate care, and nursing or convalescent home
facilities may be considered to be permitted ancillary uses.
A.
The term "hospital" shall not include those elements of the institution
or facility which have been or are intended to be conveyed, leased or
otherwise utilized by entities or persons providing services not ancillary
or incident to those hospital activities designated hereinbefore.
B.
A. There are more than 10 sleeping rooms.
B. Incidental business may be conducted.
C. There may be club rooms, ballrooms and common dining facilities.
Such hotel services as maid, telephone and postal services are
provided.
D.
Access to the rooms is restricted to passage by a single control desk or
lobby.
E.
§ 550-7 HAMILTON CODE § 550-7
1:880
INFANT CARE CENTER — A private establishment for the care of four or
more infants under the age of 2 1/2 years or children requiring constant
attention in carrying out normal daily functions.
IN-GROUND SWIMMING POOL — A water-filled enclosure, permanently
constructed or portable, having a depth of more than 12 inches below the
level of the surrounding land at any single point.
INSTITUTION — A nonprofit, religious or public purpose use, such as
a church, cathedral or temple, library, school, educational institution,
eleemosynary or philanthropic institution, or government-owned or -
operated building, structure or land used for public purposes.
INTERESTED PARTY —
KIOSK — A small structure used for noncommercial purposes for the benefit
of the public, such as bus stops, community information centers, etc.
LAND — Any ground, soil or earth whatsoever regarded as the subject of
ownership and everything annexed to it, whether it be by nature, as trees,
water, etc., or by man, such as buildings, fences, etc., extending indefinitely
vertically, upwards and downwards. "Land" includes improvements and
fixtures on, above or below the surface.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving clearing, grading,
transporting, filling or other activity which causes land to be exposed to the
danger of erosion.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth abutting upon a street or
other appropriate means of access intended for the temporary parking of
a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials,
which space or berth is not less than 10 feet in width and sufficient in length
to ensure that no vehicle using the space shall extend beyond a property
line, but in no case less than 25 feet in length.
LONG-TERM-CARE FACILITY — An institution or a distinct part of an
institution that is licensed or approved to provide health care under medical
supervision for 24 or more consecutive hours to two or more patients who
are not related to the governing authority or its members by marriage,
blood or adoption. Long-term-care facility shall include the terms "skilled
nursing facility" and "intermediate care facility."
A. In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any citizen of the state.
In the case of a civil proceeding in any court or in an administrative
proceeding before a municipal agency, any person, whether residing
within or without the municipality, whose right to use, acquire or enjoy
property is or may be affected by any action taken under this chapter
or whose rights to use, acquire or enjoy property under this chapter
or under any other law of this state or of the United States have been
denied, violated or infringed upon by an action or a failure to act under
this chapter.
B.
§ 550-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:881
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — The total area within the lot lines of a lot, expressed in terms
of square feet or acres. Any portion of a lot in a public right-of-way, existing
or proposed, shall not be included in calculating lot area.
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land at the junction of two or more intersecting
streets. Regardless of building orientation, no structure shall be set back
closer to the street than the minimum front yard setback in the zone district.
The front shall be deemed to be the commonly accepted address.
LOT DEPTH — The average distance between the front and rear lot lines
measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured
along the street line. The minimum lot frontage shall be the same as the lot
width, except that, on curved alignments with an outside radius of less than
500 feet, the minimum distance between the side lot lines measured at the
street line shall not be less than 75% of the required minimum lot width.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — A line separating the lot from the street. In the case
of a corner lot there shall be two front lot lines.
LOT LINE, REAR — A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the
front lot line, and in the case of an irregularly shaped lot, the line which is
most nearly parallel to and at the greatest average distance from the street
line. In the case of a corner lot, the line which is most nearly parallel to and
at the greatest average distance from the front of the structure.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot
line.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER — A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the
side of another lot.
LOT SIZE AVERAGING — A residential development option that allows a
range of minimum lot areas, provided that the maximum density for the
parcel is not exceeded.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot having frontage on two streets.
LOT WIDTH — The straight and horizontal distance between side lot lines at
setback points on each side lot line measured an equal distance back from
the street line. The minimum lot width shall be measured at the minimum
required building setback line. Where side lot lines are not parallel, the
minimum lot width at the setback line shall not be less than 75% of the
minimum lot frontage for the zoning district in which the lot is located.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLDS — Households whose incomes do not exceed
50% of the median income of the area, with adjustments for smaller and
larger households.
§ 550-7 HAMILTON CODE § 550-7
1:882
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by
a municipality for the maintenance of any improvements required by the
Municipal Land Use Law, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters
of credit under the circumstances specified in Section 16 of P.L. 1991, c. 256
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5), and cash.184
MAJOR SITE PLAN — Any site plan involving more than 10 acres.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the Township as set forth in and adopted pursuant
to Section 19 of the Municipal Land Use Act, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
MAXIMUM IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (MIS) — The aggregate of building
coverage and all paved surfaces which cover the gross area of a lot. By way
of example, a fifty-five-percent maximum impervious surface would permit
43,560 square feet x 55% = 22,958 square feet of site area to be covered
by impervious surfaces. Plazas, fountains, bicycle paths and other public
amenities associated with buildings located in the NC, CC, HC, GSC, REO-4,
REO-5, RD, MFG and I Zones shall not be considered paved surfaces. In
the PRDO and PRD Zones only, the use of permeable pavers, as described
in Chapter 9.7 of the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual, will be given a fifty-percent credit toward maximum impervious
surface.
MEDICAL BUILDING — A building that contains establishments dispensing
health services for nonresidents.
MID-RISE — A structure containing six stories or less and not exceeding 70
feet in height.
MINING — A process involving the removal of sand, clay, soil, gravel,
humus, peat and other organic or mineral materials. "Mining" is not
permitted in any zone district.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A site plan involving 10 acres or less.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Households whose incomes are no
greater than 80% and no less than 50% of the median income of the area,
with adjustments for smaller and larger households.
MOTEL, AUTO COURT, MOTOR LODGES, TOURIST COURTS — One or
more structures designed for the renting of sleeping rooms to transient
guests, chiefly motorists, and so laid out that there is direct and immediate
access from a parked automobile to the rooms, and access to the rooms is
not restricted to passage by a single control desk or lobby.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL — A building or area in which trucks,
including tractor or trailer units, are parked, stored and serviced, including
the transfer and loading or unloading of goods, and associated offices. A
terminal may include private warehousing, repair and service. Repair and
servicing shall only be done on their own fleets.
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:883
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — A municipal planning board or zoning board of
adjustment or governing body of a municipality, when acting pursuant to
this chapter, and any agency which is created by or responsible to one or
more municipalities, when such agency is acting pursuant to this chapter.
NET DEVELOPABLE ACREAGE — The area of a tract or parcel that does not
contain conservation easements or deed restrictions imposed as a condition
of subdivision or site plan approval, bodies of water, areas of floodplains,
wetlands and NJDEP-regulated wetland transitional area and area of slope
greater than 15%.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
NEW JERSEY FLOOD HAZARD AREA DESIGN FLOOD — The flood having a
0.2% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (design flood).
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR SIGNS — A building,
structure or sign, the size, dimension or location of which was lawful prior
to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.185
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning
ordinance, but fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.186
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.187
NUISANCE — An offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or
practice; a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or
repeating invasion or disturbance of another's rights, including the actual
or potential emanation of any physical characteristics of activity or use
across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human
being; or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of
people or things, such as but not limited to noise, dust, smoke, fumes,
odor, glare, flashes, vibrations, shock waves, heat, debris, litter, trash sites,
electronic or atomic radiation, effluent, noise of congregation of people
especially at night, passenger traffic, transportation of things by truck, rail
or other means, invasion of nonabutting street frontage by parking; the
obscuring or masking of adjacent or nearby property by projecting signs,
marquees or canopies; or any adverse effect on value or desirability of
nearby property caused by such matters as appearance, exposed storage of
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-7 HAMILTON CODE § 550-7
1:884
inoperable automobiles, junk, materials and neglect or dilapidation of lands
or buildings.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME — Any dwelling where persons are
housed or lodged or furnished with meals and where nursing care is for
hire.
NURSING CARE UNIT — A bed in a nursing home that is licensed by
the New Jersey State Department of Health to provide health care under
medical supervision and continuous nursing care to patients who do not
require the degree of care and treatment which a hospital provides and
who, because of their physical or mental condition, require continuous
nursing care and services above the level of room and board.
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN LANDS — That portion of land, including any farm-related dwelling
or accessory buildings located thereon, that is voluntarily deed-restricted by
the landowner for forest resource conservation or agricultural use in order
to qualify for open lands subdivision pursuant to this chapter.
OPEN SPACE — Any space or area characterized by natural scenic beauty
or whose existing openness, natural condition or present state of use,
if retained, would enhance the present or potential value of abutting or
surrounding development or would maintain or enhance the conservation of
natural or scenic resources. "Open space" includes areas set aside for public
use and enjoyment and also includes areas of historic significance.
OPEN SPACE ORGANIZATION — An incorporated, nonprofit organization
which may operate in a planned development under a recorded land
agreement through which:
OPEN SPACE, USABLE — Any portion of open space which can be used for
active recreational pursuits.
A. Each owner is automatically a member.
Each occupied dwelling unit is automatically subject to a charge for
a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's activities
and maintenance, including any maintenance costs levied against the
association by the Township.
B.
C. Each owner and tenant has the right to use the common property.
§ 550-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:885
PARKING AREA — An area other than a street used for the parking of motor
vehicles.
PARKING SPACE — An area not less than nine feet wide by 20 feet in
length, either within a structure or in the open, for the parking of motor
vehicles, exclusive of driveways, access drives, fire lanes and public rightsof-
way, except that nothing shall prohibit private driveways for detached
dwelling units from being considered off-street parking areas, provided that
no portion of such private driveway within the right-of-way line of the street
intersected by such driveway shall be considered an off-street parking
space. The area is intended to be sufficient to accommodate the exterior
extremities of the vehicles, whether or not wheel blocks are installed within
this area to prevent the bumper from overhanging one end of the parking
space. The width and length of each space shall be measured perpendicular
to each other regardless of the angle of the parking space to the access aisle
or driveway.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by a
municipality, including cash, in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter to assure that certain improvements be made. Escrow agreements
and other similar collateral and surety agreements are acceptable.
PERMITTED USE — Any use of land or buildings as permitted by this
chapter.
PET CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
remains of pet animals and dedicated for said purposes.
PINBALL AND ELECTRONIC GAME ARCADE — Any use of building space
which makes available to the public the use of six or more pinball machines
and/or electronic games.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size as specified by ordinance to be developed according to a
plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant
common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses, or both, and
any other uses incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by
ordinance.
PLANNED COMMUNITY — A large-scale total community developed as
a single entity according to a plan, containing diversified and varying
dwelling facilities as well as commercial, research, engineering, office and
public and quasi-public uses, and including open space and recreation
facilities, all primarily for the benefit of the residential development.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Planned neighborhood, planned community
residential cluster, planned commercial development or planned mixed-use
research development.
PLANNED MIXED-USE RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT — An area of a
minimum contiguous size as specified by ordinance to be developed
according to a plan as a single entity, containing one or more structures
with appurtenant common areas to accommodate industrial uses and any
§ 550-7 HAMILTON CODE § 550-7
1:886
other uses incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by
ordinance.
PLANNED NEIGHBORHOOD — A community of dwelling facilities
developed as a single entity according to a plan, containing residential
clusters, which may include public or quasi-public uses, and shall include
open space and recreation facilities, all primarily for the benefit of the
residential development.
PLANNED RETIREMENT DEVELOPMENT — A planned residential
community having one or more parcels of land with a contiguous total
acreage forming a land mass to be dedicated for the use of a planned
retirement development, providing for a range of living accommodations,
health care services and support facilities for people who are 55 years
of age or older or for couples, one of whom is at least 55 years of age
(except to the extent otherwise provided in a certificate of need issued by
the New Jersey Department of Health for a nursing facility with respect to
age restriction, if applicable), and which may include age-restricted units,
independent living units, assisted living or congregate care units, and/or
nursing care units. Through its corporation, association or owners, said
land and structures shall be restricted, by bylaws, rules, regulations and
restrictions of record to be approved by the Planning Board Attorney, to
use by permanent residents 55 years of age or older, with the following
exceptions:
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Township.
PLAT — The map of a subdivision or site plan. The term is used
interchangeably in this chapter with the term "plan."
A member of a couple under the age of 55 years who is residing with
his/her partner who is 55 years of age or older.
A.
Up to two children, 19 years of age or over, may reside with their
parents or parent where one of the parents with whom the child or
children are residing is 55 years of age or over.
B.
One adult under 55 years of age will be admitted as a permanent
resident if it is established that the presence of such person is essential
to the physical care of one or more of the adult occupants. If more
than one adult under 55 years of age is necessary to care for the
adult occupant, approval shall be required from the homeowners'
association.
C.
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a subdivision or site plan of
sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and
classification and meeting the requirements of this chapter.
A.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision or site plan, which is submitted to the Planning
Board for Planning Board consideration and preliminary approval, and
meeting the requirements of this chapter.
B.
§ 550-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:887
PORCH — A roofed piazza, veranda or portico which projects beyond the
main wall of a building and of which the columns supporting the roof
present a minimum of obstruction to the view and circulation of air. A porch
becomes a room when the space enclosed is heated or air conditioned and,
if glazed or screened, when the percentage of window or screen area is less
than 50% of the total exterior wall area.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights prior to final
approval after specific elements of a development plan have been agreed
upon by the Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of Adjustment and the
applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a
project, illustrating in a schematic form its scope, scale and relationship to
its site and immediate environs.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main purpose for which a lot or building is used.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — Any building or parts thereof designed to be
occupied for clerical and administrative purposes, where no manufacturing,
fabrication, assemblage of goods or retailing or wholesaling is conducted.
Any operation involving the distribution or exchange of goods which
requires the provision of a drive-in window facility is not a professional
office.
PROPERTY OWNER — The person owning fee or title or the person in
whose name the legal title to the property appears by deed duly recorded in
the office of the County Clerk of Mercer County, or the person in possession
of the property or buildings under claim of or exercising acts of ownership
over the same for himself or as the executor, administrator or guardian of
the property.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency, federal,
state, county or municipal, including a corporation created by law for the
performance of certain specialized governmental functions, and the Board
of Education.
PUBLIC AREA —
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — A Master Plan, capital
improvement program, Official Map or other proposal for land development
adopted by the appropriate public body, or any amendment thereto.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision or
site plan, which is presented to the Planning Board for final approval in
accordance with these regulations.
C.
A. Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas.
B. Other public open spaces.
C. Scenic and historic sites.
D. Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
§ 550-7 HAMILTON CODE § 550-7
1:888
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a
natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing
for the flow of water to safeguard the public against flood damage,
sedimentation and erosion.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the Township, Township agency, Board of Education, state or
county agency or other public body for recreational or conservational uses.
PUBLIC PURPOSE USES — The use of land or buildings by the Township or
any officially created authority or agency thereof.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A business or service which is engaged in regularly
supplying the public with some commodity or service which is of public
consequence and need, such as electricity, gas, water, transportation or
telephone or telegraph service.
REFUSE — Garbage, rubbish, trash, trade waste, debris or the remains of
uprooted or severed plant life.
REPAIR SHOP, BODY — The land and building designed and used in the
business of the structural and/or cosmetic repair and the incidental
mechanical repair of passenger or commercial vehicles. No such use is
permitted in any zone district.
REPAIR SHOP, MECHANICAL — The land and buildings designed and
used predominantly for the mechanical repair of passenger or commercial
vehicles. No shop in which a substantial portion of the mechanical repair
work done is on vehicles owned by the operator or owner of such shop or
leased or rented to such operator or owner shall qualify as a "mechanical
repair shop" under this definition.
RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURE — The growing and harvesting of plant life
and the keeping of farm animals for the enjoyment of the residents on
the property and not primarily for commercial purposes. A small roadside
produce stand associated with the residential agriculture use shall be
permitted, provided that all of the produce offered for sale is grown on the
property; that the produce is not grown primarily for commercial purposes;
that the stand is not furnished with permanent heating facilities; that the
floor area of the stand does not exceed 100 square feet; that the stand is
set back from all street rights-of-way and property lines at least 20 feet;
and that sufficient on-site off-street parking is provided. One unlit sign not
exceeding four square feet in area shall be permitted and shall be attached
flat against the front facade of the stand. At least five acres of land shall be
devoted to the growing and harvesting of crops and/or the keeping of farm
animals.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — A residential development of detached dwelling
units planned as a single entity in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and which has a common or public open area or areas as an
appurtenance.
§ 550-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:889
RESIDENTIAL HEALTH CARE FACILITY — Any facility so defined by
N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq., and regulated by the New Jersey Department of
Health. Residential health care facility shall include the terms "assisted
living," "congregate care," "nursing home," "convalescent home," "extended
care" and "long-term care."
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which food is
sold primarily for consumption on the premises. However, a snack bar or
refreshment stand at a public or community swimming pool, playground,
golf course, play field or park, operated solely by the agency or group
operating the recreational facility and for the convenience of patrons of the
facility, shall not be deemed to be a restaurant.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — Any restaurant, refreshment stand, snack bar,
dairy bar, hamburger stand or hot dog stand where food is served in
disposable containers or products primarily for consumption at counters,
stools or bars outside the building or primarily for consumption in
automobiles parked on the premises, whether brought to said automobiles
by the customer or by employees of the restaurant, regardless of whether
or not additional seats or other accommodations are provided for customers
inside the building. All such drive-in restaurants and refreshment stands are
specifically prohibited in all districts.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division of a lot or the adjustment of a lot
line or lot lines.
RETENTION BASIN — A structure designed and maintained to impound the
increased runoff due to development.
REVERSE FRONTAGE — A through lot that is not accessible from one of the
parallel or nonintersecting streets upon which it fronts.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any lands including streams and roadways owned by any
governmental entity giving the public free and easy access.
ROADSIDE STANDS FOR FARM AND NURSERY PRODUCTS — A yearround
commercial establishment associated with a farm which is used for
the retailing of agricultural produce.
ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY-GENERATING
FACILITY — A solar or photovoltaic facility mounted to the roof of a
building, parking garage, carport or other structure which provides
protection from weather or provides habitable or storage space. This shall
not include facilities mounted above surface parking lots.
RUBBISH — Waste solids not considered to be highly flammable or
explosive, including but not limited to rags or clothes, leather, rubber,
carpets, wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery,
masonry and other similar materials.
RURAL RESOURCE CONSERVATION (RRC) DENSITY — The permitted
number of dwelling units per net developable acreage of the lot or tract to
be developed.
§ 550-7 HAMILTON CODE § 550-7
1:890
SANITARY LANDFILL — A land disposal site employing an engineered
method of disposal of solid waste in a manner that minimizes environmental
hazard, including but not limited to the spreading of the solid waste in thin
layers, compacting the waste to the smallest practical volume and applying
cover material on a daily or more frequent basis.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — A dish-shaped, parabolic-shaped, spherical
or circular-shaped antenna for the reception and/or transmission of satellite
signals, including television signals, AM radio signals, FM radio signals,
telemetry signals, data communications signals or any other reception or
transmission signals using free air space as a medium, whether for
commercial, public or private use. Such objects shall also be known as
"earth stations," "earth terminals," "home video earth stations," "microwave
dish antennas," "satellite dishes," "satellite earth stations" and "satellite
radio frequency signal reception and/or transmission devices."
SCHOOL — Any place of instruction in any branch of knowledge.
SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY — Any school having regular sessions with
regularly employed instructors, which teaches those subjects that are
fundamental and essential in general education and which provides
elementary education under the supervision of the New Jersey Department
of Education, the Board of Education of the Township or a lawfully
constituted ecclesiastical governing body or a corporation meeting the
requirements of the New Jersey State Department of Education.
SCHOOL, SECONDARY — Same as elementary school except secondary
education is provided.
SCHOOL, VOCATIONAL — Any school having regular sessions with
regularly employed instructors which, as a principal activity, provides
training in a trade or vocation and teaches those subjects that are
fundamental and essential in elementary or secondary education, under
the supervision of the New Jersey State Department of Education or a
lawfully constituted ecclesiastical governing body or a corporation meeting
the requirements of the State Department of Education.
SCREEN or BUFFER STRIP — Unless specifically sized, a densely planted
strip of land as approved (or having equivalent natural growth) with
evergreen shrubs or trees at least five feet to six feet in height at the time
of planting.
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a
product of erosion.
SERVICE STATION — Lands and buildings providing for the sale of fuel,
lubricants and automotive accessories. Maintenance and minor repairs for
motor vehicles may be provided, but no body repairs or painting or the
extended storage of inoperable or wrecked vehicles shall be permitted.
SETBACK LINE — A line drawn parallel with a street line or lot line and
drawn through the point of a building nearest to the street line or lot line.
The term "required setback" means a line that is established a minimum
§ 550-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:891
horizontal distance from the street line or the lot line and beyond which a
building or part of a building is not permitted to extend toward the street
line or lot line.
SHED, GARDEN OR TOOL — An accessory building not exceeding 12 by 12
by 12 feet which may be erected within three feet of the rear lot line and
side lot line but not less than 20 feet from any dwelling on any adjacent
property. The three-foot-wide strip between the shed and the rear and side
lot lines shall be kept free of rubbish and debris.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments built on one
tract that is planned, developed, owned and managed as an operating unit;
it provides on-site parking in definite relationship to the type and total size
of the stores. The commercial establishments may be located in one or
several buildings, attached or separated.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangularly shaped area used as a line of vision
established at intersections in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter, in which nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to
grow in such a manner as to obstruct vision between a height of three feet
and seven feet above the center-line grade of either street.
SIGHT TRIANGLE EASEMENT — An easement which allows the Township
to have the right of entry into an established sight triangle area to remove
any obstruction to vision within the sight triangle area not conforming to
the standards of the definition of sight triangle, following due notice to the
property owner.
SIGN — See § 550-124 for sign definitions.
SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — A common use of and access to all living
and eating areas, bathrooms, and food and serving areas.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown
the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not necessarily
limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes and
waterways; the location of the existing and proposed buildings, drives,
parking areas, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and screening
devices; and any information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed review and approval.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots which
proposes new development of a site of 10 acres or less in total land
area; does not involve planned development, any new street or
extension of any off-tract improvement which is to be prorated pursuant
to § 550-256 of this chapter; and is submitted as a complete application
providing a sufficient amount of information necessary to determine
that the aforementioned conditions for the approval of a minor site plan
have been met.
A.
MAJOR SITE PLAN — Any development plan of one or more lots which
is not classified as a minor site plan.
B.
§ 550-7 HAMILTON CODE § 550-7
1:892
SITE PLAN APPROVAL — The action taken by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment with regard to a submitted site plan, which confers
certain rights to an applicant over a specified period of time in accordance
with Article VII of this chapter.
SITE PLAN REVIEW — The examination of the specific development plans
for a lot. Wherever the term "site plan approval" is used in this chapter, it
shall be understood to mean a requirement that the site plan be reviewed
and approved by the Board.
SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY-GENERATING FACILITY — A solar or
photovoltaic energy facility or structure and all associated equipment for
the purpose of generating electrical energy or heat or hot water produced
from solar or photovoltaic technologies, other than solar reflective or
concentrating technology, whether such facility or structure is a principal
use, a part of the principal use, a conditional use, or an accessory use or
structure.
SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC PARKING STRUCTURE — A solar or
photovoltaic facility mounted on a surface parking lot such that vehicles
may park and/or drive beneath.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse, sludge and other discarded solid
materials resulting from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations
and from domestic and community activities and all other waste materials.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD or FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The land in the
floodplain subject to a 0.2% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
STABLE — A structure or portion thereof which is used in whole or in
part for the shelter or care of horses, cattle or similar animals, either
permanently or temporarily.
STABLE, PRIVATE — A detached accessory building for the keeping of
horses, cattle or similar animals not kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
STABLE, PUBLIC — A stable other than a private stable.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings
or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a structure without a basement
or poured footings, "start of construction" includes the first permanent
framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its pilings or
foundations.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the next floor above it or, if there is no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. For the
purpose of this chapter, the interior of the roof shall not be considered a
§ 550-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:893
ceiling. A half story is the area under a pitched roof at the top of a building,
the floor of which is at least four feet but no more than six feet below the
plate.
STORY, HALF — A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates
of which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are not more than six feet
above the floor of such story.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway;
which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; which
is approved by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.; which is shown on a plat duly
filed and recorded in the office of the County Recording Officer prior to the
appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such board of the power
to review plats; or which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for
public use and has been improved in accordance with Township standards.
The term includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks,
parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon which
a lot fronts.
STREET LINE — The edge of the existing or future street right-of-way,
whichever would result in the widest right-of-way, as shown on the adopted
Master Plan or Official Map, forming the dividing line between the publicly
owned or controlled street right-of-way, either existing or proposed, and a
lot.
STRIPPING — Any activity which disturbs vegetated or otherwise stabilized
soil surface, including clearing, grubbing and backblading operations.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, assembled or erected which requires
location on or below the ground or attachment to something having such
location on the ground, including buildings, fences, towers, signs,
advertising devices, swimming pools, stadiums, platforms, satellite antenna
dishes and storage bins. A combination of materials to form a construction
for occupancy, use, ornamentation or advertising shall also be considered a
structure.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two
or more lots, tracts or parcels or other divisions of land for sale or
development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the
meaning of this chapter if no new streets are created: divisions of land
found by the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee thereof appointed
by the Chairman to be for agriculture purposes, where all resulting parcels
are five acres or larger in size; divisions of property by testamentary or
intestate provisions; divisions of property upon court order, including but
not limited to judgments or foreclosures; consolidations of existing lots by
deed or other recorded instrument; and the conveyance of one or more
adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land owned by the same person or
persons and all of which are found and certified by the administrative officer
to conform to the requirements of the municipal development regulations
§ 550-7 HAMILTON CODE § 550-7
1:894
and are shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax
Map or Atlas of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include
the term "resubdivision."
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair
is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial
improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether
or not that alteration reflects the external dimensions of the structure.
SUPERMARKET — A retail establishment which sells groceries, sundries
and other convenience and household goods and having a total floor area of
20,000 square feet or more.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — A water-filled enclosure,
whether located above or below the ground, designed and maintained for
swimming or bathing or other purposes by an individual for use by members
of his household and guests, and which is located on a lot as an accessory
use to a detached dwelling. The term includes all buildings, structures,
equipment and appurtenances thereto.
THEATER, MOTION-PICTURE — A building or part of a building devoted to
the showing of motion pictures on a paid-admission basis.
THEATER, OUTDOOR DRIVE-IN — An open lot or part thereof with its
appurtenant facilities devoted primarily to the showing of motion pictures
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision of properties resulting in the
ultimate creation of not more than three lots fronting on an existing
street or road, not involving any new street or road or the extension of
municipal facilities, not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel
or adjoining property, not in conflict with any provision or portion of
the Master Plan, Zoning Ordinance or this chapter and not involving a
planned development or the extension of any off-tract improvement, the
cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to § 550-256 of this chapter.
A.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any division of land not classified as a minor
subdivision.
B.
The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with the
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.
(2)
A.
Substantial improvement of a nonconforming structure or use may only
be made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B.
§ 550-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:895
or theatrical productions on a paid-admission basis to patrons seated in
automobiles or on outdoor seats.
TOWNSHIP — Township of Hamilton, Mercer County, New Jersey.
TRADE WASTE — All wastes, solid or liquid material, or rubbish resulting
from construction, building operations or the production of any business,
trade or industry, including but not limited to plastic products, carbons,
paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and
other forms of solid or liquid waste material.
TRAILER CAMP OR PARK — Any camp, trailer camp, trailer court, court,
campsite, lot, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended for
the purpose of supplying a location or accommodations for two or more
trailers thereupon, in which two or more trailers are parked, and including
all buildings used or intended for use as part of the equipment, whether a
charge is made for the use of the trailer park and its facilities or not. "Trailer
park" shall not include automobile or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied
trailers are parked for the purpose of inspection or sale. Such uses are not
permitted in any zone district.
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or
reproduction thereof.
TRANSFER STATION — A facility at which solid waste is transferred from
collection vehicles to haulage vehicles for transportation to a solid waste
facility.
TRASH — Something in a crumbled or broken condition or mass, other than
garbage, rubbish, trade waste or debris, the only value of which rests in its
crumbled or broken state.
UNCONSTRAINED LAND — The area of a tract or parcel that does not
contain floodplains, wetlands or slopes greater than 15%.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include
any nonconforming use.
VARIANCE — A departure from the terms of this chapter authorized by the
appropriate municipal agency.
WAREHOUSING — Facilities for handling freight which may include
buildings used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
WAREHOUSING, PRIVATE — Facilities operated for a specific commercial
establishment or group of establishments in a particular industrial or
economic field.
WAREHOUSING, PUBLIC — Facilities available to the general public, at a
fee, for the storage of furniture and other household goods and commercial
or private goods of similar nature.
WATER BODIES — Any natural or artificial collection of water, whether
permanent or temporary.
§ 550-7 HAMILTON CODE § 550-7
1:896
WATERCOURSE — Any natural swale, ditch, gully, stream, brook or river
wherein water flows ordinarily, frequently or infrequently but not
necessarily continuously. This definition includes watercourses which have
been artificially treated, realigned or improved.
WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTION CENTER — Establishments or places of
business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers, to industrial,
commercial, institutional or professional business users or to other
wholesalers, or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for
or selling merchandise to such individuals or companies. Within the
manufacturing and industrial zones along East State Street, wholesale sales
to the general public will also be permitted.
WIND ENERGY FACILITY — A wind generator and all associated
equipment, including any base, blade, foundation, nacelle, rotor, tower,
transformer, vane, wire, inverter, battery or other component necessary to
fully utilize the wind generator.
WIND GENERATOR — Equipment that converts energy from the wind into
electricity. This term includes the rotor, blades and associated mechanism.
YARD — An open space on a lot, other than a court, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending across the full width of the lot
and lying between the street line and the closest point of any building on the
lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured horizontally and at right
angles to either a straight street line or the tangent lines of curved street
lines. The minimum required front yard shall be the same as the required
setback.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear lot line and the closest point of the principal building
on the lot. The depth of the rear yard shall be measured horizontally and at
right angles to either a straight rear lot line or the tangent of curved rear
lot lines. The minimum required rear yard shall be the same as the required
setback.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
and lying between each side lot line and the closest point of the principal
building on the lot. The width of the required side yard shall be measured
horizontally and at right angles to either a straight side line or the tangent
lines of curved side lot lines.
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Zoning Board of Adjustment as
established in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
ZONING MAP — The map annexed to and made a part of this chapter.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the administrative officer which
is required as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation
of a structure or building and which acknowledges that such use, structure
or building complies with the provisions of the Township zoning ordinances
§ 550-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:897
or variance therefrom, duly authorized by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
§ 550-8. through § 550-40. (Reserved)
§ 550-7 HAMILTON CODE § 550-8
1:898
ARTICLE II
Zoning Districts; Map
§ 550-41. Zoning districts designated. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-008; 12-20-2000 by Ord. No. 00-057; 11-4-2005 by Ord. No.
05-025188]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township of Hamilton is hereby divided
into 26 districts as follows:
Symbol Title
C Conservation
RRC Rural Resource Conservation
R-25 Single-Family Residential
R-15 Single-Family Residential
R-10 Single-Family Residential
R-7 Single-Family Residential
R-5 Single-Family Residential
A/T Multiple-Family Residential
S1 Special Housing Zone I
S2 Special Housing Zone II
NC Neighborhood Commercial
CC Community Commercial
HC Highway Commercial
GC General Commercial
GSC Government Service Center
REO-2 Research, Engineering and Office
REO-4 Research, Engineering and Office
REO-5 Research, Engineering and Office
RD Research and Development
MFG Manufacturing
I Industrial
FP Floodplain
PRD Planned Retirement Development
Mixed-Use Area II Train Station Overlay
Arts and Culture Overlay
HH Hospital Healthcare
188. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-42
1:899
§ 550-42. Zoning Map. [Amended 9-18-1996 by Ord. No. 96-042;
10-30-1996 by Ord. No. 96-048; 2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 97-005;
7-2-1997 by Ord. No. 97-019; 4-22-1998 by Ord. No. 98-011;
12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-045; 12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-046;
12-20-2000 by Ord. No. 00-057; 11-4-2005 by Ord. No. 05-025;
4-22-2010 by Ord. No. 10-003; 7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-029]
The boundaries of these zoning districts are established on the map entitled
"Zoning Map of the Township of Hamilton Revision No. 28," dated 2004,
which is hereby made part of this chapter.189
§ 550-43. Interpretation of boundaries.
A. The boundaries of districts shall be shown by heavy solid lines on the
Zoning Map. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of
any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following
rules shall apply:
(1) Along streets and highways. Where district boundaries are
indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets or
highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines, such center
lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
(2) Along lot lines. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they
approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed
to be said boundaries.
(3) District lines parallel to streets and highways. Where district
boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to
the center lines or street lines of streets or the center lines or rightof-
way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be
construed as being parallel thereto and at such distances
therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map. If no distance is given,
such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown
on the Zoning Map.
(4) Along railroad lines. Where the boundary of a district follows a
railroad line, such boundaries shall be deemed to be located in the
middle of the main tracks of the railroad line.
(5) Along streams, lakes or other bodies of water. Where the boundary
of a district follows a stream, lake or other body of water, the
boundary shall be deemed to be at the limit of the jurisdiction of the
Township unless otherwise indicated. Where a district boundary is
shown as following a stream, the boundary shall be the center line
of the main channel of such stream, and the boundary shall be
deemed to be changed automatically if the main channel of the
stream should change or be changed by natural or artificial means
189. Editor's Note: The current Zoning Map is available from the Township offices.
§ 550-42 HAMILTON CODE § 550-43
1:900
§ 550-44. Parcels in Highway Commercial Zone; division of lots in
single ownership.
if such new center line is no farther from the old center line than
50 feet at any point.
(6) Vacating of streets. Whenever any street or public way is vacated
by official action, the zoning districts adjoining the side of such
public way shall be automatically extended to include the right-ofway
thus vacated, which shall be subject to all regulations of the
extended district or districts. In general, where the vacated rightof-
way is bounded on either side by more than one district, the
former center line of the right-of-way shall determine the extension
of each district.
(7) Map dimensions. In the absence of specific distances being
indicated on the Zoning Map or as specified in any of the above, the
distance shall be determined by using the map scale.
B. The exact location of any disputed zoning district boundary line shall be
determined by the administrative officer. This decision may be appealed
to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. No parcel shall be considered in the Highway Commercial Zone unless
said parcel abuts the following major arteries:
Cedar Lane
Chambers Street
East State Street Extension
Flock Road
George Dye Road
Hamilton Avenue
Hellyer Avenue
Kirby Avenue
Klockner Road
Mercerville-Quakerbridge Road
Nottingham Way
Route 33
Route 130
Sloan Road
South Broad Street
South Olden Avenue
White Horse Avenue
White Horse-Hamilton Square Road
§ 550-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-44
1:901
§ 550-45. through § 550-70. (Reserved)
White Horse-Mercerville Road
Young's Road
B. Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot other than by
following a stream or street, any use permitted in either district may be
extended not more than 20 feet into the adjacent district. A use
permitted in the zoning district so extended shall thereafter be a
permitted use in the extended area. A zoning district line, however,
shall be altered only once by utilizing this section of this chapter, after
which the lot use shall be governed by the regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located after the zoning district boundary line
adjustment.
§ 550-44 HAMILTON CODE § 550-45
1:902
ARTICLE III
District Regulations
§ 550-71. General principles.
No building shall hereafter be used, erected, altered, converted, added to,
moved or reduced, wholly or in part, nor shall any land be designated, used
or physically altered for any purpose or in any manner except in conformity
with this chapter. No land area shall be disturbed for development by
any person, partnership, corporation, municipal corporation or other public
agency within this Township unless a plan to provide for soil erosion and
sedimentation control has been approved by the United States Department
of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service and all other
development regulations in this chapter have been complied with. Proof of
such approval by the United States Natural Resources Conservation Service
must be presented to the Township Engineer and Township Planner prior to
commencing any such activity.
§ 550-72. C Conservation District. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord. No.
93-008; 12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-043]
In the C Conservation District, the following shall apply:
A. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings.
(1) Farms. See § 550-136, Right to farm, of this chapter.
(2) Detached dwelling units.
(3) Public playgrounds, conservation areas, parks, public purpose uses
and public or private recreation areas.
B. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Private residential tool or garden shed not to exceed 150 square
feet in area and 12 feet in height and located three feet from
property lines. [Amended 5-21-2019 by Ord. No. 19-027]
(2) Off-street parking and private garages.
(3) Fences and walls. (See § 550-114.)
(4) Residential agriculture.
(5) Keeping not more than two domestic animals over six months old
for individual domestic purposes or for cultivation of the soil,
except that this limitation shall not apply to an operating farm.
(6) Amateur radio antennas and antenna support structure not to
exceed 45 feet in height, unless the structure is retractable. The
height of a retractable antenna structure shall not exceed 45 feet
when the structure is not being used for the transmission and/or
reception of amateur radio signals and 65 feet when the structure
§ 550-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-72
1:903
is fully extended and in use for the transmission and/or reception
of amateur radio signals.
(7) Roof-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility.
C. Other uses permitted upon application to the municipal agency for a
conditional use permit:
(1) Public utility installations, subject to the standards and conditions
as set forth in Article IV of this chapter.
(2) Private golf course.
(3) Home occupations.
D. Maximum building height.
(1) No building shall exceed 35 feet in height and 2.5 stories.
(2) The height of accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet.
(3) The height of farm structures shall be subject to § 550-136 of this
chapter.
E. Area and yard requirements (detached dwellings).
C Conservation District
Minimum requirements
Principal building:
Lot area (acres) 5
Lot frontage (feet) 400
Lot width (feet) 400
Lot depth (feet) 500
Side yard, each (feet) 60
Front yard (feet) 125
Rear yard (feet) 125
Accessory building:
Distance to side line (feet) 50
Distance to rear line (feet) 50
Distance to other building (feet) 20
Maximum requirements
Building coverage (percent) 5%
F. Minimum off-street parking.
(1) Dwelling units shall each provide two spaces per dwelling unit.
(2) See § 550-119 for additional standards.
§ 550-72 HAMILTON CODE § 550-72
1:904
§ 550-73. RRC Rural Resource Conservation and R-25 Single-Family
Residential Districts. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008;
1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-009; 11-4-2005 by Ord. No. 05-025;
6-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-015; 12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-043;
6-20-2012 by Ord. No. 12-033]
G. Permitted signs. See § 550-124 of this chapter for standards.
H. Architectural design standards. For architectural design standards see
§ 550-112 of this chapter.
I. Source-separation or recycling plan. See § 550-134 of this chapter for
requirements.
J. Accessory buildings. See § 550-111 of this chapter for design standards.
A. Purpose.
(1) The RRC District responds to the Township's long-standing
planning objectives to conserve rural character, retain farmland for
agricultural use, and protect surface waters, woodlands and
environmentally sensitive lands. The RRC District's location beyond
the sewer service area has prevented its rapid suburbanization,
distinguishing it from the remainder of the Township and much of
the region.
(2) The RRC District is dominated by highly productive farmland soils,
that are part of a regional agricultural belt extending southward
into Burlington County and eastward into Ocean County. The State
Development and Redevelopment Plan designates nearly all of the
RRC District within the rural planning area (Planning Area 4),
where agricultural retention is the principal priority.
(3) The RRC District also includes extensive wetlands and wooded
stream corridors, including headwater tributaries to the
Crosswicks Creek and Delaware River that affect downstream
water quality. This diverse landscape provides a variety of habitat
types suitable for threatened and endangered species, including
grasslands, emergency wetlands, upland forest, forested wetlands
and bald eagle foraging habitat (along Crosswicks Creek) within
the RRC District.
(4) The combination of highly productive farmland and sensitive
natural resource land of the RRC District make this a unique
portion of the Township. The RRC District's zone standards are
designed to maximize the retention of farmland and other natural
resource lands and maintain the ecological integrity of the area as
permitted development proceeds.
B. In the RRC Rural Resource Conservation and R-25 Single-Family
Residential Districts, the following shall apply:
§ 550-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-73
1:905
(1) Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings.
(a) Farms. See § 550-136, Right to farm, of this chapter.
(b) Single-family detached dwellings.
(c) Public recreation and community center buildings and
grounds.
(d) Public libraries.
(e) Parks and playgrounds, but not including amusement parks or
similar uses which detract from the natural rural
characteristics of the district or are operated for profit.
(f) Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county or local
municipal government for public purposes.
(g) Harvesting of wild crops, such as berries and tree fruits.
(h) Repair and maintenance of farm buildings and machinery
located and used on the same premises, including required
workshops.
(i) In the RRC Zone only, there may be kept not more than one
saddle horse, one cow or two goats for each 1/2 acre in the
area of the parcel of land upon which the same are kept or not
more than 100 fowl for each 1/4 acre in the area of the parcel
of land upon which the same are kept. No saddle horse, cow,
goat or fowl shall be housed within a distance of 200 feet from
any property line.
(j) Conservation areas and public purpose areas.
(k) The keeping of not more than six domestic animals over six
months old for individual domestic purposes or for cultivation
of the soil, except that this limitation shall not apply to a farm
or residential agriculture. Any single-family detached
residence located in an RRC Zone and R-25 Zone may contain a
total of six dogs or cats altogether. [Amended 12-3-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-044]
(l) Development Option I Lot Size Averaging in the RRC Zone: See
Subsection B(13) of this section and § 550-135 of this chapter.
(m) Development Option II Open Lands Subdivision in the RRC
Zone: See Subsection B(14) of this section and § 550-135 of
this chapter.
(n) Development Option III Conservation Cluster Subdivision in
the RRC Zone: See Subsection B(15) of this section and
§ 550-135 of this chapter.
(2) Accessory uses permitted:
§ 550-73 HAMILTON CODE § 550-73
1:906
(a) Private garages.
(b) Swimming pools in accordance with § 550-126.
(c) Private greenhouses, garden houses, barns, silos, toolsheds,
tennis courts and outdoor fireplaces.
(d) Boats and camper to be parked or stored only and located in
rear yards only. Their dimensions shall not be counted in
determining total building coverage, and they shall not be used
for temporary or permanent living quarters while situated on a
lot. Boats and campers, when stored in rear yards, are to
observe side and rear yard requirements associated with
accessory buildings.
(e) Off-street parking.
(f) Fences and walls. (See § 550-114.)
(g) Private residential tool or garden sheds not to exceed 150
square feet in area and 12 feet in height and located not less
than three feet from property lines. [Amended 5-21-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-027]
(h) Signs.
(i) Temporary sales or construction trailer(s).
1. The trailer(s) shall be located on the same lot as the
principal permitted use and shall meet all setback
requirements for principal buildings in the zone.
2. The trailer(s) shall be shown on the site plan for the
principal permitted use and shall be reviewed by the
administrative officer on an individual case basis in
accordance with the performance standards in § 550-120.
3. The trailer(s) shall be permitted to remain only for the
period of construction, renting or sale of the permitted
use.
4. Only one sales trailer and two construction trailers are
permitted per project.
(j) Amateur radio antenna support structure not to exceed 45 feet
in height, unless the structure is retractable. The height of a
retractable antenna structure shall not exceed 45 feet when
the structure is not being used for the transmission and/or
reception of amateur radio signals and 65 feet when the
structure is fully extended and in use for the transmission and/
or reception of amateur radio signals. Satellite dish antennas
shall be installed in accordance with the standards specified in
§ 550-137.
§ 550-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-73
1:907
(k) Parking of one commercial vehicle as outlined in § 550-312H of
this chapter.
(l) Dog runs. Dog runs are permitted as accessory uses to
residential properties subject to standards specified in
§ 550-312S of this chapter.
(m) Roof-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility.
(n) Private residential garages shall not exceed 25 feet wide by 25
feet deep. The finishing of a garage with metal panels or siding
is prohibited. [Added 6-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-020]
(3) Other uses permitted upon application to the municipal agency for
a conditional use permit:
(a) Golf courses, excluding a golf driving range or miniature golf
course.
(b) Camps.
(c) Child care and infant care centers.
(d) Clubhouse.
(e) Churches and other places of worship, Sunday school
buildings, rectories and parish houses.
(f) Public and parochial schools and colleges and private schools
and colleges for academic instruction.
(g) Public utility installations.
(h) Home occupations.
(4) Maximum building height.
(a) No building shall exceed 35 feet in height and 2.5 stories.
(b) The height of accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet. This
restriction shall not apply to barns located on active farms.
(c) The height of farm structures shall be subject to § 550-136 of
this chapter.
(5) Minimum off-street parking. Each individual use shall provide
parking spaces according to the following minimum provisions.
Where a permitted use of land includes different specific activities
with different specific parking requirements, the total number of
required parking spaces shall be obtained by individually
computing the parking requirements for each different activity and
adding the resulting numbers together.
(a) Dwelling units shall each provide two spaces per dwelling unit,
which shall not encroach upon the right-of-way.
§ 550-73 HAMILTON CODE § 550-73
1:908
(b) See § 550-119 for additional standards.
(6) Permitted signs. See § 550-124 of this chapter for standards.
(7) Area and yard requirements (detached dwellings).
District
RRC Development
Options I, II and
III* R-25
Minimum
requirements
Principal building:
Lot area (square
feet)
40,000 25,000
Lot frontage (feet) 150 125
Lot width (feet) 150 125
Lot depth (feet) 200 125
Side yard (feet) 30 20
Front yard (feet) 50 50
Rear yard (feet) 50 50
Accessory building:
Distance to side line
(feet)
20 20
Distance to rear line
(feet)
20 25
Distance to other
building (feet)
20 25
Maximum
requirements
Building coverage
(percent)
12% 15%
RRC density (units/net
developable acre)
0.167 N/A
Maximum Impervious
Surface
(percent)
Unconstrained Land Area
(acres)
25% Less than 1
20% 1 to less than 2
15% 2 to less than 5
12% 5 to less than 10
§ 550-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-73
1:909
Maximum Impervious
Surface
(percent)
Unconstrained Land Area
(acres)
10% > 10
* Where properties abut limited access, major arterial, arterial
and major collector roadways, an additional 40 feet shall be
added to the minimum front setback or rear yard setback
requirement. In the case of lots whose rear yard fronts on the
above roadways, a landscaped berm of a minimum height of
four feet is required and an easement shall be granted to the
Township. The easement shall include a covenant that the owner
shall be responsible for the maintenance of the easement area.
(8) For architectural design standards see § 550-112 of this chapter.
(9) Landscaping and preservation of natural features. See §§ 550-117,
550-119 and 550-130 of this chapter for design standards.
(10) Fences, walls and sight triangles. See § 550-114 for details.
(11) Source-separation or recycling plan. See § 550-134 of this chapter
for requirements.
(12) Accessory buildings. See § 550-111 of this chapter for design
standards.
(13) Requirements for Development Option I: Lot Size Averaging in the
RRC Zone.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this development option is to provide
flexibility in the arrangement of residential development that
will allow for the preservation of the rural character,
productive farmland soils, woodlands and other critical habitat
areas found throughout the eastern end of the Township. It is
intended that this subsection will encourage development that
minimizes negative environmental impacts while providing
creative flexibility for residential and agricultural
development. Unless otherwise stated, the standards stated
below shall supersede other standards stated in this section.
(b) Zoning requirements.
1. This lot-size-averaging subdivision option is available for
parcels containing a minimum of 12 contiguous acres.
Development parcels may be separated by existing
roadways; however, a minimum of 12 acres shall be
provided on each side of the road.
§ 550-73 HAMILTON CODE § 550-73
1:910
2. Permitted uses: Single-family detached houses,
agricultural uses and accessory uses as stated in this
section.
3. RRC density. The maximum permitted RRC density shall be
0.167 units per net developable acre. In order to calculate
the maximum permissible number of lots, the total net
developable acreage shall be multiplied by 0.167.
4. Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet in the RRC Zone. All
lots are subject to § 550-135 of this chapter as it relates to
septic system design.
5. A lot-averaging subdivision may be permitted when the
applicant proposes a distribution of lot areas within the
subdivision that results in at least 75% of the lots having a
minimum lot area between 40,000 square feet and 80,000
square feet, except in the case of a two-lot subdivision, in
which case one of the two lots shall be between 40,000
square feet and 80,000 square feet.
6. The site design of lot-averaging subdivisions should shift
the more intensive development toward those lands that
can best support the installation of the dwelling, well,
septic system and associated site improvements. Similarly,
lot averaging should seek to preserve those areas which
exhibit sensitive environmental features (i.e., water
bodies, floodplains, steep slopes, shallow bedrock, aquifer
recharge areas, seasonal high-water table, etc.) or which
contain active or prime agricultural lands or forested
areas.
7. On tracts in areas which are predominantly active
agricultural lands or consist of prime agricultural soils or
soils of statewide importance, the preservation of
agricultural lands and soils shall take precedence. On
tracts in areas which are predominantly forested areas,
the preservation of forested areas shall take precedence.
8. All lots created under this subdivision option shall be deedrestricted
against further subdivision for the purpose of
creating an additional lot or lots.
(c) Details required for preliminary subdivision plats. Application
submissions shall comply with § 550-225 of this chapter. The
applicant is advised to submit a concept plan of the lotaveraging
subdivision for review and comment in accordance
with the chapter.
(d) Design standards. All lot-size-averaging subdivisions shall be
governed by the following design standards:
§ 550-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-73
1:911
1. Standards for locating new residential development.
a. The design of the development utilizing this option
shall foster the following objectives: retention of large
contiguous farmland areas; retention of large
contiguous forested areas; stream corridor and
wetlands preservation; aquifer recharge protection;
steep slope protection; overall site design; reduction
of impervious coverage; traffic circulation; and
sensitivity to the site's natural features, topography
and relationship to open lands on neighboring parcels.
b. In forested areas, the design of the development shall
include a two-hundred-foot buffer along existing
roads, which shall either maintain existing woodlands
or establish new forested areas for those areas that
are disturbed during site development or are
currently cleared. The intent of this provision is to
maintain the scenic roadside views in the Township.
c. Natural features, including woodlands, natural
terrain, open waters and scenic vistas, shall be
preserved wherever possible in designing any
development containing such features, and
development should be designed to preserve views of
cultural/historic landmarks.
2. Design standards for public roads.
a. Right-of-way width and cartway width for existing and
proposed roadways on the Hamilton Township Master
Plan shall comply with design standards outlined in
§ 550-125 of this chapter.
b. Right-of-way width and cartway width for interior
public streets shall comply with design standards for
local rural roads in § 550-125 of this chapter.
c. Minimum distance between access points on interior
and noninterior public roads: 200 feet. Access points
shall include individual and common driveways and
on-site public roadways.
d. Sidewalks shall not be required, however, a bike path
shall be required on noninterior public streets.
e. Curbing. Curbing shall only be used where necessary
to provide for stormwater management.
f. Roadways shall follow existing contours to minimize
the extent of cuts and fills. Landscape/design features
§ 550-73 HAMILTON CODE § 550-73
1:912
such as hedge rows, flowering shrubs, stone rows, and
post-and-board fences are encouraged.
3. Landscaping and lawns.
a. All basins shall require landscaping plans. Basin
designs and landscape plans shall be designed so that
they blend naturally into the landscape.
b. Interior roadways shall have deciduous trees planted
30 feet on center. Trees shall be a minimum of 2 1/2
inches in caliper at the time of planting.
4. Fencing and walls.
a. Perimeter fencing is permitted if it is post-and-rail or
post-and-board type.
b. Privacy fencing shall be kept to a minimum and
restricted to an area within the boundaries designated
for permitted building envelopes.
c. Walls shall be permitted.
5. Signage. As per § 550-124 of this chapter.
6. Accessory buildings and structures.
a. Accessory buildings shall be located within the
building envelope areas.
b. Accessory structures shall be located within the
building envelope area unless otherwise stated in this
chapter.
c. Septics, wells and driveways may be located outside
building envelopes.
7. Existing structures.
a. Existing structures shall be analyzed for their historic
significance and salvageability.
b. Those structures deemed significant shall be saved for
an adaptive use consistent with permitted uses in the
zone.
c. Existing structures may remain outside of a lot's
building envelope.
(e) Concept plan review. An applicant for a lot-size-averaging
subdivision shall submit a concept plan of the subdivision to
the administrative officer for review and comment.
§ 550-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-73
1:913
1. The developer shall not be required to submit any
application fees for informal concept plan review;
however, no professional review(s) shall be undertaken
unless the developer agrees to pay for said review(s) and
files the escrow fees specified for concept plan review in
§ 550-254.
a. The developer shall not be bound by any plan for
which concept review is requested, and the approving
authority shall not be bound by any such review.
b. A developer desiring to have a concept plan reviewed
by the approving authority shall so notify the
administrative officer and schedule a meeting. A plan
shall be submitted at least three weeks prior to a
scheduled meeting with the administrative officer at
which the concept review is requested.
2. Concept plan required details. The following information
shall be provided for concept plan review:
a. A plan, at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100
feet, clearly and legibly drawn.
b. A key map, at a scale of not less than one inch equals
800 feet, showing the entire development and its
relation to surrounding areas.
c. Existing structures and uses.
d. Existing and proposed street and lot layout in
conformance with chapter bulk standards, showing
that portion proposed for development in relation to
the entire tract.
e. Area of original tract.
f. Zoning district and North arrow.
g. Block and lot number for the tract.
h. Proposed method of water supply and sewage
treatment.
i. Proposed access points and roadways.
j. Existing topography and contours based on United
States Geological Survey (USGS) data, unless more
detailed data is available, illustrating areas with
slopes of 15% or greater.
k. Natural resources and features, such as forested
areas, wetlands, major rock outcroppings, lakes,
§ 550-73 HAMILTON CODE § 550-73
1:914
ponds, streams, drainage ditches, impoundments and
watercourses.
l. Soil mapping and interpretations based on the United
States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Soil Survey
for Mercer County.
m. Location of flood hazard areas and floodways.
n. Existing easements, deed restrictions and covenants.
o. A written summary of how the concept plan provides
for the arrangement of residential development that
will allow for the preservation of the rural character,
productive farmland soils, woodlands and other
critical habitat areas and minimize negative
environmental impacts.
p. Certification that the applicant is the owner of the
land or the owner's duly authorized agent or that the
owner has given his consent under an option
agreement or a contract to purchase.
(14) Requirements for Development Option II Open Lands Subdivision
in the RRC Zone.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this development option is to promote
the retention of large contiguous tracts of farmland, woodlands
and other natural resource features by providing flexibility in
the arrangement of residential development. It is intended that
the density incentive provided by this development option will
aid the preservation of the rural character, productive
farmland soils, woodlands and other critical habitat areas
found throughout the eastern end of the Township and
minimize negative environmental impacts while providing
creative flexibility for residential and agricultural
development. Unless otherwise stated, the standards stated
below shall supersede other standards stated in this section.
(b) Zoning requirements.
1. This open lands subdivision option is available for parcels
containing a minimum of 12 contiguous acres.
Development parcels may be separated by existing
roadway; however, a minimum of 12 acres shall be
provided on each side of the road.
2. Permitted uses. Single-family detached houses,
agricultural uses and accessory uses as stated in this
section.
3. RRC density. The maximum permitted RRC density shall be
0.167 units per net developable acre. In order to calculate
§ 550-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-73
1:915
the maximum permissible number of lots, the net
developable tract acreage shall be multiplied by 0.167.
4. Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet in the RRC Zone. All
lots are subject to § 550-135 of this chapter as it relates to
septic system design.
5. The site design of open lands subdivisions should shift the
more intensive development toward those lands that can
best support the installation of the dwelling, well, septic
system and associated site improvements. Open lands
subdivisions should seek to preserve those areas which
exhibit sensitive environmental features (i.e., water
bodies, floodplains, steep slopes, shallow bedrock, aquifer
recharge areas, seasonal high-water table, etc.) or which
contain active or prime agricultural lands or forested
areas.
6. At least 75% of a tract proposed for open lands subdivision
in the RRC District shall be designated as "open lands" and
shall, as a condition of approval of the development, be
deed-restricted for agricultural or conservation use. Lots
qualifying as open lands shall be permitted a primary
residence and other accessory buildings and uses as
provided in this chapter.
7. At least 60% of designated open lands shall be some
combination of unconstrained land area, or prime soils or
soils of statewide importance, or forested area. On tracts
in areas which are predominantly active agricultural lands
or consist of prime agricultural soils or soils of statewide
importance, the preservation of agricultural lands and
soils shall take precedence. On tracts in areas which are
predominantly forested areas, the preservation of forested
areas shall take precedence.
8. For tracts of 100 acres or less, the open lands shall be
contained in one deed-restricted contiguous parcel; for
tracts greater than 100 acres, the open lands may be
composed of noncontiguous parcels, provided that each
open lands area shall contain at least 50 contiguous acres.
When noncontiguous open lands parcels of at least 50
acres are provided, each parcel may have a residence,
provided that the total permitted density is not exceeded.
9. All lots created under this subdivision option shall be deedrestricted
against further subdivision for the purpose of
creating an additional lot or lots.
(c) Details required for preliminary subdivision plats. Application
submissions shall comply with § 550-225 of this chapter.
§ 550-73 HAMILTON CODE § 550-73
1:916
(d) Design standards. Open lands subdivisions shall be governed
by the design standards contained in Subsection B(13)(d).
(e) Concept plan review. An applicant for open lands subdivision
shall submit a concept plan of the subdivision to the Planning
Board for review and comment in accordance with Subsection
B(13)(e) of this chapter.
(15) Requirements for Development Option III Conservation
Subdivision in the RRC Zone.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this development option is to promote
the permanent preservation of large contiguous tracts of
farmland, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, stream corridors
and other natural resource features by providing flexibility in
the arrangement of residential development around preserved
open space. It is intended that this development option will aid
the preservation of the rural character, productive farmland
soils, woodlands and other critical habitat areas found
throughout the eastern portion of the Township and minimize
negative environmental impacts while providing reactive
flexibility for residential and agricultural development. Unless
otherwise stated, the standards stated below shall supersede
other standards stated in this section.
(b) Zoning requirements.
1. This conservation cluster subdivision option is available
for tracts or parcels containing a minimum of 25
contiguous acres, and development parcels may be
separated by existing roadways.
2. Permitted uses: single-family houses, agricultural uses and
accessory uses as stated in this section.
3. RRC density. The maximum RRC density shall be 0.167
units per net developable acre, plus one bonus dwelling
unit in return for permanent open space dedication. In
order to calculate the maximum permissible number of
lots, the net developable acreage shall be multiplied by
0.167, to which one additional unit shall be added.
4. Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet in the RRC District.
All lots are subject to § 550-135 of this chapter as it relates
to septic system design.
5. The site design of conservation cluster subdivisions should
locate home sites on lands that can best support the
installation of the dwelling, well, septic system and
associated site improvements, and preserve those areas
which exhibit sensitive environmental features (i.e., water
bodies, floodplains, steep slopes, shallow bedrock, aquifer
§ 550-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-73
1:917
recharge areas, seasonal high-water table, etc.) or which
contain active or prime agricultural lands or forested
areas.
6. At least 65% of a tract proposed for conservation cluster
subdivision in the RRC District shall be designated as open
space and shall, as a condition of approval of the
development, be deed-restricted exclusively for
recreational and/or agricultural and/or conservation use or
conveyed to the Township as open space.
7. All lots created under this subdivision option shall be deedrestricted
against further subdivision for the purpose of
creating an additional lot or lots.
8. When a development plan incorporates open space, the
applicant may, if both the applicant and the Township
agree, deed the open space to the Township. If the
development plan incorporates multiple ownership such as
a cooperative or condominium, any open space not deeded
to the Township shall be owned and maintained by an
association.
9. Passive open space should be left in its natural state,
augmented for erosion control and aesthetic value by
landscaping. Particular effort should be made to reduce
future maintenance requirements. Improvements should
be limited to pedestrian and bicycle circulation, hiking
trails, picnic areas and similar uses.
10. Area reserved as permanent open space shall have a
minimum contiguous area of not less than five acres, and
no portion thereof shall be less than 50 feet in width. At
least 50% of the open space shall be uplands. The open
space area(s) shall be contiguous to open space on
adjoining parcels, where applicable, and shall include
areas identified in the Township's Open Space and
Recreation Plan, including greenways.
11. The open space shall be reserved in perpetuity either by
dedication for public use or for use by the residents of the
development by private covenant or deed restriction for
one of the following purposes:
a. Undeveloped open space.
b. Public or private recreational facilities.
c. Conservation of environmentally sensitive features,
including, but not limited to, steep slopes, wetlands,
aquifer recharge area, floodplains and wooded areas.
§ 550-73 HAMILTON CODE § 550-73
1:918
§ 550-74. R-15, R-10, R-7 and R-5 Single-Family Residential
Districts. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008; 4-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-014; 12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-043]
In the R-15 Single-Family Residential, R-10 Single-Family Residential, R-7
Single-Family Residential and R-5 Single-Family Residential Districts the
following shall apply:
d. Agricultural use.
12. Provision shall be made to ensure suitable maintenance of
any area to be reserved by private covenant or deed
restriction by the establishment of a property owners'
association or other appropriate organization.
(c) Details required for preliminary plats. Application submissions
shall comply with § 550-225 of this chapter.
(d) Design standards. Conservation cluster subdivisions shall be
governed by the design standards contained in Subsection
B(13)(d).
(e) Concept plan review. An applicant for conservation cluster
subdivision shall submit a concept plan of the subdivision to
the Planning Board for review and comment in accordance
with Subsection B(13)(e) of this section.
A. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings.
(1) Detached single-family dwelling units.
(2) Public playgrounds, conservation areas and public purpose uses.
(3) Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
(4) Public libraries.
(5) Parks and playgrounds, but not including amusement parks or
similar uses which detract from the natural rural characteristics of
the district or are operated for profit.
(6) Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county or local
municipal government.
(7) Horticultural use, including nursery or greenhouse, provided that
no greenhouse heating plant shall be permitted within 100 feet of
any lot line.
(8) Harvesting of wild crops, such as berries and tree fruits.
(9) Repair and maintenance of farm buildings and machinery located
and used on the same premises, including required workshops.
(10) Farms. See § 550-136, Right to farm, of this chapter.
§ 550-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-74
1:919
Note: Please note that items in Subsection A(7) through (9) are not
permitted in the R-10 and R-7 Zones.
B. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Private residential pools. (See Article IV for standards.)
(2) Private residential tool or garden sheds not to exceed 150 square
feet in area and 12 feet in height and located three feet from
property lines. [Amended 5-21-2019 by Ord. No. 19-027]
(3) Boats on trailer and campers, to be parked or stored only and
located in rear yards only. Their dimensions shall not be counted in
determining total building coverage, and they shall not be used for
temporary or permanent living quarters while situated on a lot.
Boats and campers, when stored in rear yards, are to observe side
and rear yard requirements associated with accessory buildings.
(4) Off-street parking and private garages.
(5) Fences and walls. (See § 550-114.)
(6) Signs.
(7) Residential agriculture (R-15 Zone only).
(8) Private greenhouses, garden houses, tennis courts and outdoor
fireplaces.
(9) Barns and silos (R-15 Zone only).
(10)Keeping of not more than four dogs or four cats over six months old
for individual domestic purposes in any single-family detached
residence. Any single-family detached residence may contain only a
total of four dogs or cats altogether, except for homes in the R-5
Residential District where all residences may contain only a total of
two dogs or cats altogether, except that a litter or portion thereof
may be kept for a period of six months. [Amended 12-3-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-044]
(a) The above limitation shall not apply to an operating farm nor to
residents of a single-family detached dwelling who are
members of a bona fide active 501(c)(3) nonprofit animal
rescue organization that fosters dogs and/or cats on a
temporary basis. However, there shall be a limit of six fostered
dogs or cats over the age of six months, or a combination of six
altogether, except that a litter or portion thereof may be kept
for a period of no more than six months. The number of foster
dogs and/or cats is over and above the allowable limit for
individual domestic purposes.
(11) Temporary sales or construction trailer(s).
§ 550-74 HAMILTON CODE § 550-74
1:920
(a) The trailer(s) shall be located on the same lot as the principal
permitted use and shall meet all setback requirements for
principal buildings in the zone.
(b) The trailer(s) shall be shown on the site plan for the principal
permitted use and shall be reviewed by the administrative
officer on an individual case basis in accordance with the
performance standards in § 550-120.
(c) The trailer(s) shall be permitted to remain only for the period
of construction, renting or sale of the permitted use.
(d) Only one sales trailer and two construction trailers are
permitted per project.
(12) Amateur radio antennas and antenna support structure not to
exceed 45 feet in height, unless the structure is retractable. The
height of a retractable antenna structure shall not exceed 45 feet
when the structure is not being used for the transmission and/or
reception of amateur radio signals and 65 feet when the structure
is fully extended and in use for the transmission and/or reception of
amateur radio signals. Satellite dish antennas shall be installed in
accordance with the standards specified in § 550-137
(13) Parking of one commercial vehicle as outlined in § 550-312H of this
chapter.
(14) Dog runs. Dog runs are permitted as accessory uses to residential
properties, subject to standards specified in § 550-312S of this
chapter.
(15) Roof-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility.
(16) Private residential garages shall not exceed 25 feet wide by 25 feet
deep. The finishing of a garage with metal panels or siding is
prohibited. [Added 6-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-020]
C. Other uses permitted upon application to the municipal agency for a
conditional use permit:
(1) Golf course, excluding a golf driving range or miniature golf
course, provided that the chief activity for a club or lodge shall not
be one which is customarily carried on as a business, and provided
that the buildings and services shall be for the use of members and
their guests only.
(2) Hospitals, medical institutions, philanthropic or eleemosynary
uses, provided that plans for such facilities have met all
requirements of state and Township health regulations, but not
including correctional institutions or hospitals exclusively for the
isolation of contagious diseases or for the insane.
(3) Nursing homes.
§ 550-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-74
1:921
(4) Churches and other places of worship, Sunday school buildings,
rectories and parish houses.
(5) Public and parochial schools and colleges, and private schools and
colleges for academic instruction.
(6) Public utility installations.
(7) Senior citizen housing subsidized by the federal and/or state
government shall be permitted as a conditional use in the R-15 and
R-10 Zones only.
(8) The conversion of single-family and/or multifamily dwellings into
offices and/or the construction of new office buildings only along
highways specified in § 550-161I of this chapter.
(9) Home occupations.
(10) Funeral homes and mortuaries, subject to the same conditions as
those governing the conversion of single-family dwellings into
offices and/or the construction of new office buildings. (See
§ 550-161I.)
D. Maximum building height.
(1) No building shall exceed 35 feet in height and 2.5 stories.
(2) The height of accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet.
E. Area and yard requirements (detached dwellings).
District
R-15 R-10 R-7 R-5
Minimum requirements
Principal building:
Lot area (square feet) 15,000 10,000 7,000 5,000
Lot frontage (feet) 100 80 70 50
Lot width (feet) 100 80 70 50
Lot depth (feet) 120 100 90 90
Side yard, each (feet) 15 10 10 5
Front yard (feet) 40 30 25 20
Rear yard (feet) 40 30 25 25
Accessory building:
Distance to side line
(feet)
15 10 6 5
Distance to rear line
(feet)
20 10 6 5
§ 550-74 HAMILTON CODE § 550-74
1:922
§ 550-75. A/T Multiple-Family Residential District. [Amended
1-20-1993, by Ord. No. 93-008; 1-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-008;
12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-043]
In the A/T Multiple-Family Residential District, the following shall apply:
District
R-15 R-10 R-7 R-5
Distance to other
building (feet)
20 20 10 10
Maximum requirements
Building coverage
(percent)
20% 20% 25% 30%
F. Minimum off-street parking. Each individual use shall provide parking
spaces according to the following minimum provisions. Where a
permitted use of land includes different specific activities with different
specific parking requirements, the total number of required parking
spaces shall be obtained by individually computing the parking
requirements for each different activity and adding the resulting
numbers together.
(1) Dwelling units shall each provide two spaces per dwelling unit.
(2) See § 550-119 for additional standards.
G. Permitted signs. See § 550-124 of this chapter for standards.
H. Architectural design standards. For architectural design standards see
§ 550-112 of this chapter.
I. Landscaping and preservation of natural features. See §§ 550-117,
550-119 and 550-130 of this chapter for design standards.
J. Fences, walls and sight triangles. See § 550-114 for details.
K. Source-separation or recycling plan. See § 550-134 of this chapter for
requirements.
L. Accessory buildings. See § 550-111 of this chapter for design standards.
A. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings.
(1) Garden apartments. (See § 550-162 for additional standards.)
(2) Townhouses. (See § 550-163 for additional standards.)
(3) Any development incorporating both garden apartments and
townhouses must allow that no more than 65% of all dwelling units
are either garden apartments or townhouses.
B. Accessory uses permitted:
§ 550-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-75
1:923
(1) Private residential swimming pools. (See § 550-126 for standards.)
(2) Off-street parking and private garages.
(3) Fences and walls. (See § 550-114.)
(4) Signs.
(5) One office, to be located within an apartment or townhouse unit, to
provide facilities for management of an apartment or townhouse
complex.
(6) Temporary sales or construction trailers.
(a) The trailer shall be located on the same lot as the principal
permitted use and shall meet all setback requirements for
principal buildings in the zone.
(b) The trailer(s) shall be shown on the site plan for the principal
permitted use and shall be reviewed by the administrative
officer on an individual case basis in accordance with the
performance standards in § 550-120.
(c) The trailer(s) shall be permitted to remain only for the period
of construction, renting or sale of the permitted use.
(d) Only one sales trailer and two construction trailers are
permitted per project.
(7) Amateur radio antennas and antenna support structure not to
exceed 45 feet in height, unless the structure is retractable. The
height of a retractable antenna structure shall not exceed 45 feet
when the structure is not being used for the transmission and/or
reception of amateur radio signals and 65 feet when the structure
is fully extended and in use for the transmission and/or reception of
amateur radio signals.
(8) Keeping of not more than two domestic animals over six months old
for individual domestic purposes.
(9) Roof-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility.
C. Other uses permitted upon application to the municipal agency for a
conditional use permit:
(1) Public utility installations.
(2) Churches and other places of worship, Sunday school buildings,
rectories and parish houses.
(3) Senior citizen housing subsidized by the federal or state
government.
D. Maximum building height.
§ 550-75 HAMILTON CODE § 550-75
1:924
(1) No building shall exceed 35 feet in height and 2.5 stories.
(2) The height of accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet.
E. Area and yard requirements.
(1) Minimum tract size and frontage. The minimum tract size shall be
10 acres. A minimum of 300 feet of frontage on one arterial or
collector street shall be required. All plans shall delineate the
boundaries of the portion(s) of the tract devoted to each use.
(2) Recreation areas and facilities. Land area equal to at least 560
square feet for each dwelling shall be specified on the site plan and
improved by the developer as active recreation areas for use by the
residents of the development. Such areas shall be an integral part
of the development, and each shall be at least 1/2 acre and at least
100 feet wide and have a grade of less than 5%. Recreational
facilities shall include residential swimming pool(s) and regulation
doubles tennis court(s), tot-lots and playgrounds. The municipal
agency may permit other recreational facilities to be constructed in
lieu of and as alternative equivalents of the aforesaid pool and
tennis facilities, provided that they would seem to be appropriate
substitutes thereof.
(3) Additional standards. For additional standards for townhouse and/
or apartment developments see §§ 550-163 and 550-164 of this
chapter.
(4) Front yard. The minimum front yard along a primary or secondary
road on which the lot abuts shall be 50 feet. The minimum front
yard along all other streets, whether public or private, shall be 30
feet.
(5) Side yard. The minimum width of a side yard shall not be less than
25 feet unless the side yard abuts a single-family residential use or
district line. In such cases the side yard requirement shall be
increased to 75 feet and shall include a landscaped buffer area of at
least 25 feet in width, in accordance with buffer standards in this
chapter.
(6) Rear yard. The minimum width of a rear yard shall not be less than
50 feet unless the rear yard abuts a single-family residential use or
district line. In such cases the rear yard requirement shall be
increased to 75 feet and shall include a landscaped buffer area of at
least 25 feet in width in accordance with buffer standards in this
chapter.
(7) Minimum yard areas. Minimum yard areas shall be measured
horizontally in feet and shall be measured away from the front, side
and rear of each building. The total minimum distance between
buildings shall be the sum of two abutting yard areas. No building,
as measured radially from any corners, shall be closer to any other
§ 550-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-75
1:925
building corner than the combined distances of the side yard
requirements for each building. The combined distance of two
side yards shall exclude any driveway or vehicular access, such
driveway or vehicular access width being in addition to the
combined side yard width.
(8) Maximum lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage shall be 20%.
(9) Streets. The minimum right-of-way for any street, road or
thoroughfare, whether public or private, shall be 56 feet.
(10) Garages.
(a) If garages are provided, they shall have a floor area of not less
than 240 square feet.
(b) No garage or other accessory building shall be placed closer to
a side or rear property line than 50 feet when abutting a
residential district or another apartment project; in all other
cases, this distance may be reduced to 25 feet.
(c) Each group of attached garages shall have a joint capacity of
not more than 10 vehicles arranged in a row, and there shall be
a minimum distance of 12 feet between such structures.
(d) Garages and other accessory buildings shall be no more than
one story in height. The architectural design and materials
used in the construction thereof shall conform to the design
and building materials used in the construction of the
apartment buildings. No part of any garage or other accessory
building shall be used for living purposes.
F. Density. No development shall exceed 10 dwelling units per acre.
G. Minimum off-street parking.
(1) Two spaces for each apartment or townhouse dwelling unit.
(2) See § 550-119 for additional standards.
H. Permitted signs. See § 550-124 of this chapter for standards.
I. Landscaping and preservation of natural features. See §§ 550-117,
550-119 and 550-130 of this chapter for design standards.
J. Architectural design standards. For architectural design standards see
§ 550-112 of this chapter.
K. Fences, walls and sight triangles. See § 550-114 for details.
L. Source-separation or recycling plan. See § 550-134 of this chapter for
requirements.
M. Accessory buildings. See § 550-111 of this chapter for design standards.
§ 550-75 HAMILTON CODE § 550-76
1:926
§ 550-76. NC Neighborhood Commercial District. [Amended
1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008; 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-012;
12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 02-037; 12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-043]
In the NC Neighborhood Commercial District, the following shall apply:
A. Purpose. A Neighborhood Commercial Zone is established as a business
district adjacent to residence districts in which such uses are permitted
as are normally required for the daily local business and/or convenience
needs of the residents of the immediately surrounding residential
areas.
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings. [Note:
Convenience stores are permitted in the HC Highway Commercial and
GC General Commercial Zones only; see § 550-78B(55).]
(1) Confectionery, luncheonettes and delicatessens.
(2) Stationery and tobacco.
(3) Hardware, paints and wallpaper.
(4) Bakery.
(5) Periodicals and newspapers.
(6) Barber and beauty shops.
(7) Tailoring and dressmaking.
(8) Bakery goods store.
(9) Book or gift store.
(10) Candy store and/or fountain.
(11) Clothes cleaning store with two or less trucks associated with it.
(12) Clothing (new) and dry goods store.
(13) Drugstore.
(14) Package liquor store.
(15) Ice cream store.
(16) Interior decorating business.
(17) Jewelry store.
(18) Self-cleaning laundry.
(19) Notion and variety store.
(20) Repair or service shops for household or personal goods.
(21) Shoe repair shop.
§ 550-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-76
1:927
(22) Prepared foods: take-out and delivery only, with no seating.
(23) Combinations of two or more of the above-permitted uses in one
principal building.
(24) Photography studio, photo supplies, artist's studio.
(25) Antique store.
(26) Art gallery.
(27) Sporting goods store.
(28) All existing residences as of the date of the adoption of this chapter.
For purposes of evaluating proposed additions or expansions, bulk
and yard requirements of those residential zone districts which
most closely resemble the size of the lot in question will be utilized.
(29) Child and infant care centers. See § 550-138 for design standards.
(30) Video store.
(31) Adult day care. [Added 9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-063]
C. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Fences and walls. (See § 550-114.)
(3) Signs.
(4) Garages, storage buildings and toolsheds.
(5) Amateur radio antennas and antenna support structure not to
exceed 45 feet in height, unless the structure is retractable. The
height of a retractable antenna structure shall not exceed 45 feet
when the structure is not being used for the transmission and/or
reception of amateur radio signals and 65 feet when the structure
is fully extended and in use for the transmission and/or reception of
amateur radio signals. Satellite dish antennas shall be installed in
accordance with the standards specified in § 550-137.
(6) Roof-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility.
D. Other uses permitted upon application to the municipal agency for a
conditional use permit:
(1) Public utility installations.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Churches and other places of worship, Sunday school buildings,
rectories and parish houses.
E. Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
§ 550-76 HAMILTON CODE § 550-76
1:928
F. Area and yard requirements.
NC Neighborhood Commercial District
Minimum requirements
Principal building:
Lot area (square feet) 5,000
Lot frontage (feet) 50
Lot width (feet) 50
Lot depth (feet) 75
Side yard, each (feet) 5
Front yard (feet) 25
Rear yard (feet) 10
Accessory building:
Distance to side line (feet) 5
Maximum requirements
Distance to rear line (feet) 10
Distance to other building (feet) 10
Floor area ratio 0.15
Maximum impervious surface
coverage (percent)
60%
G. General requirements.
(1) Any principal building may contain more than one use and/or
organization, provided that the total building coverage of the
combined activities does not exceed the maximum building
coverage specified for the district and, further, that each activity
occupies a minimum gross floor area of 750 square feet.
(2) At least the first 10 feet adjacent to any street line and five feet
adjacent to any lot line shall not be used for parking and shall be
planted and maintained in lawn area or ground cover or landscaped
with evergreen shrubbery.
(3) A minimum buffer area of 10 feet in width shall be provided along
any common property line with a residential district. [See
§§ 550-119G(7) and 550-130B.]
(4) For additional general requirements see § 550-84, General
requirements in nonresidential districts.
H. Minimum off-street loading. See § 550-119E, F, G and H of this chapter
for standards.
I. Minimum off-street parking. See § 550-119 of this chapter for
standards.
§ 550-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-76
1:929
§ 550-77. CC Community Commercial District. [Amended 1-20-1993
by Ord. No. 93-008; 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-012; 12-4-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-037; 12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-043]
In a CC Community Commercial District, the following shall apply:
J. Permitted signs. See § 550-124 of this chapter for standards.
K. Development credit adjustments for environmentally constrained areas.
See § 550-84K of this chapter for standards.
L. Architectural design standards. For architectural design standards, see
§ 550-112 of this chapter.
M. Landscaping and preservation of natural features. See §§ 550-117,
550-119 and 550-130 of this chapter for design standards.
N. Fences, walls and sight triangles. See § 550-114 for details.
O. Source-separation or recycling plan. See § 550-134 of this chapter for
requirements.
P. Accessory buildings. See § 550-111 of this chapter for design standards.
A. Purpose. The CC areas, as the name implies, will serve a larger
residential population. As such, the areas are almost entirely developed
and are located to take advantage of relatively good accessibility from
the developed concentrations within the Township.
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings. [Note:
Convenience stores are permitted in the HC Highway Commercial and
GC General Commercial Zones only; see § 550-78B(55).]
(1) All uses permitted in the NC Neighborhood Commercial Zone,
subject to the requirements of the CC Community Commercial
Zone.
(2) Restaurants, bars and taverns.
(3) Banks, including drive-in facilities.
(4) Dancing studio.
(5) Florist.
(6) Household appliance store.
(7) Stereo, radio, television, computer and telecommunications stores.
(8) Offices, business and professional.
(9) Funeral homes and mortuaries.
(10) Auto parts store.
§ 550-76 HAMILTON CODE § 550-77
1:930
(11) Combination of two or more permitted uses in one principal
building.
(12) All existing residences as of the date of the adoption of this chapter.
For purposes of evaluating proposed additions or expansions, bulk
and yard requirements of those residential zone districts which
most closely resemble the size of the lot in question will be utilized.
(13) Music conservatories or music instructions.
(14) Bicycle sales, rental or repair.
(15) Parcel package shipping store or mailing center.
C. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Fences and walls. (See § 550-114.)
(3) Signs.
(4) Garages, storage buildings and toolsheds.
(5) Amateur radio antennas and antenna support structure not to
exceed 45 feet in height, unless the structure is retractable. The
height of a retractable antenna structure shall not exceed 45 feet
when the structure is not being used for the transmission and/or
reception of amateur radio signals and 65 feet when the structure
is fully extended and in use for the transmission and/or reception of
amateur radio signals. Satellite dish antennas shall be installed in
accordance with the standards specified in § 550-137.
(6) Temporary sales or construction trailer(s).
(a) The trailer(s) shall be located on the same lot as the principal
permitted use and shall meet all setback requirements for
principal buildings in the zone.
(b) The trailer(s) shall be shown on the site plan for the principal
permitted use and shall be reviewed by the administrative
officer on an individual case basis in accordance with the
performance standards in § 550-120.
(c) The trailer(s) shall be permitted to remain only for the period
of construction, renting or sale of the permitted use.
(d) Only one sales trailer and two construction trailers are
permitted per project.
(7) Roof-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility.
D. Other uses permitted upon application for a conditional use permit.
(1) Public utility installations.
§ 550-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-77
1:931
(2) Service stations.
(3) Nursing homes.
(4) Churches and other places of worship, Sunday school buildings,
rectories and parish houses.
(5) Senior citizen housing subsidized by the federal or state
government.
E. Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
F. Area and yard requirements.
CC Community Commercial District
Minimum requirements
Principal building:
Lot area (square feet) 7,500
Lot frontage (feet) 60
Lot width (feet) 60
Lot depth (feet) 90
Side yard, each (feet) 10
Front yard (feet)* 30
Rear yard (feet) 15
Accessory building:
Distance to side line (feet) 10
Distance to rear line (feet) 10
Distance to other building (feet) 10
Maximum requirements
Floor area ratio 0.18
Maximum impervious surface
coverage (percent)
60%
* NOTE: Front yard setbacks may be reduced to 20 feet where
parking is provided in the rear or side yards and the property is
located on a major arterial, arterial or major collector roadway.
G. General requirements.
(1) Any principal building may contain more than one use and/or
organization, provided that the total building coverage of the
combined activities does not exceed the maximum building
coverage specified for the district and, further, that each activity
occupies a minimum gross floor area of 750 square feet except as
noted.
§ 550-77 HAMILTON CODE § 550-77
1:932
§ 550-78. HC Highway Commercial and GC General Commercial
Districts. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008; 1-3-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-008; 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-012; 9-16-1998 by Ord. No.
98-034; 12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-043]
In the HC Highway Commercial and GC General Commercial Districts, the
following shall apply:
(2) At least the first 10 feet adjacent to any street line and five feet
adjacent to any lot line shall not be used for parking and shall be
planted and maintained in lawn area or ground cover or landscaped
with evergreen shrubbery.
(3) A minimum buffer area of 10 feet in width shall be provided along
any common property line with a residential district. [See
§§ 550-119G(7) and 550-130B.]
(4) No entrance or exit, at the curbline only, shall be closer than 12 feet
to a side lot line.
(5) For additional general requirements, see § 550-84, General
requirements in nonresidential districts.
H. Minimum off-street loading. See § 550-119E, F, G and H of this chapter
for standards.
I. Minimum off-street parking. See § 550-119 of this chapter for
standards.
J. Permitted signs. See § 550-124 of this chapter for standards.
K. Development credit adjustments for environmentally constrained areas.
See § 550-84K of this chapter for standards.
L. Architectural design standards. For architectural design standards see
§ 550-112 of this chapter.
M. Landscaping and preservation of natural features. See §§ 550-117,
550-119 and 550-130 of this chapter for design standards.
N. Fences, walls and sight triangles. See § 550-114 for details.
O. Source-separation or recycling plan. See § 550-134 of this chapter for
requirements.
P. Accessory buildings. See § 550-111 of this chapter for design standards.
A. Purpose.
(1) HC Highway Commercial Zones are intended to provide locations
in the Township where highway-oriented businesses servicing the
needs of highway users and encompassing a broader service area
than GC Zones may be located. No parcel of land shall be
§ 550-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-78
1:933
considered in the Highway Commercial Zone unless said parcel
abuts the major arteries listed in § 550-44A of this chapter.
(2) The GC areas are intended to allow a wide spectrum of commercial
activities not necessarily associated with highway access and the
traveling public.
(3) Highway Commercial Design District. See §§ 550-85 and 550-86 of
this chapter.
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in the buildings.
(1) All uses permitted in the NC Neighborhood Commercial and the CC
Community Commercial Zones, subject to the requirements of the
HC Highway Commercial Zone or the GC General Commercial
Zone.
(2) Restaurants, bars, taverns and nightclubs.
(3) Department stores.
(4) Garden centers engaged in the retail sales of living plant material
and related garden equipment. Outside storage, sale or display
areas shall not exceed four times the building coverage and shall be
used only for the storage, sale and display of living plant material
with proper screening.
(5) Bowling alleys.
(6) Supermarkets.
(7) Manufacturing plants, in the GC District only, of a type which carry
on processes within completely enclosed buildings, including the
manufacture, assembly or treatment of products from previously
prepared materials.
(8) Wholesale distribution centers and warehouses, in the GC District
only.
(9) Automobile repair shop, provided that all operations are conducted
within a completely enclosed building.
(10) Automobile upholstery shop.
(11) Automobile parking lot for private passenger vehicles but not for
storage of vehicles for sale.
(12) Awning or canvas store.
(13) Beverages, retail or wholesale distribution of.
(14) Bicycle sales, rental or repair.
(15) Blueprinting establishment.
§ 550-78 HAMILTON CODE § 550-78
1:934
(16) Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county or local
municipal government for public purposes.
(17) Building material sales establishment, with outdoor storage to be
screened.
(18) Business college.
(19) Business uses oriented to marine activities, such as the sale and
rental of boats and boat engines, boating supplies and fishing
supplies, with outdoor storage to be screened.
(20) Cabinet and woodworking shop.
(21) Catering establishment.
(22) Contractor's storage, if confined entirely to a completely enclosed
building, in the GC Zone only.
(23) Equipment rental and sales yard, with proper screening.
(24) Electrical shop or contractor.
(25) Exhibition building.
(26) Frozen food locker.
(27) Furniture and furnishings, sale of.
(28) Hospital for small animals (dogs, cats and the like), including
kennel, provided that yards are enclosed.
(29) Laboratory servicing medical and dental requirements.
(30) Lumberyard, retail.
(31) Museum.
(32) Office furniture, appliances and supply business.
(33) Pet shop, not involving the treatment or boarding of cats and dogs.
(34) Plumbing and heating shop or contractor with indoor storage.
(35) Printing, lithography, publishing and photostating establishments.
(36) Recreation area, public.
(37) Sheet metal shop or contractor, in the GC District only.
(38) Sign shop.
(39) Stone or monument works, with proper screening.
(40) Taxidermist.
§ 550-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-78
1:935
(41) Theater, not including drive-in or open air, and not to be located in
combination with a book or magazine store and not to be located
within 1,000 feet of any such store.
(42) Trade school.
(43) Wholesale stores and distributors in a completely enclosed building
not involving the processing or treatment of goods or products.
(44) Tool and die shop, in the GC District only.
(45) Combinations of two or more of the permitted uses.
(46) All existing residences as of the date of the adoption of this chapter.
For purposes of evaluating proposed additions or expansions, bulk
and yard requirements of those residential zone districts which
most closely resemble the size of the lot in question will be utilized.
(47) Indoor recreation uses.
(48) Health clubs.
(49) Miniature golf.
(50) Limousine services, in GC Zone only.
(51) Small truck rentals exclusive of flatbeds, tractor-trailers or similar
size trucks in GC Zone only.
(52) Billiard hall.
(53) Taxicab and bus companies with associated vehicle storage yards
(yards to be properly screened), in the GC Zone only.
(54) Automobile rentals.
(55) Convenience stores.
(56) Shopping centers. [Added 6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-022]
(57) Massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishments subject to
the provisions of Chapter 296, Massage and/or Somatic
Establishments, but only in the HC Highway Commercial Zone.
[Added 10-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-053]
(58) Brewpub, in HC Zone only. [Added 11-21-2017 by Ord. No.
17-041]
C. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Fences and walls. (See § 550-114.)
(3) Signs.
§ 550-78 HAMILTON CODE § 550-78
1:936
(4) Garages, storage buildings and toolsheds.
(5) Temporary sales or construction trailer(s).
(a) The trailer(s) shall be located on the same lot as the principal
permitted use and shall meet all setback requirements for
principal buildings in the zone.
(b) The trailer(s) shall be shown on the site plan for the principal
permitted use and shall be reviewed by the administrative
officer on an individual case basis in accordance with the
performance standards in § 550-120.
(c) The trailer(s) shall be permitted to remain only for the period
of construction, renting or sale of the permitted use.
(d) Only one sales trailer and two construction trailers are
permitted per project.
(6) Amateur radio antennas and antenna support structure not to
exceed 45 feet in height, unless the structure is retractable. The
height of a retractable antenna structure shall not exceed 45 feet
when the structure is not being used for the transmission and/or
reception of amateur radio signals and 65 feet when the structure
is fully extended and in use for the transmission and/or reception of
amateur radio signals. Satellite dish antennas shall be installed in
accordance with the standards specified in § 550-137.
(7) Roof-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility.
D. Other uses permitted upon application to the municipal agency for a
conditional use permit:
(1) Public utility installations.
(2) Service stations.
(3) Car washes.
(4) Automobile sales: new and/or used cars.
(5) Fast food restaurant.
E. Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
F. Area and yard requirements.
HC Highway Commercial and GC General Commercial Districts
Individual Uses Shopping Center
Minimum requirements
Principal building:*
Lot area (square feet or
acres)
20,000 8
§ 550-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-78
1:937
HC Highway Commercial and GC General Commercial Districts
Individual Uses Shopping Center
Lot frontage (feet) 125 400
Lot width (feet) 125 400
Lot depth (feet) 150 400
Side yard, each (feet) 20 100
Front yard (feet) 60 100
Rear yard (feet) 40 100
Accessory building:
Distance to side line
(feet)
10 100
Distance to rear line
(feet)
10 100
Distance to other
building (feet)
10 *
Maximum requirements
Floor area ratio 0.20 0.20
Maximum impervious
surface coverage (percent)
60% 60%
* NOTE: All principal buildings shall be separated by a minimum
of 25 feet, provided that such separation is to be used solely for
pedestrian circulation. All principal buildings shall be separated by
a minimum of 50 feet when any part of such separation is to be
used for parking or vehicular circulation. However, the separation
requirements should not be construed to prohibit covered
pedestrian walkways when the roof or covering of such walkway
extends between the principal buildings. In addition, the separation
requirements should not be construed to prohibit enclosed
shopping centers or mall development.
G. General requirements.
(1) Any principal building may contain more than one use and/or
organization, provided that the total building coverage of the
combined activities does not exceed the maximum building
coverage specified for the district and, further, that each activity
occupies a minimum gross floor area.
(2) No merchandise, products, equipment or similar material or
objects shall be displayed or stored outside, except that uses in the
GC District may have an outside storage area for vehicles, provided
that such outside storage area does not exceed 20% of the lot area
and is located in the rear yard only. The area shall be enclosed
entirely by a fence, wall, plant material or combination thereof in
§ 550-78 HAMILTON CODE § 550-78
1:938
order to provide a visual barrier between the storage areas and any
street, residential zoning district or existing residential use.
(3) A minimum buffer area of 20 feet in width shall be provided along
any common property line with a residential district or residential
use.
(4) Along each street line, a thirty-foot-wide suitably landscaped strip
shall be provided in conjunction with shopping center
development. In addition, paved parking areas shall provide
landscaped planting strips, particularly at the ends of parking
rows. Said ends of parking areas shall be surrounded by concrete
curb or Belgian block curb and shall be of a size sufficient to
contain a two-and-one-half-inch-caliper shade tree, which shall be
required in each planting strip.
(5) Entrances and exits upon a public street or road shall not be
located within 80 feet of any street intersection, the distance to be
measured from the intersection of the right-of-way lines at the
corner affected and the closest point of such proposed driveway. No
entrance or exit at the curbline shall be closer than 12 feet to a side
lot line.
(6) At least the first 10 feet adjacent to any street line and five feet
adjacent to any lot line shall not be used for parking and shall be
planted in lawn area or ground cover or landscaped with evergreen
shrubbery.
(7) For additional general requirements see § 550-84, General
requirements in nonresidential districts.
H. Minimum off-street loading.
(1) 190See §§ 550-84E and 550-119E, F, G and H for additional
standards. [Amended 9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-064]
I. Minimum off-street parking. See § 550-119 of this chapter for
standards.
J. Permitted signs. See § 550-124 of this chapter for standards.
K. Development credit adjustments for environmentally constrained areas.
See § 550-84K of this chapter for standards.
L. Architectural design standards. For architectural design standards see
§ 550-112 of this chapter.
M. Landscaping and preservation of natural features. See §§ 550-117,
550-119 and 550-130 of this chapter for design standards.
N. Fences, walls and sight triangles. See § 550-114 for details.
190. Editor's Note: Original subsections a. and b., regarding loading dock facilities, which
immediately preceded this subsection, were repealed 9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-064.
§ 550-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-78
1:939
§ 550-79. GSC Government Service Center District. [Amended
1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008; 8-18-1993 by Ord. No. 93-039;
1-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-008; 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 02-037;
12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-043]
In the GSC Government Service Center District, the following shall apply:
O. Source-separation or recycling plan. See § 550-134 of this chapter for
requirements.
P. Accessory buildings. See § 550-111 of this chapter for design standards.
A. Purpose. The GSC government service center area has been designated
in recognition of both the existing Township facilities located within the
area and the excellence of the land area for the future location of
additional government service facilities. The parcel is located in the
central portion of the Township and enjoys excellent road accessibility.
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings. [Note:
Convenience stores are permitted in the HC Highway Commercial and
GC General Commercial Zones only; see § 550-78B(55).]
(1) All forms of Township land uses, including but not limited to public
playgrounds, conservation areas, parks, public purpose uses and
publicly owned/privately maintained and operated recreation
facilities.
(2) Banks.
(3) Offices and office buildings, business and professional.
(4) Radio or television broadcasting station, including studios,
auditoriums and other rooms for performances and including office
and other space incident to and necessary for the principal use,
exclusive of broadcasting towers and antennas.
(5) Theater, not including a drive-in theater.
(6) Museums, exhibition halls, art galleries, libraries, music
conservatories or instruction, art, photographic and dance studios,
and other cultural facilities of a similar nature.
(7) Restaurants and bars as accessory uses to restaurants.
(8) Indoor tennis, racquetball, squash and handball courts.
(9) Combinations of the above uses.
(10) All existing residences as of the date of the adoption of this chapter.
For purposes of evaluating proposed additions or expansions, bulk
and yard requirements of those residential zone districts which
most closely resemble the size of the lot in question will be utilized.
(11) Child and infant care centers. See § 550-161F for design standards.
§ 550-78 HAMILTON CODE § 550-79
1:940
(12)On Lots 35, 36, 37, 15 and 18.01 of Section 499, apartments and/or
townhouses are permitted uses. These dwellings may be either
freestanding or located within buildings housing other permitted
uses. A total of 225 units of housing are required, of which 45 are to
be for low- and moderate-income tenants. These units must satisfy
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing requirements.
Where the dwelling units are freestanding, the following chapter
sections are to apply in addition to §§ 550-79 and 550-81 of this
chapter: §§ 550-75G(1) and (2); 550-162A, B and K; 550-163A, D
and J.
(13) All uses permitted within the Neighborhood Commercial,
Community Commercial, and Highway Commercial Zone Districts,
with the exception of the following: §§ 550-77B(9) and (10);
550-78B(4), (5), (9), (10), (11), (13), (14), (17), (19), (21), (22), (24),
(25), (26), (28), (30), (31), (33), (36), (39), (40), (45), (46), (47), (50),
(51).
C. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Fences and walls. (See § 550-114.)
(3) Signs.
(4) Temporary sales or construction trailer(s).
(a) The trailer(s) shall be located on the same lot as the principal
permitted use and shall meet all setback requirements for
principal buildings in the zone.
(b) The trailer(s) shall be shown on the site plan for the principal
permitted use and shall be reviewed by the administrative
officer on an individual case basis in accordance with the
performance standards in § 550-120.
(c) The trailer(s) shall be permitted to remain only for the period
of construction, renting or sale of the permitted use.
(d) Only one sales trailer and two construction trailers are
permitted per project.
(5) Amateur radio antennas and antenna support structure not to
exceed 45 feet in height, unless the structure is retractable. The
height of a retractable antenna structure shall not exceed 45 feet
when the structure is not being used for the transmission and/or
reception of amateur radio signals and 65 feet when the structure
is fully extended and in use for the transmission and/or reception of
amateur radio signals. Satellite dish antennas shall be installed in
accordance with the standards specified in § 550-137.
(6) Roof-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility.
§ 550-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-79
1:941
D. Other uses permitted upon application to the municipal agency for a
conditional use permit:
(1) Public utility installations.
(2) Hotels.
(3) Hospitals.
(4) Schools.
(5) Clubs.
(6) Child care and infant care centers.
(7) Ground-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility as
a conditional accessory use.
(8) Solar or photovoltaic energy-generating parking structure as a
conditional accessory use.
E. Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 70 feet and six
stories in height.
F. Area and yard requirements (non-Township uses).
GSC Government Service Center District
Minimum requirements
Principal building:
Lot area (square feet) 120,000
Lot frontage (feet) 300
Lot width (feet) 300
Lot depth (feet) 300
Side yard, each (feet) 75
Front yard (feet) 100
Rear yard (feet) 75
Accessory building:
Distance to side line (feet) 50
Distance to rear line (feet) 50
Distance to other building
(feet)
50
Maximum requirements
Floor area ratio 0.15
Maximum impervious surface
coverage (percent)
50%
G. General requirements.
§ 550-79 HAMILTON CODE § 550-79
1:942
(1) Any principal building may contain more than one use or
organization. More than one principal building may be constructed
on any lot, provided that all chapter requirements are met and that
a minimum distance of 50 feet is provided between the principal
buildings.
(2) At least the first 50 feet adjacent to any street line and 50 feet
adjacent to any lot line shall not be used for parking and shall be
planted and maintained in lawn area or ground cover or landscaped
with evergreen shrubbery. Any parking proposed within the front
yard shall be screened by a landscaped berm of at least four feet in
height having a slope of two to one or three to one.
(3) Land area equal to a minimum of 10% of the tract of land proposed
for development shall be set aside for conservation, open space,
floodplain, community facility, school site, recreation and park
areas. Such land shall be optimally related to the overall municipal
complex plan. Land to be devoted to public purposes may be
offered to the Township or may be privately owned and maintained.
Any lands intended to be offered to the Township for a public
purpose shall be so stipulated prior to preliminary approval.
(4) A minimum buffer area of 50 feet in width shall be provided along
any common property line with a residential district or residential
use. [See §§ 550-119G(7) and 550-130B.]
(5) Entrances and exits. Entrances and exits upon a public street or
road shall not be located within 100 feet of any street intersection,
the distance to be measured from the intersection of the right-ofway
lines at the corner affected and the closest point of such
proposed driveway. No entrance or exit, at the curbline only, shall
be closer than 12 feet from a side lot line. Entrance and exit sizes,
location and construction shall also be in accordance with
requirements of the governmental agency having jurisdiction over
the facility upon which the permitted use has frontage.
(6) For additional general requirements see § 550-84, General
requirements in nonresidential districts.
H. Minimum off-street loading. See § 550-119E, F, G and H for additional
standards.
I. Minimum off-street parking. See § 550-119 of this chapter for
standards.
J. Permitted signs. See § 550-124 of this chapter for standards.
K. Development credit adjustments for environmentally constrained areas.
See § 550-84K of this chapter for standards.
L. Source-separation or recycling plan. See § 550-134 of this chapter for
requirements.
§ 550-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-79
1:943
§ 550-80. Township Town Center Project Redevelopment Plan.
[Added 7-6-1995 by Ord. No. 95-039191]
The Township Town Center Project Redevelopment Plan, as amended, which
is set forth in this section, shall constitute the municipal development
regulations for the Government Service Center District. The zoning district
map of the Township shall indicate the redevelopment area to which the
redevelopment plan applies as the Government Service Center District.
M. Architectural design standards. For architectural design standards see
§ 550-112 of this chapter.
N. Landscaping and preservation of natural features. See §§ 550-117,
550-119 and 550-130 of this chapter for design standards.
O. Fences, walls and sight triangles. See § 550-114 for details.
P. Accessory buildings. See § 550-111 of this chapter for design standards.
Q. Design standards. For design standards and uses regulated under the
redevelopment area overlay, see § 550-80, Township Town Center
Project Redevelopment Plan, of this chapter.
A. Description of project.
(1) Boundaries. The redevelopment area is located in the central
portion of the Township. The area to be redeveloped is bounded by
Cypress Lane to the north, Whitehorse-Mercerville Road to the
east, Route I-295 to the west and Section 499, Lots 39, 40, 41, 43,
44.01, 44.02, 45, 46, 47, 54, 75, 112, 113, 137 and 142 to the south.
The redevelopment area includes Section 499, Lots 15 and 35.
(2) Redevelopment plan objectives.
(a) To create a mixed-use activity center in a village setting that
includes government services, cultural activities and
recreational, commercial, retail and family recreation
establishments.
(b) To promote family-oriented activities that focus on education
and recreation facilities permitted by law.
(c) To promote sensitive design solutions that integrate both the
natural and man-made character of the site.
(d) To provide through design a significant statement of "place," a
central area in the Township for citizens to meet, relax and
work.
191. Editor's Note: This chapter was originally codified in Ch. 2, Sec. 2-722, of the 1994 Code of
Ordinances, but was relocated to the Land Development Chapter at the Township's
request.
§ 550-79 HAMILTON CODE § 550-80
1:944
(e) To design a pedestrian-oriented facility. The town center
setting shall promote the use of the site as a gathering place by
encouraging strolling, sitting and possible street
entertainment.
(f) To promote the effective design of both exterior and interior
spaces to encourage their flexible use for a multitude of
seasonal activities. Plazas, squares, colonnades, outdoor cafes,
seating areas, fountains, artwork and gardens shall be
encouraged to provide an attractive environment for yearround
activity on the site.
(g) To promote a pleasingly built environment through high quality
architectural design and open space design. High quality
construction methods and craftsmanship shall also be
encouraged.
(h) To provide adequate off-street parking to serve the users of the
site. Surface parking shall be permitted; however, structured
parking may be encouraged for later phases of the project.
(i) Encourage the interconnection and integration of uses on both
the northerly and southerly side of Municipal Drive.
(j) The corner of Whitehorse-Mercerville Road and Municipal
Drive serves as a gateway to the project, and therefore the
design treatment of this corner is critical to the success of the
project. The corner is not to be developed as surface parking.
Rather, architectural elements such as retail stores, gazebos,
colonnades, gatehouses and the like should be used to define
the corner and provide an attractive entrance into the site.
Critical attention must be taken in the architectural design of
all facades facing Whitehorse-Mercerville Road and Municipal
Drive.
(k) Preservation of the wetland areas and their incorporation into
the redevelopment plan where possible.
(l) Develop a plan for the future use of the landfill which will
complement the town center. This plan shall take into
consideration the closure plan and the ecological facility.
(m) Uses that detract from the town center theme of a familyoriented
place shall be prohibited.
B. Land use plan.
(1) Land use map. The attached land use map, dated May 1995,
indicates the proposed land uses in the project area.192
192. Editor's Note: Said land use map, which was attached to Ord. No. 95-039, is on file in
Township offices.
§ 550-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-80
1:945
(2) Land use provisions and building requirements.
(a) Permitted land uses.
1. Government offices and related uses.
2. Banks.
3. Restaurants and bars as accessory uses to restaurants.
4. Theaters. Movie cinemas and community theaters.
5. Museums, exhibition halls, art galleries, libraries, music
conservatories or instruction, art, photographic and dance
studios and other cultural facilities of similar nature.
6. Civic arenas.
7. Child and infant care centers.
8. Boutiques, bookstore, flower shop, ice cream
establishment and other similar small-scale commercial
establishments.
9. Periodicals and newspapers.
10. Offices, business and professional.
11. Indoor tennis, racquetball, squash and handball courts.
12. Indoor and/or outdoor recreation facilities, such as golf
driving range, golf course, aquatic center, tennis center
and similar uses associated with family recreation.
13. Outdoor cafes, restaurants, theater and seating areas.
14. Housing in accordance with the Township zoning
ordinances.
15. Parking and parking garages as accessory uses.
16. Parks, plazas and other public or quasi-public spaces.
17. Hotels.
18. Other retail establishments catering to the needs of family
recreation and consistent with the theme of a municipal
town center.
19. Recycling center on Parcel Number 3 only.
(b) Building requirements.
1. Regulations, controls and restrictions regarding building
area, floor area, height, lot width, yard setbacks and
parking, if not controlled by this redevelopment plan, shall
§ 550-80 HAMILTON CODE § 550-80
1:946
be generally determined by the Township zoning and land
development ordinance.
2. Building setbacks shall adhere to the GSC Zone District
standards. Generally, buildings are to be built directly
adjacent to sidewalks, plazas and other hard surfaces. If
deemed appropriate, up to twenty-foot-wide landscape
strips shall be planted adjacent to certain facades.
3. The general location of buildings and amenities and their
relationship to each other shall generally follow the
illustrative concept plan, which, however, shall not be
deemed to be land use control. This configuration may
change subject to review by the redevelopment agency.
Buildings facing the plaza shall be encouraged to have
colonnades, canopies, awnings, outdoor seating areas or
other pedestrian-friendly elements. It is the intent of the
Township and the redevelopment agency to allow for
discretion with respect to aesthetics and site plan design.
However, aesthetics and site plan design shall be subject
to the approval of the appropriate Township agency.
4. Architectural elements. It is strongly encouraged that
architectural design exercise a full array of creative design
elements in order to achieve a place that is interesting,
pedestrian-friendly and designed in a style that withstands
the test of time. To this end, such elements as arcades,
colonnades, clock towers, unique fenestration, balconies,
material changes, dormers, hip, gable or mansard
rooflines and the like are encouraged.
5. Building materials. Building materials should be chosen to
express the idea of permanence on the site. Stone, brick,
masonry aggregates and/or a combination of above
materials shall be required. Roofs of all buildings shall be
gable, gambrel or true mansard and shall be constructed
of a raised-seam metal type.
6. Building(s) on the plaza on the primary axis with the front
door of the existing library shall be no less than 40 feet
high and no greater than 70 feet high. This structure shall
also include a prominent architectural feature on axis with
the library door. This feature may be a clock tower, obelisk
or theater marquee, and it shall be a minimum of 45 feet
high and a maximum of 70 feet high. The remaining
buildings on the plaza square shall be a minimum of 30
feet high (measured to the top of the roofline).
7. Signs. Signs shall be architecturally incorporated into
each building design. Each tenant shall be permitted a
§ 550-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-80
1:947
facade sign equal to 10% of the front facade leased to said
tenant.
a. Signage should be uniform in nature, and the
materials should be consistent with or at least
complement the original construction materials and
architectural style of the building facade.
b. Natural materials such as wood and metal are more
appropriate than internally-lit plastic box signs.
Individually-lit channel letter signs shall also be
permitted as long as it constitutes a uniform theme on
the site.
c. Appropriately designed neon window or facade signs
can account for some or all of the 10% allowable
signage on the building.
d. An awning with the store's name on it may serve as an
attractive alternative when properly designed and
installed.
e. A total of 600 square feet of signage may be
distributed in up to three signs along the two
frontages of Whitehorse-Mercerville Road and
Municipal Drive in connection with Parcel 1. No sign
shall exceed 250 square feet in area. Signs shall be
incorporated into architectural elements such as
gazebos, gatehouses, sculptures or similar structures
and shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from
roadways. Signs shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
f. A total of 100 square feet of signage shall be
permitted in one sign for Parcel 2. Said sign shall be
architecturally harmonious with surrounding
development and shall be set back a minimum of 20
feet from the roadway. Said sign shall not exceed 15
feet in height.
g. Blinking and flashing signs shall be prohibited.
8. Corporate or commercial statements in the architecture
shall be limited and shall be at the discretion of the
Township.
9. Outdoor recreation facilities. Outdoor recreation facilities
shall be designed ensuring a high quality of development.
Design shall take into consideration both the natural and
man-made environmental content consistent with such
standards and controls usually associated with state-ofthe-
art facilities and shall be subject to approval by the
Township.
§ 550-80 HAMILTON CODE § 550-80
1:948
10. Parking.
a. Parking lots shall be designed as an integral part of
the site plan. Surface parking shall be buffered and
landscaped in accordance with this chapter.
Structured or decked parking shall be designed so
that it enhances rather than detracts from the
architectural integrity of the project. When siting
structures, view corridors should be considered to
maximize visibility of commercial buildings.
b. Off-street parking shall be provided equal to the
parking ratios set forth in this chapter. Shared parking
shall be considered acceptable if supporting evidence
to the viability of the parking ratio proposed is
satisfactory to the reviewing agency(ies).
c. Parallel parking shall be permitted in the area along
the front of the movie theater only. Stalls for such
parking shall be a minimum of 25 feet by eight feet.
11. Plaza square. A plaza shall be constructed and it shall
serve as the site-organizing element around which the
commercial/retail/government/cultural facilities shall be
set. The plaza square shall be a minimum of 180 feet by
210 feet and shall be constructed of brick, stone or other
such material deemed appropriate. Design elements such
as patterns in pavement, fountain(s), sculpture, bollards,
sitting areas and landscaping shall be incorporated into
the design of the plaza.
12. Sidewalks.
a. A system of walks shall be provided throughout the
subject site area designed to encourage pedestrian
movement on the site and connections to adjacent
sites.
b. Sidewalks shall be constructed of brick pavers
approved by the Township.
c. Crosswalks shall be provided at appropriate
intersections as well as along a well-defined path
system within all parking lots. All crosswalks and
pedestrian paths shall be a minimum of six feet wide
and constructed of brick pavers.
13. Lighting.
a. Lighting on the site shall meet or exceed the Township
standard for minimum lighting.
§ 550-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-80
1:949
b. Due to the unique nature of the project, the following
decorative light standard shall be used: Belmont
fourteen-foot pole and luminaire and Belmont elevenfoot
pole and luminaire.
14. Service. Service requirements for loading, unloading and
trash removal shall be well-screened and shall be
architecturally incorporated into the design of the affected
buildings. Loading areas shall be designed to avoid conflict
with pedestrians and other vehicle patterns on the site.
Service and loading areas shall meet Township standards.
15. Landscaping. Landscaping shall meet Township standards.
16. Street furniture. Street furniture, such as benches, street
lamps, bicycle racks, landscape planters and the like, shall
be encouraged. The design of street furniture shall be
consistent with the general architectural character of the
town center as envisioned by the redevelopment agency.
C. Other provisions necessary to meet state and local requirements. The
laws of the state require that any redevelopment project be undertaken
in accordance with a redevelopment plan for the project area. The
Township Planning Board has approved this redevelopment plan for the
town center. It has further indicated that the proposals in this plan are
in accordance with local plan objectives and the Master Plan of the
Township.
(1) Land use. The land use plan and land use map indicate proposed
uses following redevelopment. The land uses as shown on the land
use plan/land use map are in general conformity with the local
objectives for the project area which, in its totality, is designed for
government services and commercial, recreational, cultural and
institutional uses.
(2) Density of population. Changes in resident population due to
implementation of the redevelopment plan will have no significant
adverse impacts. A maximum of 220 one- and two-bedroom
residential units are permitted. This equates to 1.04 units/acre on
the site, and it is estimated that they would generate approximately
550 residents.
(3) Traffic patterns and parking.
(a) A traffic analysis of the site and surrounding area was
conducted by FAZ Associates and several improvements were
recommended. They are:
1. Installation of a traffic signal at Whitehorse-Mercerville
Road and Municipal Drive.
§ 550-80 HAMILTON CODE § 550-80
1:950
2. Municipal Drive is to be widened to meet traffic
requirements.
3. Left-turn lanes are to be installed on Whitehorse-
Mercerville Road.
(b) Off-street parking is to be designed to meet or exceed the
minimum requirements of this chapter.
(4) Public transportation. There are no proposed changes in existing
public transportation.
(5) Public utilities. Public utilities, including water, sewer, gas and
electric, will be extended into the site by the redeveloper of the
project.
(6) Recreation and community facilities.
(a) A multipurpose plaza is proposed to provide space for varied
cultural and recreational events.
(b) The Township will extend trails and paths into the wooded
areas of the site for passive recreation and educational
purposes.
(7) Regulation and controls. All standards relating to land coverage, lot
size, etc., shall be done in accordance with this chapter of the
Township Code unless specifically noted.
(8) Relocation plan.
(a) No displacement of residents or businesses should occur as a
result of the implementation of this plan, as the area to be
redeveloped is presently unoccupied. Additionally, the
Township currently owns all lands affected by the
redevelopment plan.
(b) Any families or individuals temporarily or permanently
displaced by the governmental action from the redevelopment
area will be relocated by the Township into decent, safe and
sanitary housing at rents within the means of the persons
displaced from the project area.
(9) Procedure for changing the plan. The redevelopment plan may be
amended from time to time upon compliance with requirements of
law.
(10) Consistency with contiguous municipalities' and state's master
plans. This redevelopment plan is consistent with the County
Master Plan and the State Development and Redevelopment Plan in
its promotion of creative mixed-use projects and community
centers. Due to the project's location within the center of the
§ 550-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-80
1:951
§ 550-81. REO-2, REO-4 and REO-5 Research, Engineering and
Office Districts, and RD Research and Development Districts.
[Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008; 8-16-1995 by Ord. No.
95-047; 1-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-010; 9-18-1996 by Ord. No. 96-042;
10-30-1996 by Ord. No. 96-048; 12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-045;
12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 02-037; 5-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-013;
12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-043; 9-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-046]
In the REO and RD Districts, the following shall apply:
Township, it can be stated that the project has no significant
adverse impacts on the master plans of contiguous municipalities.
(11) Period of effectiveness of the redevelopment plan. This plan shall
be effective for a period of 20 years.
(12) Project maps.
(a) Location map.
(b) Redevelopment plan parcel boundary map.
(c) Illustrative concept plan map.
(d) Existing utilities map.
D. Amendment of Township Town Center Project Redevelopment Plan of
January 18, 1989.
(1) The Township Town Center Project Redevelopment Plan of January
18, 1989, enacted by Township Council Ordinance No. 89-002, is
superseded and amended by Subsections A through C preceding.
(2) The Zoning Map of the Township shall be and is hereby amended
consistent herewith, and the proper officials of the Township are
authorized to make such revisions thereto.
A. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings. [Note:
Convenience stores are permitted in the HC Highway Commercial and
GC General Commercial Zones only; see § 550-78B(55).]
(1) REO and RD Districts:
(a) Office buildings for executive, administrative, business,
educational or professional services.
(b) Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county or local
municipal government.
(c) Activities of an industrial, medical or scientific research
laboratory, provided that there are no inherent hazards
associated with such research, and further provided that no
nuisance may occur from fire or explosion, toxic or corrosive
fumes, gas, smoke, odors, obnoxious dust or vapor, offensive
§ 550-80 HAMILTON CODE § 550-81
1:952
noise or vibrations, glare, flashes or objectionable effluent and
electrical interference which may adversely affect or impair
the normal use and peaceful enjoyment of any property,
structure or dwelling located in any other zone or district.
The likelihood of groundwater contamination or depletion, air
pollution and the problem of waste disposal shall be
considered.
(d) Commercial printing facilities.
(e) Mailing, reproduction, commercial art and photography and
stenographic services.
(f) Computer and data processing services.
(g) Medical and dental laboratories.
(h) Research and engineering activities involving technical
investigation or study for product development and similar
activities.
(i) Publishing houses.
(j) Public playgrounds, conservation areas, parks and public
purpose uses.
(k) Research office parks, on tracts of land at least 25 acres in
area, comprised of uses in accordance with those listed above.
(l) All residences existing as of the date of adoption of this
chapter. For purposes of evaluating proposed additions or
expansions to said residences, the bulk and yard requirements
of those residential zone districts which most closely resemble
the size of the lot in question shall be applied.
(m) Farms.
(n) Child and infant care centers. See § 550-138 for design
standards.
(o) Adult day care. [Added 9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-063]
(p) Assisted living, memory care, senior independent living (REO-5
only). [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-042]
(2) In addition to the above, the following are permitted, but only in the
RD Districts, except as provided in Subsection A(2)(g)1. below:
(a) Pharmaceutical products operations.
(b) Assembly and treatment of previously prepared materials to
produce products as follows:
1. Apparel.
§ 550-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-81
1:953
2. Textiles.
3. Leather goods.
4. Books and book binders.
5. Electrical and electronic equipment and supplies.
6. Professional, scientific, surgical and controlling
instruments.
7. Photographic and optical goods, watches and clocks.
8. Graphic materials, supplies, instruments and implements.
9. Fabricated metal products, such as cutlery, hand tools,
general hardware, fabricated structural metal products,
screw machine products, bolts, nuts, screws, rivets,
washers, springs, valves, pipe fittings and similar
miscellaneous products.
10. Construction materials.
11. Hardware, plumbing and heating equipment and supplies.
(c) Distribution and warehousing. For general requirements see
§ 550-139.
(d) Research and development parks may be permitted on tracts of
land at least 25 acres in area comprised of uses in accordance
with this section.
(e) Telecommunications towers, provided they are not within 1/2
mile of a residential zone line or within 1/2 mile of the property
line of a residential use, school or public recreation area. The
distance shall be measured between the two closest property
lines.
(f) Radio or television broadcasting stations, including studios,
auditoriums and other rooms for performances and including
office and other space incident to and necessary for the
principal use. Broadcasting towers and antennas may not be
located within 1/2 mile of a residential zone line or within 1/2
mile of the property line of a residential use, school or public
recreation area. The distance shall be measured between the
two closest property lines.
(g) Planned mixed-use research and development parks, subject to
the following requirements and conforming to the findings of a
planned development as defined by the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45, and in accordance with an approved
general development plan.
§ 550-81 HAMILTON CODE § 550-81
1:954
1. The minimum total area to be developed as a planned
mixed-use research and development park shall be 100
acres, unless otherwise noted. That minimum area may be
met with land in the RD District or in both the RD and
REO-5 Districts, provided that the districts are contiguous
and that at least 85 acres of the planned mixed-use
research and development park are within the RD District.
Such area shall be developed in accordance with a single
comprehensive general development plan. Streets and rail
rights-of-way shall not be deemed to divide acreage for the
purposes of this requirement. [Amended 5-6-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-028]
2. The maximum floor area ratio for a planned mixed-use
research and development park shall be 0.25, unless
otherwise noted. [Amended 5-6-2014 by Ord. No.
14-028]
3. No building shall exceed 45 feet in height. In the case of
buildings with flat roofs, building height shall be measured
to the roof level and not to the top of the parapet wall.
4. Principal permitted, accessory and conditional uses within
a planned mixed-use research and development park as
identified in Subsections A, B and C of this section shall be
permitted and be required to satisfy all of the RD
requirements as set forth in this section and throughout
the chapter. The Planning Board shall have the right to
modify the requirements for minimum lot area, width or
frontage, minimum building setback, maximum impervious
surface coverage, requirements as to front, side or rear
yards, and requirements concerning the location of
accessory buildings or structures for any land use in a
planned mixed-use research and development park,
whenever such modifications are necessary to achieve a
planned mixed-use research and development park.
5. In a planned mixed-use research and development park,
the permitted gross floor area yield to be devoted to a
planned commercial development that contains a wide
range of retail and commercial and accessory uses serving
a regional trade area which embraces a large segment of
Hamilton Township shall be as follows:
a. The planned commercial development located in the
RD Zone at the intersection of Klockner Road and
Route 130 on the land use map and Zoning Map shall
be limited to no more than 25% of the permitted gross
floor area yield.
§ 550-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-81
1:955
b. The planned commercial development located in the
RD Zone east of Route 130 on the Land Use Plan Map
and Zoning Map shall be limited to no more than 43%
of the permitted gross floor area yield. [Amended
7-21-2015 by Ord. No. 15-027]
c. The planned commercial development located in the
RD Zone situated at Cabot Drive east of Interstate
I-195, south of Klockner Road and north of Yardville
Hamilton Square Road on the land use map and the
Zoning Map shall be subject to the following
conditions:
i. Not more than 360,000 square feet of planned
commercial retail development shall be
permitted.
ii. Minimum landscape buffers along arterial roads
shall be not less than 100 feet.
iii. Minimum common open space shall be 35% of the
land area within the planned mixed-use research
and development park.
iv. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for the planned
mixed use research and development park shall
be 0.16 FAR or not more than 947,500 square
feet.
v. At the intersection of Yardville Hamilton Square
Road and Cabot Drive, there shall be no left turn
permitted from Cabot Drive exiting on to Yardville
Hamilton Square Road, and there shall be no right
turn from Yardville Hamilton Square Road
entering onto Cabot Drive.
d. The planned commercial development located in the
RD Zone bounded by Kuser Road, Route 130,
Robbinsville Township and the United Jersey Railroad
& Canal Company right-of-way shall be limited to no
more than 40% of the permitted gross floor area yield
for the planned mixed-use research and development
park. Although the tract area of the planned mixeduse
research and development park may extend
northwest of the rail right-of-way, all planned
commercial development must be physically located
within the RD District southeast of the rail right-ofway
within the area described above.
i. The permitted gross floor area yield of a planned
commercial development shall be calculated by
the applicant and approved by the Planning Board
§ 550-81 HAMILTON CODE § 550-81
1:956
based upon the submission of a concept site plan
and concept subdivision plan which shows
development of the site based upon current RD
Zone standards.
ii. At least 25% of the permitted gross floor area of a
planned commercial development shall be
devoted to anchor tenant or magnet stores as
defined in this chapter.
6. All planned commercial developments shall be required to
locate along Route 130. The sites identified on the
Township Land Use Plan Map and Zoning Map are
potential sites for commercial development, and the
Planning Board may approve other locations along Route
130 within the planned mixed-use research development
zone. The location of the planned commercial development
within the planned mixed-use research and development
park shall be located in a manner to encourage efficient
movement of traffic and provide the maximum benefit to
the mixed-use nature of the park. If deemed feasible and
desirable, the Planning Board may permit some
commercial uses to develop outside of these identified
planned commercial locations within a planned mixed-use
research and development park located along Route 130.
7. The planned commercial development located in the RD
Zone south and west of Klockner Road on the Land Use
Plan Map and Zoning Map shall be limited to no more than
40% of the permitted gross floor area yield or to a
maximum of 500,000 square feet, whichever is lower.
Planned commercial development in this area shall front
on Route 130 and be located east of the Master Plan
roadway or may front on the Master Plan roadway and/or
the ramp system west of the Master Plan roadway at its
intersection with Route 130.
8. The planned commercial development located in the RD
Zone south and west of Klockner Road and north of Route
130, consisting of Block 2610, Lots 30, 31 and 32 on the
Land Use Plan Map and Zoning Map shall have a minimum
tract size of 45 acres. [Added 5-6-2014 by Ord. No.
14-028]
a. The planned commercial development shall have a
major commercial anchor or magnet store of at least
40,000 square feet in size.
b. Development within the Planned Commercial
Development Overlay Zone portion of the tract shall
have a maximum FAR of the following:
§ 550-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-81
1:957
i. Tracts with less than 1,000 feet contiguous
frontage along State Highway Route 130 shall
have a maximum FAR of 5%.
ii. Tracts with more than 1,000 feet of contiguous
frontage along State Highway Route 130 shall
have a maximum FAR of 15%.
c. The applicant may provide a payment-in-lieu of
constructing the Master Plan road depicted as being
located on this tract and running perpendicular to
Route 130 in the 2011 Hamilton Township Master Plan
if the applicant can demonstrate to the Planning
Board that Klockner Road or other road can fulfill the
purpose of that segment of the Master Plan road in
providing adequate additional access to Route 130.
The payment-in-lieu of construction shall be
consistent with the Township's Transportation
Improvement District (TID) standards in § 550-256H.
Notwithstanding, the Master Plan road running
parallel to Route 130 on this tract in the 2011
Hamilton Township Master Plan shall be required to
be reserved and constructed. Furthermore,
construction of the Master Plan road running parallel
to Route 130 shall be completed during the first phase
of construction.
9. All planned commercial developments shall have at least
one major commercial anchor or magnet store of at least
100,000 square feet, unless otherwise noted. All planned
commercial developments shall provide for passive and/or
active recreation for patrons. Such area(s) shall be
improved in accordance with a consistent design theme
which is applied throughout the planned development and
in accordance with the standards set forth in § 550-165.
[Amended 5-6-2014 by Ord. No. 14-028; 4-2-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-013]
10. The following principal commercial uses, other than
anchor tenant and magnet stores as defined herein, as
identified in §§ 550-76B, 550-77B and 550-78B, and hotels
under § 550-161O, shall be permitted on the land and in
buildings within a planned commercial development. They
shall be limited to no more than 75% of the gross floor area
of the planned commercial development: [Amended
7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029]
a. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings
as found in § 550-76B.
§ 550-81 HAMILTON CODE § 550-81
1:958
Groceries and foodstuffs
Confectionery and luncheonettes
Stationery and tobacco
Hardware and paints
Bakery
Periodicals and newspapers
Barber and beauty shops
Tailoring and dressmaking
Bakery goods store
Book or gift store
Candy store and/or fountain
Clothes cleaning store with two or less trucks
associated with it
Custom dressmaking, millinery and tailoring
Clothing (new) and dry goods store
Delicatessen store
Dress shop
Drugstore
Package liquor store
Ice cream store
Interior decorating business
Jewelry store
Self-cleaning laundry
Notion and variety store
Paint and wallpaper store.
Repair or service shops for household or personal
goods
Shoe repair shop
Tailor shop
Photography studio, photo supplies, artist's studio
Antique store
Art gallery
Sporting goods store
Child and infant care centers; see § 550-138 for
design standards
Video store.
§ 550-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-81
1:959
All existing residences as of the date of the adoption
of this chapter. For purposes of evaluating proposed
additions or expansions, bulk and yard requirements
of those residential zone districts which most closely
resemble the size of the lot in question will be
utilized.
b. Principal permitted uses on the land or in buildings as
found in § 550-77B.
Restaurants, bars and taverns
Banks, including drive-in facilities
Dancing studio
Florist
Household appliance store
Stereo, radio and television stores
Offices, business and professional
Funeral homes and mortuaries
Automobile parts store
All existing residences as of the date of the adoption
of this chapter. For purposes of evaluating proposed
additions or expansions, bulk and yard requirements
of those residential zone districts which most closely
resemble the size of the lot in question will be
utilized.
Combinations of two or more of the above-permitted
uses in one principal building
c. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings
as found in § 550-78B.
Restaurants, bars, taverns and nightclubs
Department stores
Garden centers engaged in the retail sales of living
plant material and related garden equipment
Outside storage, sale or display areas shall not
exceed four times the building coverage and shall be
used only for the storage, sale and display of living
plant material
Bowling alleys
Supermarkets
Awning or canvas store
Bicycle sales, rental or repair
Blueprinting establishment
§ 550-81 HAMILTON CODE § 550-81
1:960
Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state,
county or local municipal government for public
purposes
Catering establishment
Exhibition building
Furniture and furnishings, sale of
Laboratory servicing medical and dental
requirements
Museum
Office furniture, appliances and supply business
Pet shop, not involving the treatment of or boarding
of cats and dogs
Printing, lithography, publishing and photostating
establishments
Recreation area, public
Taxidermist
Theater, not including drive-in or open air, and not to
be located in combination with a book or magazine
store and not to be located within 1,000 feet of any
such store
Wholesale stores and distributors in a completely
enclosed building not involving the processing or
treatment of goods or products
Parcel package shipping store or mailing center
Indoor recreation uses
Health clubs
Miniature golf
Billiard hall
All existing residences as of the date of the adoption
of this chapter. For purposes of evaluating proposed
additions or expansions, bulk and yard requirements
of those residential zone districts which most closely
resemble the size of the lot in question will be
utilized.
Combinations of two or more of the above-permitted
uses in one principal building
d. The above-referenced principal permitted commercial
uses other than anchor tenant and magnet stores shall
be required to satisfy all of the requirements as set
forth in §§ 550-76, 550-77 and 550-78 and throughout
this chapter. The Planning Board shall have the right
to modify the requirements for minimum lot area,
§ 550-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-81
1:961
width or frontage, minimum building setback,
maximum impervious surface coverage, requirements
as to front, side or rear yards, and requirements
concerning the location of accessory buildings or
structures for any land use in a planned mixed-use
research and development park, whenever such
modifications are necessary to achieve a planned
mixed-use research and development park.
e. Hotels, subject to the standards set forth in
§ 550-161O.
11. No plan for a planned mixed-use research and
development park development shall be approved by the
Planning Board unless the lot areas, widths, depths and
frontages, building setbacks, percentages of lot coverage,
front, side and rear yards and locations of accessory
buildings or structures provided for in the site plan and
subdivision plan are appropriate to the type of
development permitted.
12. Not less than 25% of the land area within a planned mixeduse
research and development park shall be devoted to
common open space. The location of common open space
shall be consistent with the declared function of the
common open space, and where possible, the common
open space shall be planned as a contiguous area located
for the maximum benefit of the area which it was designed
to serve, preserving and where possible enhancing natural
features.
13. A concept site plan and concept subdivision plan shall be
required for any development proposed within a planned
mixed-use research and development park. At a minimum,
the concept plan shall indicate the proposed location of all
buildings, structures, parking, landscaping, open space,
utilities, signage, pedestrian walkways and driveways. The
concept plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board for
review prior to any formal preliminary site plan or
subdivision plan.
14. In order to foster the attractiveness of a site designated as
a planned mixed-use research and development park and
the surrounding neighborhoods and in order to provide an
efficient road and utility network, ensure the movement of
traffic, implement Comprehensive Planning and better
serve the public health, safety and general welfare, the
design standards and criteria in § 550-165 shall be utilized
by the Planning Board in reviewing all site plans and
subdivision plats relating to a planned mixed-use research
and development park. These standards shall not be
§ 550-81 HAMILTON CODE § 550-81
1:962
regarded as inflexible requirements. They are not intended
to discourage creativity, invention and innovation.
[Amended 4-2-2019 by Ord. No. 19-013]
15. A planned mixed-use research and development park shall
adhere to the general development plan submission
requirements as identified in § 550-228.
(h) Indoor recreation. [Added 8-19-2014 by Ord. No. 14-046]
B. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Fences and walls. (See § 550-114.)
(3) Signs.
(4) Temporary sales or construction trailer(s).
(a) The trailer(s) shall be located on the same lot as the principal
permitted use and shall meet all setback requirements for
principal buildings in the zone.
(b) The trailer(s) shall be shown on the site plan for the principal
permitted use and shall be reviewed by the administrative
officer on an individual case basis in accordance with the
performance standards in § 550-120.
(c) The trailer(s) shall be permitted to remain only for the period
of construction, renting or sale of the permitted use.
(d) Only one sales trailer and two construction trailers are
permitted per project.
(5) Restaurants or cafeterias located within a principal building.
(6) Banks located within a principal building containing a permitted
use in accordance with this section.
(7) Recreational areas and parks, provided that the facility is owned
and operated by an industry situated within the REO or RD
Districts for the use of its employees or guests.
(8) Amateur radio antennas and antenna support structure not to
exceed 45 feet in height, unless the structure is retractable. The
height of a retractable antenna structure shall not exceed 45 feet
when the structure is not being used for the transmission and/or
reception of amateur radio signals and 65 feet when the structure
is fully extended and in use for the transmission and/or reception of
amateur radio signals. Satellite dish antennas shall be installed in
accordance with the standards specified in § 550-137.
(9) Roof-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility.
§ 550-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-81
1:963
C. Other uses permitted upon application to the municipal agency for a
conditional use permit:
(1) Public utility installations.
(2) Hospitals, medical institutions, philanthropic or eleemosynary uses
in the REO-5 District only, provided that plans for such facilities
have met all requirements of state and Township health
regulations, but not including correctional uses or hospitals
exclusively for the isolation of contagious diseases or for the
insane.
(3) Private clubs, lodges, social buildings and fraternal organizations.
(4) Ground-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility as
a conditional accessory use in the RD District only.
(5) Solar or photovoltaic energy-generating parking structure as a
conditional accessory use in the RD District only.
(6) Hotels.
D. Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 45 feet in height
except in the REO-2 Zone, where the maximum height is limited to 35
feet. In the case of buildings with flat roofs, building height shall be
measured to the roof level and not to the top of the parapet wall.
E. Area and yard requirements.
Individual Use
Research
Park Use
Requirements REO-2REO-4REO-5 RD
All REO and
RD
(except
REO-2)
Minimum requirements
Principal building:
Lot area (acres) 2 4 5 10 4
Lot frontage (feet) 200 300 400 600 300
Lot width (feet) 200 300 400 600 300
Lot depth (feet) 400 500 400 400 400
Side yard, 1 (feet) 50 75 75 100 50
Side yard, total
(feet)
100 150 200 200 100
Front yard (feet) 75 80 150 150 80
Rear yard (feet) 100 100 75 100 50
Accessory building:
§ 550-81 HAMILTON CODE § 550-81
1:964
Individual Use
Research
Park Use
Requirements REO-2REO-4REO-5 RD
All REO and
RD
(except
REO-2)
Distance to side line
(feet)
50 75 75 100 50
Distance to rear line
(feet)
100 75 75 100 50
Distance to other
building (feet)
50 50 50 50 50
Maximum requirements
Floor area ratio 0.189 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25
Impervious surface
coverage (percent)
55% 55% 55% 55% 55%
F. General requirements.
(1) Any principal building may contain more than one use or
organization. More than one principal building may be constructed
on any lot, provided that all chapter requirements are met and that
a minimum distance of 50 feet is provided between the principal
buildings.
(2) At least the first 50 feet adjacent to any street line, including state
and interstate roadways, and 50 feet adjacent to any lot line shall
not be used for parking and shall be planted and maintained in
lawn area or ground cover or landscaped with evergreen
shrubbery. Within a research park and within the REO-2 Zone, the
required buffer along the side or rear property lines may be
reduced to 25 feet in width.
(3) Any parking proposed within the front yard shall be screened by a
landscaped berm of at least 4 1/2 feet in height and having a slope
of three to one. The berm shall be required to screen parking
located between buildings and any street, including any state or
interstate roadway.
(4) A minimum buffer area of 150 feet in width shall be provided along
any common property line with a residential district, and a
minimum buffer area of 75 feet in width shall be provided along any
common property line with any residential use; except that, in the
REO-2 and the REO-4 Districts, these buffers may be reduced by 2/
3.
(5) Yard requirements adjoining railroads. The side and rear yard
requirements shall be reduced by 50% where they apply to those
§ 550-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-81
1:965
portions of a lot immediately adjoining and bounded by the rightof-
way of a railroad.
(6) Where the front yard area abuts a residential zone, the minimum
front setback shall be 100 feet in all research parks in the REO and
RD Zones. Off-street parking shall be prohibited within the front
yard area in these instances.
(7) Cross easements to allow for traffic and pedestrian circulation
between properties within the REO-2 Zone shall be required as a
part of any site plan approval.
(8) For additional general requirements see § 550-84, General
requirements in nonresidential districts.
G. Specific requirements.
(1) For uses in the RD District abutting Edgebrook Road, access shall
not be permitted directly onto Edgebrook Road. However, a
secondary emergency or service access may be permitted,
provided that the applicant demonstrates that there will be no
adverse impact on the roadway or properties in the area resulting
from use of this access.
(2) For uses in the RD District abutting Edgebrook Road, a buffer of at
least 300 feet in width shall be provided adjacent to Edgebrook
Road and shall not be used for parking and maintained in lawn area
or ground cover or landscaped with evergreen shrubbery.
(3) For uses in the RD District along the Edgebrook stream corridor
and abutting residential districts, a buffer at least 300 feet in width
shall be provided from the residential district boundary.
(4) For uses in the RD District along Route 130 affected by the Master
Plan parallel service road system, the following shall apply:
(a) The Master Plan roadway, as depicted on the Master Plan Map,
calls for a fifty-foot-wide right-of-way. Any land dedicated by a
property owner will not be deducted from the property's
prededication gross lot area when calculating permitted
development based on FAR or MIS.
(b) Applicants are to size basins, pipes, and other drainage
infrastructure to accommodate that portion of the Master Plan
roadway that is on the site subject to development.
(c) Buffers, parking, and loading areas must be set back a
minimum of 15 feet from the Master Plan road right-of-way.
Parking and loading buffers are to consist of the following:
1. Parking buffer.
§ 550-81 HAMILTON CODE § 550-81
1:966
a. Deciduous trees with a minimum two-and-one-halfinch
caliper are to be planted 35 feet on center along
the entire length of the fifteen-foot-wide buffer.
b. A continuous buffer of three-foot to four-foot-high
shrubs is to be planted along the entire length of the
fifteen-foot-wide buffer. A minimum three-and-onehalf-
foot-high masonry wall may be substituted for the
shrubs.
c. The design of the walls must be approved by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
2. Loading area buffer.
a. Portions of the site where loading areas abut the
Master Plan roadway, a continuous double row of
evergreen trees shall be planted. Trees shall be six
feet to eight feet high at time of planting, and they
shall be planted a maximum of 15 feet on center.
Acceptable trees shall include white pines, Douglas fir,
spruce varieties, Canadian hemlock, or equal.
(d) The right-of-way for the Master Plan roadway shall be set back
a minimum of 100 feet from residential zones.
(5) Principal buildings and accessory structures shall be set back a
minimum of 150 feet from residential zones and a minimum of 30
feet from the right-of-way of the Master Plan roadway.
(6) Parking areas shall be set back a minimum of 150 feet from
residential zones.
(7) Properties affected by the Master Plan road system shall be
required to construct that portion of the Master Plan roadway that
traverses the property, as well as any additional on-site or off-site
improvements required by NJDOT. In addition, TID obligations shall
be required per ordinance, with priority spending to be applied to
the cost of constructing bridges within the Route 130 study area
and the Route 156/Route 130 traffic signal.
H. Minimum off-street loading. See § 550-119E, F, G and H for additional
standards.
I. Minimum off-street parking. See § 550-119 of this chapter for
standards.
J. Signs. See § 550-124 of this chapter for standards.
K. Previously approved industrial parks.
(1) All previously approved industrial parks, approved prior to the date
of the adoption of this chapter, and now located within the REO and
§ 550-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-81
1:967
§ 550-82. MFG Manufacturing and I Industrial Districts. [Amended
1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008; 2-8-1995 by Ord. No. 94-005;
RD Districts may be developed in accordance with the following
provisions:
(a) Minimum requirements.
1. Principal building.
a. Lot area: two acres.
b. Lot frontage: 250 feet.
c. Lot width: 250 feet.
d. Lot depth: 250 feet.
e. Side yard, minimum: 35 feet.
f. Side yard, total: 100 feet.
g. Front yard: 75 feet.
h. Rear yard: 50 feet.
2. Accessory building.
a. Distance to side line: 40 feet.
b. Distance to rear line: 40 feet.
c. Distance to other building: 40 feet.
(b) Maximum requirements. Combined coverage of principal and
accessory building(s): 30%.
(2) Uses on these properties, however, shall be limited to those listed
as permitted in accordance with § 550-81A, B and C.
(3) Development credit adjustments for environmentally constrained
areas. See § 550-84K of this chapter for standards.
(4) Architectural design standards. For architectural design standards,
see § 550-112 of this chapter.
(5) Landscaping and preservation of natural features. See §§ 550-117,
550-119 and 550-130 of this chapter for design standards.
(6) Fences, walls and sight triangles. See § 550-114 for details.
(7) Source-separation or recycling plan. See § 550-134 of this chapter
for requirements.
(8) Accessory buildings. See § 550-111 of this chapter for design
standards.
§ 550-81 HAMILTON CODE § 550-82
1:968
1-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-008; 2-21-1996 by Ord. No. 96-017;
12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-043]
In the MFG Manufacturing and I Industrial Districts, the following shall
apply:
A. Purpose. The MFG and I areas are proposed to permit a full spectrum of
industrially related uses, including warehouses and wholesale
distribution centers, but excluding activities which synthesize chemical
products for direct industrial sale.
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings. Any
manufacturing, processing or industrial use listed below, provided that
the use meets the performance requirements of Hamilton Township,
meets applicable state and federal environmental standards and does
not have inherent characteristics which are noxious, injurious, offensive
or hazardous to the health, safety or general welfare of the community.
All uses permitted in the REO and RD Districts are also permitted in the
MFG and I Districts. Uses permitted exclusively in the REO and RD
research parks are also permitted exclusively in industrial parks.
(1) Office buildings or offices for executive administrative purposes.
(2) Fabrication of metal, paper and wood products.
(3) Textile mill products.
(4) Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics.
(5) Leather products.
(6) Blank books, looseleaf binders, bookbinding and related work.
(7) Manufacturing of electrical and electronic equipment and supplies.
(8) Professional, scientific and controlling instruments.
(9) Photographic and optical goods, watches and clocks.
(10) Wholesale trade distribution centers.
(11) Food industries, except rendering or refining of fats and oils.
(12) Manufacturing of light machinery and equipment, such as office
and accounting machines, small machine parts and portable power
tools.
(13) Pharmaceutical products manufacturing.
(14) Concrete central mixing and proportioning plants, in the MFG
District only.
(15) Rubber products, including tires, tubes and tire recapping, in the
MFG District only. The manufacture of rubber is prohibited.
§ 550-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-82
1:969
(16) Manufacture and repair of light and heavy machinery, in the MFG
District only.
(17)Wood and lumber bulk processing, including sawmills, planing
mills and wood-preserving treatment, in the MFG District only.
(18) Manufacturing of metal and metal products, processing,
fabrication and assembly, but excepting the processing of basic
products of such metals from new materials using open-hearth
furnaces, Bessemer converters or other techniques, in the MFG
District only.
(19) Industrial parks, in both the manufacturing and industrial zones,
on tracts of land at least 25 acres in area, comprised of uses in
accordance with this section.
(20) Service industries for the printing trade.
(21) Fabricated metal products, such as cutlery, hand tools, general
hardware, fabricated structural metal products, screw machine
products, bolts, nuts, screws, rivets, washers, springs, valves, pipe
fittings and miscellaneous fabricated wire products, as well as the
manufacturing of wire.
(22) Coating, engraving and allied services, in the MFG District only.
(23) Freight forwarding.
(24) Miscellaneous services incidental to transportation, such as
packing and crating.
(25) Construction materials.
(26) Hardware, plumbing and heating equipment and supplies.
(27) Rubber and plastic footwear, hose, belting and miscellaneous
plastics products, in the MFG District only.
(28) Engines, turbines, metalworking machinery and equipment,
special industry machinery and general industry machinery and
equipment, in the MFG District only.
(29) Refrigeration and service industry machinery.
(30) Miscellaneous machinery.
(31) Motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment; motorcycles, bicycles
and parts; miscellaneous transportation equipment, in the MFG
District only.
(32) Machine shops and tool and die shops.
(33) Buildings used exclusively by municipal, county, state or federal
governments.
§ 550-82 HAMILTON CODE § 550-82
1:970
(34) All existing residences as of the date of the adoption of this
subsection are permitted. For purposes of evaluating proposed
additions or expansions, bulk and yard requirements of those
residential zone districts which most closely resemble the size of
the lot in question will be utilized.
(35) Automobile and small truck rentals exclusive of flatbeds, tractortrailers
or similar size trucks.
(36) Limousine service.
(37) Recycling of wood and wood products, grass and concrete products
only, provided that there are no inherent hazards associated with
such operations, and further provided that no nuisance may occur
from fire or explosion, toxic or corrosive fumes, gas, smoke, odors,
obnoxious dust or vapor, offensive noise or vibrations, glare, flashes
or objectionable effluent and electrical interference which may
adversely affect or impair the normal use and peaceful enjoyment
of any property, structure or dwelling located in any zone or
district. The likelihood of groundwater contamination or depletion,
air pollution and the problem of waste disposal shall be considered.
(38) Child and infant care centers. See § 550-161F for design standards.
(39) Taxicab and bus companies with associated vehicle storage yards
(yards to be properly screened).
(40) Health and fitness centers.
(41) Indoor recreation uses.
(42) Art centers, on minimum tracts of five acres, of which at least
50,000 square feet in area shall be used for the display of art in an
indoor museum and/or outdoor sculpture park. Within an industrial
or office park, the minimum acreage need not be contiguous,
provided that in the aggregate a minimum of five acres is provided
within the park for the museum facility.
(43) Ground-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility
on a site 20 acres or larger within the MFG and I Districts only.
(44)Wind-energy-generating facility on a site 20 acres or larger within
the MFG and I Districts only. The use shall be prohibited on smaller
sites.
(45) Adult day care. [Added 9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-063]
(46) Craft brewery. [Added 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-041]
(47) Craft distillery. [Added 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-041]
(48) Contractor's storage, if confined entirely to a completely enclosed
building. Outside storage area for vehicles per § 550-82D(7).
[Added 1-2-2019 by Ord. No. 18-067]
§ 550-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-82
1:971
C. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Fences and walls. (See § 550-114.)
(3) Signs.
(4) Garages, storage buildings and toolsheds.
(5) Temporary sales or construction trailer(s).
(a) The trailer(s) shall be located on the same lot as the principal
permitted use and shall meet all setback requirements for
principal buildings in the zone.
(b) The trailer(s) shall be shown on the site plan for the principal
permitted use and shall be reviewed by the administrative
officer on an individual case basis in accordance with the
performance standards in § 550-120.
(c) The trailer(s) shall be permitted to remain only for the period
of construction, renting or sale of the permitted use.
(d) Only one sales trailer and two construction trailers are
permitted per project.
(6) Employee cafeterias as part of a principal building or as the entire
use of a principal building, provided that the cafeteria is limited in
service to the employees of the principal use designated on the site
plan as approved by the municipal agency.
(7) Recreational areas and parks for employees, provided that the
facility is owned and operated by an associated industry.
(8) Satellite dish antennas in accordance with the standards specified
in § 550-137.
(9) Roof-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility.
(10) Ground-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility
and solar or photovoltaic energy-generating parking structure on a
site 20 acres or larger within the MFG and I Districts only.
D. Other uses permitted upon application to the municipal agency for a
conditional use permit:
(1) Public utility installations, subject to the standards and conditions
set forth in Article IV.
(2) Service station.
(3) Car wash.
(4) Motor freight terminals.
§ 550-82 HAMILTON CODE § 550-82
1:972
(5) Single-user warehouse club, primarily engaged in selling
merchandise and services to businesses, industrial, commercial,
institutional or professional business users or to other wholesale or
retail users who have paid to become members of the warehouse
club.
(6) Ground-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility
on a site less than 20 acres as a conditional accessory use within
the MFG and I Districts only.
(7) Solar or photovoltaic energy-generating parking structure on a site
less than 20 acres as a conditional accessory use within the MFG
and I Districts only.
E. Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
F. General requirements.
(1) At least the first 50 feet adjacent to any street line and 10 feet
adjacent to any lot line shall not be used for parking and shall be
planted and maintained in lawn area or ground cover or landscaped
with evergreen shrubbery. Any parking proposed within the front
yard shall be screened by a landscaped berm of at least four feet in
height and having a two-to-one or three-to-one slope.
(2) A minimum buffer area of 80 feet in width shall be provided along
any common property line with a residential district or 40 feet
along any common property line with any residential use. [See
§§ 550-119G(7) and 550-130B.]
(3) Entrances and exits. Entrances and exits upon a public street or
road shall not be located within 100 feet of any street intersection,
the distance to be measured from the intersection of the right-ofway
lines at the corner affected and the closest point of such
proposed driveway. No entrance or exit, at the curbline only, shall
be closer than 12 feet from a side lot line. Entrance and exit sizes,
locations and construction shall also be in accordance with
requirements of the governmental agency having jurisdiction over
the facility upon which the permitted use has frontage.
(4) Yard requirements adjoining railroads and interstate highways. The
side and rear yard requirements shall be reduced by 50% where
they apply to those portions of a lot immediately adjoining and
bounded by the right-of-way of a railroad and/or an interstate
highway.
(5) Any principal building may contain more than one use or
organization. More than one principal building may be constructed
on any lot, provided that all chapter requirements are met and that
a minimum distance of 50 feet is provided between the principal
buildings.
§ 550-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-82
1:973
(6) Where the front yard area abuts a residential zone, the minimum
front setback shall increase to 100 feet in the MFG District
individual use, industrial park use and the I District industrial park
use.
(7) Merchandise, products, equipment or similar material or objects
may be stored outside in the MFG and I Districts, provided that
such outside storage area does not exceed 30% of the lot area and
is located in the rear yard. The area shall be enclosed entirely by a
fence, wall, plant material or combination thereof in order to
provide a visual barrier between the storage areas and any street,
residential zoning district or existing residential use. (See also
§ 550-84A.)
(8) For additional general requirements see § 550-84, General
requirements in nonresidential districts.
G. Minimum off-street loading. See § 550-119E, F, G and H for additional
standards.
H. Minimum off-street parking. See § 550-119 of this chapter for
standards.
I. Signs. See § 550-124 of this chapter for standards.
J. Area and yard requirements.
MFG District I District
Individual
Use
Industrial
Park Use
Individual
Use
Industrial
Park Use
Minimum requirements
Principal building:
Lot area (acres) 2 1 3 2
Lot frontage
(feet)
250 175 300 250
Lot width (feet) 250 175 300 250
Lot depth (feet) 250 175 300 250
Side yard,
minimum (feet)
35 15 50 35
Side yard, total
(feet)
100 50 150 100
Front yard (feet) 75 50 100 75
Rear yard (feet) 50 25 75 50
Accessory building:
Distance to side
line (feet)
40 30 50 40
§ 550-82 HAMILTON CODE § 550-82
1:974
§ 550-83. Area and lot widths for corner lots. [Amended 1-20-1993
by Ord. No. 93-008; 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-012]
MFG District I District
Individual
Use
Industrial
Park Use
Individual
Use
Industrial
Park Use
Distance to rear
line (feet)
40 30 50 40
Distance to
other building
(feet)
40 30 50 40
Maximum requirements
Floor area ratio 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25
Maximum
impervious surface
coverage (percent)
50% 50% 50% 50%
K. Architectural design standards. For architectural design standards, see
§ 550-112 of this chapter.
L. Landscaping and preservation of natural features. See §§ 550-117,
550-119 and 550-130 of this chapter for design standards.
M. Fences, walls and sight triangles. See § 550-114 for details.
N. Source-separation or recycling plan. See § 550-134 of this chapter for
requirements.
A. Generally. For corner lots, area and lot width shall be as follows:193
District
Area
(square feet
or acres)
Lot Width/
Frontage Each
Street
(feet)
Setback From
Each Street
(feet)
C 5 acres 400 125
R-5 5,000 50 20
R-7 9,000 90 25
R-10 12,100 110 30
193. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-83
1:975
District
Area
(square feet
or acres)
Lot Width/
Frontage Each
Street
(feet)
Setback From
Each Street
(feet)
Detached
dwellings in
planned
neighborhoods
and planned
communities
9,000 90 30
R-15 15,625 125 40
R-25 25,600 160 50
A/T 10 acres 300 501
NC 6,500 60 25
CC 9,300 75 302
HC 24,000 150 60
HC Shopping
Center
8 acres 400 100
HC Design
District I
20,000 125 30
HC Design
District Shopping
Center
15 acres 400 60
HC Design
District II
5,000 50
GC 24,400 150 60
GC Shopping
Center
8 acres 400 100
GSC 120,000 300 100
REO-2 2 acres 200 75
REO-4 3 acres 300 80
REO-5 5 acres 400 150
REO Park 3 acres 300 80
RD 5 acres 400 150
RD Park 3 acres 300 80
MFG 2 acres 250 75
MFG Park 1 acre 175 50
I 3 acres 300 150
I Park 2 acres 250 100
§ 550-83 HAMILTON CODE § 550-83
1:976
§ 550-84. General requirements in nonresidential districts.
[Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008]
General requirements for Neighborhood Commercial, Community
Commercial, Highway Commercial, General Commercial, all Research,
Engineering and Office Districts, Research and Development,
Manufacturing and Industrial Districts are as follows:
NOTES:
1 Thirty feet along nonprimary or nonsecondary streets.
2 Twenty feet where parking is provided in rear or side yards and
property is on major arterial, arterial or major collector.
B. Accessory buildings on corner lot. Accessory buildings on a corner lot
shall not be erected closer to the street line than the front yard required
on the adjacent lot.
A. No merchandise, products, waste, equipment or similar material or
object shall be displayed or stored outside. In industrial and
manufacturing districts, such materials may be stored outside if
properly screened and part of an approved site plan submission.
B. All buildings shall be compatibly designed, whether constructed all at
one time or in stages over a period of time. All building walls facing any
street or residential district line shall be suitably finished for aesthetic
purposes.
C. All areas not utilized for buildings, parking, loading, access aisles and
driveways or pedestrian walkways shall be suitably landscaped with
shrubs, ground cover, seeding or similar plantings and maintained in
good condition.
D. Any building or use permitted shall be served by a public sanitary
sewerage facility and a public water supply system. A statement from
the appropriate agency allocating capacity in the systems shall be
required.
E. No loading docks, service areas or doors or areas used for parking or
storing of trucks shall be on any street frontage. Provision for handling
all freight shall be on those sides of any building which do not face on
any street or proposed street. All such areas shall be screened from
view from the street. Screening shall consist of at least a dense and
continuous placement of large evergreens planted at a height of
between six and eight feet located along the crest of a four-to-five-foothigh
berm. Spacing shall be determined according to species and in
order to achieve a total screen of the above areas. Fencing may be
utilized in conjunction with the evergreens, but not as a substitute. The
height of the evergreen portion of the screen may be reduced through
additional berm height or the depression of areas to be screened, so
§ 550-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-84
1:977
long as the effective height is not altered and the intended screening is
achieved.
F. Air-conditioning and other mechanical equipment on roofs and on
building grounds shall be screened from public view with suitable
materials to harmonize with the total development.
G. All permitted and conditional uses in these zone districts shall be
required to screen from view all trash and garbage depots. Such depots
shall be constructed on concrete pads suitable to withstand the weight
of garbage disposal trucks.
H. All uses other than single-family or two-family dwellings must provide
their own commercial trash pickup.
I. There shall be at least one trash and garbage pickup location provided
by each building, which shall be separated from the parking spaces by
either a location within the building or in a pickup location outside the
building which shall be a steel-like totally enclosed container located in
a manner to be obscured from view from parking areas, streets and
adjacent residential uses or zoning districts by a fence, wall, planting or
combination of the three. If located within the building, the doorway
may serve both the loading and trash/garbage functions, and if located
outside the building, it may be located adjacent to or within the general
loading area(s), provided that the container in no way interferes with or
restricts loading and unloading functions.
J. The disinterment and/or removal of animal remains buried in a pet
cemetery is prohibited.
K. Development credit adjustments for environmentally constrained areas.
Where there are wetlands on a property, floor area ratio (FAR) will not
be based upon the area of the entire property. Wetland areas on the
property will only be included in FAR calculations based upon the
following sliding scale:
Extent of Wetland and/or
Floodplain
(expressed as percentage of
total tract)
Allowable Development Credit
for Wetland
(percent)
1% to 25% 60%
26% to 50% 50%
51% to 60% 40%
61% to 70% 30%
71% to 100% 20%
L. Accessory buildings attached to principal buildings shall comply in all
respects with the yard requirements of this chapter in respect to the
principal building. For additional standards see § 550-111.
§ 550-84 HAMILTON CODE § 550-85
1:978
§ 550-85. HC Highway Commercial Design District I. [Amended
1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008]
In the HC Highway Commercial Design District I, the following shall apply:
A. Purpose; location.
(1) The purpose of the HC Highway Commercial Design District I Zone
is to provide convenient, aesthetically pleasing and pedestriansensitive
areas for shopping for the citizens of Hamilton and for
highway users in general, without compromising the carrying
capacity of the highways. It is intended that this can be achieved by
improving circulation between sites by encouraging shared access
and shared parking and by providing yard criteria that encourage
rear and side yard parking.
(2) This area extends from Weston Avenue to Paxson Avenue Extension
along both sides of Route 33.
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in the buildings. All uses
permitted in the HC Highway Commercial Zone, subject to the
requirements of that zone, in addition to the requirements of the HC
Highway Commercial Design District I Zone.
C. Area and yard requirements.
HC Highway Commercial Design District I
Individual Use
Shopping
Center
Minimum requirements
Principal building:
Lot area (square feet or
acres)
20,000 square
feet
15 acres
Lot frontage (feet) 125 400
Lot width (feet) 125 400
Lot depth (feet) 150 400
Side yard (each) (feet) 10 60
Front yard (feet) 30 60
Rear yard (feet) 30 100
Accessory building:
Distance to side line (feet) 10 60
Distance to rear line (feet) 20 60
Distance to other buildings
(feet)
10 20
Maximum requirements
FAR 0.18 0.18
§ 550-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-85
1:979
HC Highway Commercial Design District I
Individual Use
Shopping
Center
MIS (percent) 60% 60%
D. General requirements.
(1) Any principal building may contain more than one use and/or
organization, provided that the total FAR and MIS of the combined
activities does not exceed the maximum FAR and MIS specified for
the district; and provided, further, that each activity occupies a
minimum gross floor area of 750 square feet.
(2) No merchandise, products, equipment or similar material or
objects shall be displayed or stored outside.
(3) A minimum buffer area of 20 feet in width shall be provided along
any common property line with a residential district or residential
use. See §§ 550-119G(7) and 550-130B of this chapter.
(4) Along each street line a thirty-foot-wide, suitably landscaped strip
shall be provided in conjunction with shopping center
development. In addition, paved parking areas shall include
landscaped planting strips, particularly at the end of parking rows.
Said ends of parking areas shall be surrounded by concrete curb or
Belgian block curb and shall be a minimum of nine feet in width.
Planting strips shall be planted with deciduous trees and vegetative
ground cover. No parking shall take place in this buffer area.
(5) At least five feet adjacent to any side lot line shall not be used for
parking or driveway aisles unless the parking or driveway aisle is to
be used as part of a shared parking or access plan. The five-footwide
buffer is to be suitably landscaped to buffer the impact of
parking lots on adjacent properties.
(6) Common driveways shall be encouraged and cross easements shall
be required to allow vehicular movements between adjacent
commercial properties. The easements shall be located at the rear
of the property. Cross easements shall be a minimum of 24 feet
wide.
(7) All service facilities will be located at the rear of the property. All
such facilities shall be appropriately screened from adjacent
commercial and residential properties.
(8) Each property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of
common easement areas.
(9) Signage. A coordinated sign package must be provided for review
prior to final approval. One ground sign, not to exceed 50 square
feet and six feet in height, shall be permitted within the front yard,
§ 550-85 HAMILTON CODE § 550-85
1:980
§ 550-86. HC Highway Commercial Design District II. [Amended
1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008]
In the HC Highway Commercial Design District II, the following shall apply:
set back a minimum of 15 feet from the front lot line. Two facade
signs not to exceed, in aggregate, 10% of the front facade are
permitted, one each on the front and rear facade of the building.
(10) Awnings, arcades, fountains, plazas and other public amenities are
encouraged and will not be considered in MIS or FAR calculations.
Awnings and arcades may extend five feet into the front yard
setback area.
(11) Pedestrian linkages between adjacent properties are encouraged.
(12) Street trees are required along the frontage of each property, to be
planted 40 feet on center, and they shall be a minimum of two-andone-
half-inch caliper at the time of planting.
(13) All other standards of this chapter not in conflict with the above are
applicable to the Highway Commercial Design District.
(14) For additional general requirements see § 550-84, General
requirements in nonresidential districts.
E. Architectural design standards. For architectural design standards see
§ 550-112 of this chapter.
F. Source-separation or recycling plan. See § 550-134 of this chapter for
requirements.
A. Purpose; location.
(1) The purpose of the HC Highway Commercial Design District II zone
is to provide convenient, aesthetically pleasing and pedestriansensitive
areas for shopping for the citizens of Hamilton and for
highway users in general, without compromising the carrying
capacity of the highways. It is intended that this can be achieved by
improving circulation between sites by encouraging shared access
and shared parking and by providing yard criteria that encourage
rear and side yard parking.
(2) This district overlay is for the HC Highway Commercial Zone along
Chambers Street, between Cedar Lane and South Broad Street,
and along South Broad Street between Cedar Lane and Park
Avenue, including the property zoned HC Highway Commercial on
the northeast corner of South Broad Street.
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in the buildings.
(1) All uses permitted in the NC Neighborhood Commercial and CC
Community Commercial Zones, subject to the requirements of
§ 550-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-86
1:981
those zones in addition to the requirements of the HC Highway
Commercial Design District II Zone.
(2) Restaurants, bars and taverns.
(3) Automobile parts store.
(4) Beverage store.
(5) Bicycle sales, rental or repair.
(6) Blueprinting, copy or facsimile store.
(7) Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county or local
municipal government for public purposes.
(8) Cabinet and woodworking shop.
(9) Catering establishment.
(10) Furniture and furnishings, sale of.
(11) Museum.
(12) Art gallery.
(13) Antique store.
(14) Laboratory serving medical and dental requirements.
(15) Parcel delivery station.
(16) Pet shop, not involving the treatment or boarding of cats and dogs.
(17) Printing, lithography, publishing and photostating establishments.
(18) Taxidermist.
(19) Theater, not including drive-in or open air.
(20) Residential uses.
(a) One-family dwellings, existing.
(b) Two-family dwellings, existing.
(c) Attached dwellings, existing.
(d) Multifamily uses, boardinghouses or rooming houses are not
permitted.
(21) Office furniture, appliances and office supply business.
(22) Supermarkets.
(23) One residential unit permitted on ground floor of existing
buildings. [Added 1-2-2019 by Ord. No. 18-067]
§ 550-86 HAMILTON CODE § 550-86
1:982
C. Area and yard requirements.
HC Highway Commercial Design District II
Minimum requirements
Principal building:
Lot area (square feet) 5,000
Lot frontage (feet) 50
Lot width (feet) 50
Lot depth (feet) 100
Side yard (feet) 10
Rear yard (feet) 35
Front yard (feet) 0
Accessory building:
Distance to side line (feet) 10
Distance to rear line (feet) 20
Distance to other building (feet) 10
Maximum requirements
FAR 0.6
MIS (percent) 80%
D. General requirements.
(1) Any principal building may contain more than one use and/or
organization, provided that the total FAR and MIS of the combined
activities does not exceed the maximum FAR and MIS specified for
the district; and provided, further, that each permitted activity
occupies a minimum 750 square feet gross floor area.
(2) No merchandise, products, equipment or similar material or
objects shall be displayed or stored outside.
(3) A minimum buffer area of 10 feet in width shall be provided along
any common property line with a residential district. Buffers are to
be suitably landscaped to reduce the negative impact of parking
areas on adjacent property owners. No parking is to take place
within the buffer, except that, in the case of a common alley, the
alley may be within the buffer area. In conjunction with a common
alley, a minimum five-foot landscaped buffer is required.
(4) Along each street line, brick sidewalks shall be provided. Street
trees shall be planted 40 feet on center along the property frontage
and they shall be a minimum of two-and-one-half-inch caliper at the
time of planting. Street amenities such as benches, landscape
strips, landscape planters and bicycle racks shall be provided
where possible.
§ 550-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-86
1:983
(5) Yard requirements, side yards.
(a) Where a building adjoins another on the side lot line and a
common party wall is used, no side yard shall be required.
(b) Where a building is not erected on a side lot line, the side yard
not abutting a street shall be not less than 10 feet in width.
(6) Parking and loading. All parking and loading is to be located at the
rear or side of the building, where practical. Access is to be
controlled through the rear of the property, where practical, using
the common alley system. All spaces for nonresidential uses shall
be provided within a five-hundred-foot radius of the building and on
the same side of South Broad Street or Chambers Street to which
such facilities are appurtenant. When practical difficulties prevent
the establishment of off-street parking facilities upon the same lot
with the use or building to be served, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Planning Board may, after public hearing and notice
and subject to appropriate conditions, permit the following
exemption:
(a) Required off-street parking facilities may be established on
another lot or parcel, provided that such substitute facility is
located within a five-hundred-foot radius of the building or
premises and on the same side of South Broad Street or
Chambers Street to which such facilities are appurtenant.
Such off-street parking facilities and accessways shall be
reserved for such use by deed covenants or agreements which
subject their control to the Township under conditions
approved by the Board.
(b) Required off-street parking requirements may be reduced
where public parking facilities exist within a five-hundred-foot
radius of the building or premises and on the same side of
South Broad Street or Chambers Street to which such facilities
are appurtenant. Applicants must demonstrate that parking is
available in said facility. Upon review and conditions approved
by the Board, the applicant's parking requirement may be
reduced by a number deemed appropriate by the Board.
(c) In the case of residential uses, on-site parking must be
provided at a rate of two spaces per unit.
(7) Signage. Two facade signs not to exceed, in aggregate, 10% of the
front facade are permitted, one each on the front and rear facade of
the building.
(8) Awnings are encouraged, where appropriate, and they will not be
considered in setback calculations.
(9) Where appropriate, rear alleys will provide vehicular and service
access to the site. Alleys shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width and
§ 550-86 HAMILTON CODE § 550-86
1:984
shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the rear property line. Alleys
will not be considered in MIS calculations.
(10) Alleys and/or rear property lines must be adequately buffered from
adjacent residential zones. Buffers shall take the form of
landscaping, walls, fences or a combination, as deemed
appropriate by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
The goal is to reduce the negative impacts of commercial uses on
residential uses.
(11) Planters and landscape strips shall be required along the sidewalk
within the frontage of the site. The form and appropriateness of the
landscaping shall be determined by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment. The goal is to provide an aesthetically
pleasing environment for the pedestrian areas of the sidewalk and
commercial area.
(12) For additional general requirements, see § 550-84, General
requirements in nonresidential districts.
E. Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
F. Other uses permitted upon application to the municipal agency for
conditional use permit:
(1) Public utility installations.
(2) Joint occupancy buildings.
G. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Fences and walls. (See § 550-114 of this chapter.)
(3) Garages (community and private only).
(4) Storage buildings associated with the principal use only.
(5) Temporary construction trailers and one sign, not exceeding 100
square feet, advertising the prime contractor, subcontractor(s),
architect, financing institution and similar data for the period of
construction beginning with the issuance of a construction permit
and concluding with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or
one year, whichever is less, provided that said trailer(s) and sign
are on the site where construction is taking place and are set back
at least 15 feet from all street and lot lines.
H. Architectural design standards. For architectural design standards see
§ 550-112 of this chapter.
I. Source-separation or recycling plan. See § 500-134 of this chapter for
requirements.
§ 550-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-87
1:985
§ 550-87. Special Housing Zone I. [Amended 12-21-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-043]
In the Special Housing Zone I, the following shall apply.
A. Purpose; location.
(1) The purpose of this zone district is to implement the Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan, as accepted, granted substantive
certification by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH).
(2) The zone encompasses only Lot 13 in Section 623.
B. Principal permitted uses. Principal permitted uses on land and in the
building shall be as follows:
(1) Detached single-family dwelling units in accordance with R-7 Zone
standards and/or zero-lot-line single-family detached dwelling units
on minimum lots of 5,000 square feet.
(2) Public parks and playgrounds, conservation areas and public
purpose uses, but not including amusement parks or similar uses
which detract from the natural rural characteristics of the district
or are operated for profit.194
(3) Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county or local
municipal governments.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses permitted shall be as follows:
(1) Private residential pools, with setbacks as follows:
(a) Distance from principal structure: five feet.
(b) Side yard setback: six feet.
(c) Rear yard setback: 10 feet.
(2) Decks and patios, in accordance with the following standards and
which shall not be included within the calculation of building
coverage.
(a) Side yard setback: five feet.
(b) Rear yard setback: 10 feet.
(3) Private residential tool or garden sheds, not to exceed 12 by 12 feet
and located three feet from property lines.
(4) Off-street parking and private garages attached to the principal
building.
194. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-87 HAMILTON CODE § 550-87
1:986
(5) Fences, which shall be uniform and adhere to the height and style
of the primary fencing as established during the subdivision
process.
(6) The keeping of not more than two domestic animals over six
months old for individual domestic purposes.
(7) One temporary sales office per subdivision, whose location is to be
approved by the Division of Planning, only for the period of
construction, renting or sale of the permitted use.
(8) Amateur radio antennas and antenna support structure not to
exceed 45 feet in height, unless the structure is retractable. The
height of a retractable antenna structure shall not exceed 45 feet
when the structure is not being used for the transmission and/or
reception of amateur radio signals and 65 feet when the structure
is fully extended and in use for the transmission and/or reception of
amateur radio signals.
(9) Roof-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility.
D. Maximum building height. Maximum building height shall be as follows:
(1) No building shall exceed 35 feet in height and 2.5 stories.
(2) The height of accessory buildings shall not exceed 12 feet.
E. Area and yard requirements. Area and yard requirements shall be as
follows:
Special Housing Zone I
Requirement R-7 Zero Lot Line
Lot area (square feet) 7,000 5,000
Lot frontage (feet) 70 50
Lot width (feet) 70 50
Lot depth (feet) 90 90
Side yard (feet) 10 (each side) 15 (1 side only)
Front yard (feet) 25 20
Rear yard (feet) 25 20
Maximum building coverage
(percent)
25% 35
F. Parking. Each individual use shall provide parking spaces according to
the following minimum provisions.
(1) Where a permitted use of land includes different specific activities
with different specific parking requirements, the total number of
required parking spaces shall be obtained by individually
§ 550-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-87
1:987
§ 550-88. Special Housing Zone II or IIA. [Added 12-18-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-060; amended 12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-045;
12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-043]
In the Special Housing Zone II or IIA, the following shall apply:
computing the parking requirements for each different activity and
adding the resulting numbers together.
(2) Minimum off-street parking.
(a) Dwelling units shall each provide two spaces per dwelling unit.
(b) See § 550-119 for additional standards.
G. Permitted signs. See § 550-124 of this chapter for standards.
H. General requirements.
(1) Streets shall include a cartway of 34 feet within a right-of-way of 50
feet.
(2) Buffers. There shall be a twenty-five-foot-deep buffer along South
Broad Street (measured from the right-of-way line), which shall
contain landscaping and a minimum three-foot-high berm with a
minimum grade ratio of three to one, and which shall be
incorporated into the rear yard setback of lots adjoining South
Broad Street.
(3) Roof overhangs/eaves may extend over the lot line up to a
maximum of 18 inches when associated with zero-lot-line
dwellings.
(4) It is required that on-site active recreation facilities on at least a
single, contiguous one-half-acre lot designated for such use be
provided in lieu of all contributions required for recreation.
A. Purpose; location.
(1) The purpose of this zone district is to implement the Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan, as accepted, which granted
substantive certification of the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing (COAH).
(2) The zone encompasses only Lot 34 (1.44 acres) and a portion of Lot
107 in Section 282, which encompasses 4.76 acres and extends
399.7 feet in an easterly direction along Leonard Avenue from Lot
34.
(3) Special Housing Zone IIA encompasses only Lot 3 (+10 acres) in
Section 2154.
B. Principal permitted uses. Principal permitted uses on land and in the
building shall be as follows:
§ 550-87 HAMILTON CODE § 550-88
1:988
(1) Apartments which would be age-restricted for senior citizens and
apartments for the disabled who may also be senior citizens.
Occupants of these apartments must meet the income criteria
established by COAH.
(2) Public parks and playgrounds, conservation areas and public
purpose uses, but not including amusement parks or similar uses
which detract from the natural rural characteristics of the district
or are operated for profit.
(3) Buildings used exclusively by the federal, state, county or local
municipal governments.
C. Accessory uses. Accessory uses permitted shall be as follows:
(1) Storage sheds or storage buildings.
(2) Off-street parking.
(3) Garage(s).
(4) Community center which is subordinate to apartment uses.
(5) Offices for management and personnel of the apartment uses.
(6) Roof-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility.
D. Maximum building height. Maximum building height shall be as follows:
(1) No building shall exceed 45 feet in height.
(2) The height of accessory buildings shall not exceed 30 feet in height.
E. Area and yard requirements. Area and yard requirements shall be as
follows:
S2 Special Housing
Minimum Requirements
Principal building:
Lot area (acres) 6
Lot frontage (feet) 45
Lot width (feet) 45
Lot depth (feet) 200
Side yard, each (feet) 50
Front yard (feet) 50
Rear yard (feet) 50
Accessory building:
Distance to side line (feet) 25
Distance to rear line (feet) 25
§ 550-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-88
1:989
§ 550-89. Planned Retirement Development Overlay Zone and
Planned Retirement Development Zone. [Added 2-5-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-005; amended 4-7-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009; 12-20-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-057]
In the Planned Retirement Development Overlay Zone and the Planned
Retirement Development Zone, the following shall apply:
S2 Special Housing
Distance to principal building
(feet)
25
Maximum Requirements
Building coverage (percent) 20%
F. Minimum off-street parking. Each individual use shall provide parking
spaces according to the following minimum provisions:
(1) Dwelling units shall provide 0.9 off-street parking spaces per unit.
(2) See § 550-119 of this chapter for additional standards.
G. Permitted signs. See § 550-124 of this chapter for standards.
A. Purpose; location.
(1) The purpose of a planned retirement development is to provide for
a variety of dwelling unit types and/or health care facilities and
services in the Township for the elderly population which is
growing both locally and in the county and State of New Jersey.
Dwelling units in a planned retirement development are intended
for mature adults, 55 years of age or older, and contain a variety of
housing types and services to satisfy a wide range of life styles. A
planned retirement development shall contain recreational support
facilities and may include health care facilities specifically
designed for these individuals.
(2) This overlay zone is for tract areas as identified on the Land Use
Plan Map and Zoning Map. An entire tract area or portion thereof
may be the subject of a planned retirement development
application.
B. Principal permitted uses. Principal permitted uses on the land and in
the buildings shall be as follows:
(1) Any principal permitted use, accessory use or other use permitted
in the underlying zoning district shall continue to be allowed in
accordance with the standards specified for such uses found in the
appropriate section of this chapter.
(2) A planned retirement development, subject to the following
additional requirements and conforming to the findings of a
§ 550-88 HAMILTON CODE § 550-89
1:990
planned development as defined by the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45, and in accordance with an approved general
development plan:
(a) The following uses are principal permitted uses in a planned
retirement development, provided they meet the standards in
this section.
1. Detached single-family.
2. Semidetached two-family.
3. Single-family zero-lot-line.
4. Semidetached zero-lot-line.
5. Townhouse.
6. Multifamily.
7. Independent living facilities.
8. Assisted living/congregate care facilities.
9. Nursing home.
10. Existing single-family homes existing at the time of this
section (dated December 20, 2000) located only in the
Planned Retirement Development Zone. These homes are
subject to the bulk and yard requirements of the R-25 Zone
in § 550-73B(4) and (7).
(b) Age-restricted units (single-family detached, two-family
semidetached, single-family zero-lot-line, zero-lot-line
semidetached, townhouse and multifamily) shall be developed
at a gross density of not more than six dwelling units per acre,
excluding any acreage devoted to independent living, assisted
living/congregate care and nursing home facilities. All agerestricted
units shall be grouped or located together in
proximity to recreational facilities, open space, sidewalk and
bike path systems. The developer shall be required to provide
facilities for the maintenance and administration of the
development.
(c) Conversion or redevelopment of existing structures at the time
of adoption of this article to age-restricted, independent living,
assisted living or congregate care, and nursing home facilities
shall be subject to site plan review and the following
requirements:
1. The conversion of an existing structure(s) shall only be
permitted where the architectural character of the
existing structure(s) is improved and where all off-street
parking and building height requirements found in this
§ 550-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-89
1:991
article are addressed to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board.
2. There shall be no minimum lot size on which a conversion
may be permitted to occur; provided, however, no lot
existing at the time of adoption of this article on which a
conversion is proposed shall be further reduced in size.
3. Except as otherwise provided in this article, there shall be
no minimum lot width or frontage, no minimum building
setback, no maximum percentage of lot coverage, no
requirement as to front, side or rear yards, and no
requirement concerning the location of accessory
buildings or structures. However, no conversion or
redevelopment plan shall be approved unless the lot areas,
widths, depths and frontages, building setbacks,
percentages of lot coverage, front, side and rear yards,
and locations of accessory buildings or structures provided
for in the site plan are consonant with the public health,
safety and general welfare.
4. Open space and recreational and cultural facilities shall be
provided to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
5. A ten-foot landscaped and fenced buffer shall be located
along all property lines abutting nonresidential uses.
Provision may be made for a lighted pathway to any
adjacent commercial use deemed by the Township to be
advantageous for elderly citizen use.
6. Landscaping and fencing buffering shall be located along
all property lines abutting residential uses where deemed
appropriate by the Township.
(d) Recreational and cultural facilities for the use of the residents
of the development and their guests, including the following:
clubhouse, in-ground community swimming pool, and picnic
grounds. Recreational and cultural facilities shall not be
limited to the foregoing so that the applicant and Planning
Board may propose additional facilities. All such facilities shall
be subordinated to the residential character of the
development.
(e) Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to a planned
retirement development.
1. Off-street parking.
2. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in a
planned retirement development within a building(s) that
also contains independent living, assisted living or
congregate care, and nursing home units; recreational
§ 550-89 HAMILTON CODE § 550-89
1:992
facilities, physical therapy facilities, entertainment
facilities, libraries, food preparation facilities, dining
facilities, laundry and linen service facilities, nursing
services, housekeeping services, limited health care
facilities and services including nursing beds, security
facilities, administrative offices, staff facilities, storage and
maintenance, chapels, temporary guest lodging facilities;
and limited commercial service facilities, such as banking
facilities, post office, drugstore, barbershops and beauty
parlors, facilities for the sale of sundries, personal articles,
newsstand, gift shop, food and similar convenience
products for the residents, snack/coffee shop and such
other uses as are customarily associated with and
subordinate to the principal permitted uses. No outdoor
advertisement for these facilities shall be permitted.
3. Fences and walls, which shall be uniform in size and
materials and complement the architectural style, type
and design of the dwelling unit and the overall project
design, as established during the site plan review and
approval process. All fences and walls shall be constructed
when the development is constructed.
4. Decks and patios, which shall be uniform in size and
materials and complement the architectural style and
design of the dwelling unit and the overall project design,
as established during the site plan review and approval
process. All decks and patios shall be constructed when
the development is constructed.
5. Signage. A coordinated sign package must be provided for
review prior to final approval. The size, location, design,
color, texture, lighting and materials of all temporary and
permanent signs shall not detract from the design of
proposed buildings and structures and the surrounding
properties.
6. An area devoted to off-residence storage and recreational
vehicle parking for residence use only, subject to Planning
Board review and approval.
7. Entrance gatehouses, provided such structure(s) are
located along entrance roadway(s) to the property, are
located outside of any required sight triangle, and are
designed to complement the architectural style and the
overall project design.
8. Temporary construction trailer(s) and one sign, not
exceeding 100 square feet, advertising the prime
contractor, subcontractor(s), architect, financial
institution and similar data for the period of construction
§ 550-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-89
1:993
beginning with the issuance of a construction permit and
concluding with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
or one year, whichever is less, provided that said trailer(s)
and sign are on the site where construction is taking place
and are set back at least 15 feet from all street and lot
lines.
(f) Accessory uses for existing single-family homes in the Planned
Retirement Development Zone only. See § 550-73B(2), (6), (9),
(10) and (12).
(3) Conservation areas.
(4) Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
(5) Parks and playgrounds, but not including amusement parks or
similar uses which detract from the characteristic of the district or
are operated for profit.
(6) Farms. See § 550-136, Right to farm, of this chapter.
C. The following shall be the bulk, area and general regulations for a
planned retirement development.
(1) Lot sizes and dimensions, yard sizes and building arrangements
may be freely disposed and arranged for age-restricted units,
provided that the planned retirement development conforms to a
general development plan approved by the Planning Board
pursuant to the applicable provisions contained in this chapter and
in accordance with the following minimum standards:
(a) End wall (no openings) to end wall: 12 feet minimum.
(b) Any building face to street curb: 20 feet minimum.
(c) End wall to window wall: 30 feet minimum, except for zero-lotline
dwelling units, which shall be separated a minimum of 10
feet.
(d) Any building face to parking area: 12 feet minimum.
(e) Window wall to window wall: 30 feet minimum; except for
multifamily units, which shall be separated a minimum of 75
feet.
(f) The Planning Board may reduce the setback distances cited in
Subsection C(1)(a) through (e) above if extensive landscaping
and/or earth berming is placed between buildings.
(g) The following minimum standards shall apply if individual lots
are proposed for single-family, two-family, townhouse and
multifamily age-restricted units:
§ 550-89 HAMILTON CODE § 550-89
1:994
Single-Family Detached
Minimum lot area 5,000 square feet
Minimum lot frontage and
width
50 feet
Minimum lot depth 100 feet
Minimum front yard setback 20 feet
Minimum side yard setback 10 feet
Minimum rear yard setback 25 feet
Maximum impervious coverage 40%
Two-Family Semidetached
Minimum lot area 6,000 square feet
Minimum lot frontage and
width
80 feet
Minimum lot depth 75 feet
Minimum front yard setback 20 feet
Minimum side yard setback 10 feet
Minimum rear yard setback 20 feet
Maximum impervious coverage 40%
Single-Family Zero-Lot-Line
Minimum lot area 5,000 square feet
Minimum lot frontage and
width
50 feet
Minimum lot depth 100 feet
Minimum front yard setback 20 feet
Minimum side yard setback 0/10 feet
Minimum rear yard setback 15 feet
Maximum impervious coverage 40%
Zero-Lot-Line Semidetached
Minimum lot area 6,000 square feet
Minimum lot frontage and
width
65 feet
Minimum lot depth 90 feet
Minimum front yard setback 20 feet
Minimum side yard setback 0/10 feet
Minimum rear yard setback 15 feet
Maximum impervious coverage 40%
Townhouse (fee simple)
Minimum lot area 2,000 square feet
§ 550-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-89
1:995
Minimum lot frontage and
width
20 feet
Minimum lot depth 100 feet
Minimum front yard setback 20 feet
Minimum side yard setback 10 feet (end units)
Minimum rear yard setback 10 feet
Maximum impervious coverage 75%
Multifamily
Minimum distance from internal
roads
25 feet
Window wall to window wall 75 feet
Window wall to end wall 30 feet
End wall to end wall 12 feet
Building face to parking 12 feet
Building face to street curb 20 feet
(h) Minimum lot frontage, width, depth and yard setback
requirements shall not be regarded as inflexible, nor shall they
be applied in a manner that will adversely affect full
implementation of a plan of development. The attainment of
these requirements shall not be considered justification for
building placement and proper site plan design without other
considerations set forth in this article.
(2) All age-restricted units, except multifamily, shall be provided with
garages, and all independent living units shall be provided with
carports.
(3) All uses will be serviced by public water and sewer systems.
(4) Total impervious surface coverage for the tract area devoted to
age-restricted units shall be 40%.
(5) All units shall be designed in such a manner as to provide maximum
security and visual privacy from adjacent dwelling units and other
buildings. For zero-lot-line units, no windows of an adjoining unit
shall face the private outdoor living space of another unit. Walls
placed on lot lines shall not contain window openings on living
spaces, and cross-lot easements shall be provided so that adjacent
lot owners and/or homeowners' association may gain access to
their dwellings for the purposes of maintenance and repairs.
(6) No portion of any principal permitted use or parking lot shall be
located closer than 50 feet from a tract boundary line, 75 feet from
any off-site road right-of-way line, or 100 feet from any common
property line with a nonresidential use or nonresidential zoning
district. A twenty-five-foot-wide landscaped buffer shall be installed
§ 550-89 HAMILTON CODE § 550-89
1:996
within these setback areas to diminish the visual encroachment
of residential privacy and residential neighborhood characteristics
of a planned retirement development. Age-restricted units shall
be separated from all other on-site principal permitted uses by at
least 100 feet. These setback and landscape buffer requirements
may be increased by the Planning Board if more than 50% of a
planned retirement development's total site acreage is occupied
by independent living, assisted living/congregate care facilities or
nursing homes, and these setback and landscape buffer
requirements may be reduced by the Planning Board if the
applicant can demonstrate that additional landscaping, fencing
and/or earth berming will protect residents from negative visual
and physical impacts.
(7) There shall be a minimum unit setback of 200 feet from an existing
interstate road right-of-way or existing railroad right-of-way.
Sound-attenuation systems, barriers or devices, to include but not
be limited to walls, landscaping and earth berming capable of
reflecting noise, shall be placed within the setback area parallel to
the right-of-way. Units placed immediately adjacent to the road
right-of-way or railroad right-of-way shall also be architecturally
and structurally designed to mitigate noise impacts. Soundattenuation
systems shall be designed to meet New Jersey
Department of Transportation guidelines.
(8) Adequate off-street parking facilities for residents, employees and
visitors of a planned retirement development shall be provided as
follows:
(a) Age-restricted units, except for multifamily units: two off-street
spaces per unit, at least one of which must be provided in a
garage, plus 0.25 space per unit for visitors.
(b) Age-restricted multifamily units: 1.25 spaces for each onebedroom,
1.75 spaces for each two-bedroom, and two spaces
for each three-bedroom unit, plus 0.25 space per unit for
visitors.
(c) Independent living unit: 1.00 space per unit, plus 0.25 space
per unit for visitors.
(d) Assisted living and congregate care unit: 0.5 space per unit
plus one additional parking space for each employee on the
largest shift.
(e) Nursing home unit: 1.0 space per bed.
(f) Clubhouse: 1.0 space for every four age-restricted units,
except that this requirement may be modified by the Planning
Board to the extent that other conveniently accessible and
available parking could feasibly be substituted. All off-street
parking areas shall be visually defined along their perimeter by
§ 550-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-89
1:997
a fence, wall, hedge, tree line or earth berming, or some
combination thereof.
(9) No building may exceed 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories in height, except as
provided in the following provisions: independent living facilities,
assisted living and congregate care and nursing home units may
not exceed 45 feet in height or three stories. The exterior walls of
all independent living, assisted living, congregate care and nursing
home buildings shall be accessible for fire protection purposes.
(10) All utilities shall be installed underground.
(11) Sufficient individual or common areas and/or equipment shall be
made available for each dwelling unit for the laundering and
artificial drying of laundry by occupants of each dwelling unit.
(12) An on-site security system may be provided for a planned
retirement development including entrance gatehouse, fences,
walls and supporting service buildings.
(13) All freshwater wetlands shall be protected in accordance with the
New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act.
(14) Recreational and cultural facilities shall be readily accessible to all
residents of the planned retirement development via sidewalks
and/or bike paths.
(15) Open space shall be distributed throughout the development in an
equitable manner.
(16) Natural features and critical areas, such as treed areas, scenic
views; historic sites; natural terrain including steep slopes and
open waters; wetlands and associated buffers; wildlife corridors;
natural drainage lines; open space of high ecological value; and
other community assets shall be preserved as much as possible in
designing any planned retirement development containing such
features. On individual lots or parcels, care shall be taken to
preserve selected trees as determined by the Planning Board to
enhance the landscape treatment of the development. Clearing
trees and shrubs from a lot or filling around trees on a lot shall not
be permitted unless it can be shown that grading, construction
requirements, and/or proposed building locations necessitate
removal of trees, in which case treed portions of those lots or other
lots that are designated by the Planning Board to be of
environmental value shall be replanted with native trees.
(17) If a development is to be staged over a period of years, a phased
development plan with net density of the land development in each
phased area shall be shown with a timetable for development.
§ 550-89 HAMILTON CODE § 550-89
1:998
(18) Properties affected by the Township land use plan road system
shall be required to construct that portion of the Township land use
plan roadway that traverses their property.
(19) During land development review, the following criteria shall be
addressed to the satisfaction of the Planning Board:
(a) Consistency with this chapter.
(b) The function and visual relationship between the planned
retirement development and adjacent developments.
(c) Orientation of buildings so as to take advantage of passive
solar heating, summer breezes and views of floodplains and
other natural features and critical areas while minimizing
exposure to winter winds.
(d) Sidewalks and bike paths, which are linked to off-site sidewalk
and bike path networks.
(e) Minimization of glare, noise and visual intrusion of parking lots
to external roadways and adjacent developments through
grading, landscaping and/or earth berms.
(20) The following standards shall only apply to independent living,
assisted living, congregate care, and nursing home buildings that
do not involve conversion or redevelopment of existing structures:
(a) The minimum lot area shall be five acres.
(b) The minimum lot width at the front building setback line shall
be 100 feet.
(c) The minimum front yard setback shall be 75 feet.
(d) There shall be two side yards no less than 100 feet in
aggregate width, and neither yard shall be less than 50 feet.
(e) There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than 50 feet.
(f) Not more than 30% of the lot area may be occupied by
buildings.
(g) The maximum impervious surface coverage shall be 50%.
(h) The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.40.
(i) A ten-foot landscaped and fenced buffer shall be located along
all property lines abutting nonresidential uses. Provision may
be made for a lighted pathway to any adjacent commercial use
deemed by the Township to be advantageous for elderly citizen
use.
§ 550-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-89
1:999
(j) Landscaping and fencing buffering shall be located along all
property lines abutting residential uses where deemed
appropriate by the Township.
D. No age-restricted, independent living, assisted living, congregate care
or nursing home unit shall be constructed unless the following
minimum design standards are met. The design and location of all
buildings and recreational facilities must be consistent with the
ultimate purpose of achieving independent, self-reliant and pleasant
living arrangements and shall take into account the desires and needs
of older persons for privacy, participation in social community activities
and access to community facilities. At the same time, provision shall be
made to accommodate the limitations that sometimes accompany
advanced years so that independent living can be sustained as long as
possible. The applicant shall show in detail how the development design
criteria considers this criteria. The following design elements shall be
required in a planned retirement development:
(1) Single-family and two-family units shall be placed into small
groupings such as clusters or courts. Groupings shall be visually
reduced in size by using garden walls, gates, fences and variable
landscape layouts.
(2) Building exteriors shall have vertical and/or horizontal offsets to
create visual breaks on the exterior.
(3) A variety of building heights is encouraged in a single development.
(4) A variety of building setbacks, rooflines, color schemes, and
elevations shall be required in the development to avoid a
repetitious or monotonous streetscape.
(5) The exteriors of all buildings in the development, including
accessory buildings, shall conform architecturally and be
constructed of materials of like character.
(6) Each age-restricted building and combined complex of units shall
have a compatible architectural theme with variations in design to
provide attractiveness to the development, which shall include
consideration of landscaping techniques, building or orientation to
the site and to other structures, topography, natural features and
individual dwelling unit design, such as varying unit width,
staggering unit setbacks, providing different exterior materials,
changing rooflines and roof designs, altering building heights and
changing types of windows, shutters, doors, porches, colors and
vertical or horizontal orientation of the facades, singularly or in
combination, for each unit.
(7) In order to prevent the development of long and monotonous
buildings and ridgelines, which serve to increase the sense of
density, lack interest and liken the development to a barracks,
overall structures of attached townhouses shall consist of no more
§ 550-89 HAMILTON CODE § 550-89
1:1000
than eight townhouse dwelling units. There shall be at least three
different ridgeline heights in each overall structure of attached
townhouses, which shall vary by at least three feet. In any overall
structure of attached townhouses, no more than two adjacent
dwelling units shall have the same setback. Setbacks shall vary by
at least eight feet.
(8) The monotony of long overall structures of attached townhouses is
considerably diminished when such structures are sited on gently
rolling lands. In such instances, the Planning Board may approve
the construction of overall structures of attached townhouses
containing nine or 10 townhouse dwelling units.
(9) All units shall be connected to approved and functioning public
water and sanitary sewer systems. Prior to approval, an applicant
must obtain a certificate from the appropriate agency allocating
capacity in the system to the development.
(10) Each development shall provided for the removal of trash and
garbage. Storage of trash and garbage shall be subject to Planning
Board review and approval.
(11) The development plan for the site, its developed facilities and the
interior of residential units must be specifically designed to met the
potential physical and social needs and visual, auditory, ambulatory
and other impairments that may affect older persons, particularly
as residents age in place.
(12) There shall be provided a safe and convenient system of sidewalks
and bike paths accessible to all occupants. Due consideration
should be given in planning walks, paths and ramps to prevent
slipping or stumbling. Handrails and ample space for rest shall be
provided. All walks, paths and risers shall be designed according to
the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
When required, sidewalks shall be at least five feet wide and bike
paths six feet wide, as approved by the Planning Board.
(13) Artificial lighting shall be provided along all walks, paths and
interior roads and driveways and in all off-street parking areas with
sufficient illumination for the safety and convenience of older-age
residents, depending on anticipated night-time use.
E. Open space and recreation requirements.
(1) Open space shall be optimally related to the overall plan and design
of the development and improved to best suit the purpose(s) for
which it is intended. No less than 20% (less existing and proposed
road rights-of-way) shall be devoted to conservation, open space
and/or recreational purposes. All flood hazard areas plus wetlands
and wetland buffers shall be retained in open space. Individual
residential lots or portions thereof shall not be construed as open
space. Such designated open space shall be on major contiguous
§ 550-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-89
1:1001
parcels inter-spaced among grouping of residential dwellings and
shall be interconnected with open space areas on abutting parcels,
having adequate access to public roads and consisting of land
developed for specific recreational purposes. Open space areas for
purposes of this calculation shall not include, among other things,
courtyards and cul-de-sac islands.
(a) Active and passive recreational facilities shall be provided in a
planned retirement development for the use and enjoyment of
the residents of the planned development and their guests,
which shall consist of the following: an in-ground community
swimming pool provided with an improved sitting area,
contiguous to all sides of the pool, having an area two times the
water surface area of the pool; there shall be not less than 25
square feet of floor area per dwelling unit provided in a
clubhouse with meeting rooms, multipurpose space, fully
equipped game rooms, art and craft rooms, fully equipped
kitchen, office space and service facilities; shuffleboard and
horseshoe courts; regulation doubles tennis courts; exercise
areas and stations; picnic facilities; outdoor sitting areas;
gardening areas with a communal greenhouse; and a system of
handicapped-accessible sidewalks, bike paths, roads and
shared drives. The location of such recreational facilities shall
be carefully planned to provide privacy for the users and to
avoid problems of noise, lighting and similar nuisances which
might interfere with their use and enjoyment by residents of
the development.
(b) The design and use of open space areas shall protect the
natural resources and qualities of the site, including the
natural terrain, woodlands, significant views and any unique
and unusual features. Open space other than that preserved
for its natural values shall be suitably landscaped. All
structures within open space areas shall be sited so as to retain
their visual appeal. The Planning Board shall require active
and/or passive recreational facilities and such grading,
drainage, planting, walkways, fencing, lighting and such other
improvements in open space as may be necessary to enhance
the intended open space and recreational uses or accept a
contribution in lieu of making such improvements.
(c) Payments in lieu of improvements shall be deposited in a
dedicated recreation trust fund and may be commingled with
other deposits and/or municipal or other governmental
appropriations intended for recreation purposes.
(d) Within open space areas, the Planning Board may require the
developer to make certain site preparation improvements,
which may include but are not limited to the following:
preservation and/or relocation of existing trees; removal of
dead or diseased trees; thinning of trees or other growth to
§ 550-89 HAMILTON CODE § 550-89
1:1002
encourage more desirable growth; removal of trees in areas
planned for ponds, lakes or active recreational facilities;
grading and seeding; improvement or protection of the natural
drainage system through the use of protective structures,
stabilization measures and similar improvements;
improvement and landscaping of ponds and lakes to afford
appropriate use and enjoyment by the residents; and generally
cleaning up the site by removing trash, debris and any
hazardous materials.
(2) Land to be devoted to public purposes may be offered to the
Township or may be owned and maintained by an open space
organization. Any lands intended to be offered to the Township for
public purposes shall be so declared prior to preliminary approval.
All lands not offered to and/or not accepted by the Township shall
be owned and maintained by an open space organization.
(3) All bike paths in the planned retirement development next to
Veterans' Park must connect with the existing system in Veterans'
Park.
(4) Open space within planned retirement developments shall satisfy
the applicable requirements found in § 550-164, Planned
developments, Subsection B(4) through (6), open space
requirements.
F. Design guidelines for all planned retirement developments adjacent to
the Planned Town Center Zone in Robbinsville Township.195
(1) The development shall be encouraged to reflect a development
pattern that closely matches the Robbinsville Township Land Use
Plan and implementing ordinances to:
(a) Provide a radial and axial street pattern that interconnects
with existing and proposed uses and links neighborhoods
together.
(b) Provide a layout of streets and open space edges which
encourages pedestrian and bike path connections.
(c) Provide small parks and squares and a defined peripheral
green park or open space.
(d) Encourage an efficient use of land and public services, reflect
changes in technology of land development, and direct a new
development in a pattern that resembles a traditional mixeduse
pattern.
195. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-89
1:1003
§ 550-90. Mixed-Use Area II Train Station Overlay. [Added 7-2-1997
by Ord. No. 97-019; amended 12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-043]
(e) Promote the creation of new neighborhoods and developments
that exhibit the design features of traditional neighborhoods
and small towns in Mercer County.
(f) Promote the creation of places which are oriented to the
pedestrian, promote citizen security, and social interaction.
(g) Promote the creation of developments that are identifiable in
the landscape, surrounded by open space, and help to preserve
sensitive natural features.
G. All planned retirement developments shall adhere to the general
development plan submission requirements as identified in § 550-228.
A. Purpose; location.
(1) The purpose of a mixed-use train station development is to provide
for a variety of land use types that complement adjacent uses and
service users of the nearby train station and residents of the
Township; to ensure compatibility among land uses; to encourage
the highest quality design and architecture; to encourage better
movement and transportation of people; and to prevent strip
development.
(2) This overlay zone is for tract areas as identified on the Land Use
Plan Map and Zoning Map. An entire tract area or portion thereof
may be the subject of a mixed-use train station development
application.
B. Design; subdivision; etc. A mixed-use train station development shall be
conceived, designed, subdivided and site planned as a single complex
and in accordance with an approved concept site plan and concept
subdivision plan.
C. Principal permitted uses. Principal permitted uses on the land and in
the building(s) shall be as follows:
(1) Any principal permitted use, accessory use and other use permitted
in the underlying zoning district shall continue to be allowed in
accordance with the standards specified for such uses found in the
appropriate section of this chapter.
(2) The following principal commercial uses as defined herein, as
identified in §§ 550-76B, 550-77B, 550-78B and 550-79B, shall be
permitted on the land and in buildings within a mixed-use train
station development.
(a) Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings as found
in § 550-76B:
§ 550-89 HAMILTON CODE § 550-90
1:1004
Bakery
Periodicals and newspapers
Barber and beauty shops
Book or gift store
Candy store and/or fountain
Ice cream store
Sporting goods store
Video store
Combination of two or more of the above-permitted uses in
one principal building.
(b) Principal permitted uses on the land or in buildings as found in
§ 550-77B:
Restaurants, bars and taverns, excluding drive-in
Banks, including drive-in facilities
Florist
Offices, business and professional
Combinations of two or more of the above-permitted uses in
one principal building
(c) Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings as found
in § 550-78B:
Bowling alleys
Bicycle sales, rental or repair
Miniature golf
Billiard hall
Combinations of two or more of the above-permitted uses in
one principal building
(d) Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings as found
in § 550-79B:
All forms of Township land uses, including but not limited to
public playgrounds, conservation areas, parks, public purpose
uses and publicly owned/privately maintained and operated
recreation facilities
Radio or television broadcasting station, including studios,
auditoriums and other rooms for performances and including
office and other space incident to and necessary for the
principal use, exclusive of broadcasting towers and antennas
Theater, not including a drive-in theater
§ 550-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-90
1:1005
Museums, exhibition halls, art galleries, libraries, music
conservatories or instruction, art, photographic and dance
studios and other cultural facilities of a similar nature
Indoor tennis, racquetball, squash and handball courts
Combinations of two or more of the above-permitted uses in
one principal building
(e) The above-referenced principal permitted commercial uses
shall be required to satisfy all of the requirements as set forth
in §§ 550-76, 550-77, 550-78 and 550-79 and throughout this
chapter. The Planning Board shall have the right to modify the
requirements for minimum lot area, width or frontage,
minimum building setback, maximum impervious surface
coverage, requirements as to front, side or rear yards, and
requirements concerning the location of accessory buildings or
structures for any land use in a mixed-use train station
development, whenever such modifications are necessary to
achieve a mixed-use train station development.
(3) No plan for a mixed-use train station development shall be
approved by the Planning Board unless the lot areas, widths,
depths and frontages, building setbacks, percentages of lot
coverage, front, side and rear yards and locations of accessory
buildings or structures provided for in the site plan and subdivision
plan are appropriate to the type of development permitted.
(4) Not less than 10% of the land area within a mixed-use train station
development shall be devoted to common open space. The location
of common open space shall be consistent with the declared
function of the common open space, and where possible the
common open space shall be planned as a contiguous area located
for the maximum benefit of the area which it was designed to serve,
preserving and, where possible, enhancing natural features. Land
to be devoted to public purposes may be offered to the Township or
may be privately owned and maintained. Any lands intended to be
offered to the Township for a public purpose shall be so stipulated
prior to preliminary approval.
(5) In order to foster the attractiveness of a site designed as a mixeduse
train station development and the surrounding neighborhoods
and in order to provide an efficient road and utility network, ensure
the movement of traffic, implement comprehensive planning and
better serve the public health, safety and general welfare, the
design standards and criteria in § 550-165 shall be utilized by the
Planning Board in reviewing all site plans and subdivision plats
relating to a mixed-use train station development. These standards
shall not be regarded as inflexible requirements. They are not
intended to discourage creativity, invention and innovation.
[Amended 4-2-2019 by Ord. No. 19-013]
§ 550-90 HAMILTON CODE § 550-90
1:1006
D. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Fences and walls. (See § 550-114.)
(3) Signs.
(4) Temporary sales or construction trailer(s).
(a) The trailer(s) shall be located on the same lot as the principal
permitted use and shall meet all setback requirements for
principal buildings in the zone.
(b) The trailer(s) shall be shown on the site plan for the principal
permitted use and shall be reviewed by the administrative
officer on an individual case basis in accordance with the
performance standards in § 550-120.
(c) The trailer(s) shall be permitted to remain only for the period
of construction, renting or sale of the permitted use.
(d) Only one sales trailer and two construction trailers are
permitted per project.
(5) Appurtenant services and retail shops determined to be available
for the convenience of the patrons of the development and
designed as an integral part of a site development plan.
(6) Restaurants or cafeterias located within a principal building.
(7) Banks located within a principal building containing a permitted
use in accordance with this section.
(8) Recreational areas and parks, provided that the facility is owned
and operated by an associated industry for the use of its employees
or guests.
(9) Satellite dish antennas in accordance with the standards specified
in § 550-137.
(10) Roof-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility.
E. Other uses permitted upon application to the municipal agency for a
conditional use permit:
(1) Public utility installations.
(2) Private clubs, lodges, social buildings and fraternal organizations.
(3) Hotels.
F. Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 55 feet in height. In
the case of buildings with flat roofs, building height shall be measured
to the roof level and not to the top of the parapet wall.
§ 550-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-90
1:1007
G. Area and yard requirements.
(1) Minimum requirements.
(a) Principal building.
1. Tract area (acres): 50.
2. Tract frontage (feet): 750.
3. Tract width (feet): 750.
4. Tract depth (feet): 750.
5. Side yard, each (feet): 150.
6. Front yard (feet): 100.
7. Rear yard (feet): 150.
(b) Accessory building.
1. Distance to side line (feet): 150.
2. Distance to rear line (feet): 150.
3. Distance to other building (feet): 50.
(2) Maximum requirements.
(a) Floor area ratio: 0.25.
(b) Maximum impervious surface coverage (percent): 40%.
H. General requirements.
(1) A mixed-use train station development shall be conceived,
designed, subdivided, site planned and approved by the Planning
Board as a single complex according to a comprehensive master
site development plan.
(2) The entirety of the mixed-use train station development shall be
developed with a common architectural theme, which shall be
subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board. The
architectural theme shall include buildings, signage, fencing,
lighting, paving, curbing, landscaping and other similar related
physical features.
(3) Any principal building may contain more than one use or
organization. More than one principal building may be constructed
on any lot, provided that all chapter requirements are met and that
a minimum distance of 50 feet is provided between the principal
buildings.
(4) At least the first 30 feet adjacent to any street line and 100 feet
adjacent to any lot line shall not be used for parking and shall be
§ 550-90 HAMILTON CODE § 550-90
1:1008
planted and maintained in lawn area or ground cover or landscaped
with evergreen shrubbery. Any parking proposed within the front
yard shall be screened by a landscaped berm of at least four feet in
height and having a slope of two to one or three to one.
(5) A minimum buffer area of 150 feet in width shall be provided along
any common property line with a residential district or residential
use. [See §§ 550-119G(7) and 550-130B.]
(6) Left-turn access and egress from Sloan Avenue at the tract shall
only be permitted through a signalized roadway entrance and exit
directly opposite Fairlawn Avenue with the construction of a
reverse jughandle on the tract with the development of a landscape
center median and left turns on Sloan Avenue. No entrance or exit,
at the curbline only, shall be closer than 12 feet from a side lot line.
Entrance and exit sizes, location and construction shall be in
accordance with requirements of the governmental agency having
jurisdiction over the facility upon which the permitted use has
frontage.
(7) Pedestrian and bicycle linkages shall be planned and constructed
between the mixed-use train station development and adjacent
properties as required by the Planning Board.
(8) A mixed-use train station development shall provide for transit bus
linkages to the train station located on Sloan Avenue and to other
areas within the Township as required by the Planning Board. The
development shall provide for on-site transit amenities in the form
of a bus stops, shelters, signage, benches and transit schedules in
consultation with New Jersey Transit.
(9) Common driveways shall be encouraged and cross easements shall
be required to allow vehicular movements between adjacent
commercial properties.
(10) For additional general requirements see § 550-84, General
requirements in nonresidential districts.
I. Minimum off-street loading. See § 550-119E, F, G and H for additional
standards.
J. Minimum off-street parking. See § 550-119 of this chapter for
standards.
K. Permitted signs. See § 550-124 of this chapter for standards.
L. Landscaping and preservation of natural features. See §§ 550-117,
550-119 and 550-130 of this chapter for design standards.
M. Fences, walls and sight triangles. See § 550-114 for details.
N. Accessory buildings. See § 550-111 of this chapter for design standards.
§ 550-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-91
1:1009
§ 550-91. Arts and Culture Overlay. [Added 4-22-2010 by Ord. No.
10-003]
All requirements of this chapter for the respective zoning districts within
the Arts and Culture Overlay shall remain in effect except as specifically
superseded by the following, unless otherwise noted:
A. Purpose. The Arts and Culture Overlay has been designated to promote
investment through mixed-use and commercial development that
expands the presence of and/or otherwise enhances the arts and
culture within the district.
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in the buildings. The following
permitted uses shall supplement the uses permitted in the underlying
zone districts.
(1) Arts and culture principal permitted uses.
(a) Art galleries, including art sales.
(b) Art, music and dance studios.
(c) Teaching of visual and performing arts.
(d) Performing art facilities and performing arts theaters.
(e) Museums, art libraries and other similar cultural facilities.
(f) Artist live/work space.
(2) Supporting principal permitted uses.
(a) Commercial recreation (a recreation facility operated as a
business and open to the public for a fee).
(b) Hotel, subject to the standards set forth in § 550-161O, Hotels.
(c) Restaurants, excluding drive-through or fast-food restaurants.
(d) Retail uses associated with and directly related to an arts and
culture principal permitted use on the same lot or as part of the
same development project.
(e) Residences not located on the ground floor of a mixed-use
building.
C. General requirements.
(1) A floor area ratio bonus to a maximum total floor area ratio of 0.40
and an impervious surface coverage bonus to a maximum total
coverage of 0.80 shall be conveyed to any lot developing one or
more of the Arts and Culture Overlay District's principal permitted
uses, provided that at least 20% of the total building floor area on
the lot consists of one or more of the arts and culture principal
permitted uses as set forth in Subsection B(1) above. The bonuses
§ 550-91 HAMILTON CODE § 550-91
1:1010
set forth in this section are not to be conveyed for supporting
principal permitted uses as set forth in Subsection B(2) above.
(2) A floor area ratio bonus and an impervious surface coverage bonus
shall be conveyed to any lot developing passive or active open
space that would be open to the public, provided the following
standards are met or exceeded:
(a) For each one square foot of open space provided on the lot, a
floor area ratio bonus equivalent to one square foot of floor
area and an impervious surface coverage bonus equivalent to
two square feet shall be granted. The floor area ratio bonus
available for public open space under this section is subject to
a limitation of maximum total floor area ratio of 0.30 for the
lot(s) which are proposed for development. The bonus in floor
area under this section cannot be combined with development
of arts and culture uses pursuant to Subsection C(1) above to
achieve a floor area ratio in excess of the 0.40 limit set forth in
that section.
(b) The open space must be visible and easily accessible from a
public street.
(c) The open space must include one or more elements of public
art, such as, but not limited to, outdoor sculpture, murals and/
or artist-designed furnishings.
(3) No building developed under this subsection within the CC and GC
Zoning Districts shall exceed 35 feet in height. No building
developed under this subsection within the HC, I and MFG Zoning
Districts shall exceed 45 feet in height, and any building which
exceeds 35 feet in height shall provide twice the buffer which
would otherwise apply under this section and in the event the lot is
adjacent to a residential district or use.
(4) Site design standards. The following standards shall apply to all
development and redevelopment:
(a) Buildings shall be primarily oriented toward and relate to a
public street. Buildings shall not be primarily oriented toward
a parking lot.
(b) Parking lots shall be located at the side or rear of buildings.
(c) Sidewalks shall be provided along the street frontage of all
lots.
(d) Street trees shall be provided along the street frontage of all
lots.
(e) A visual screen of plantings shall be provided along property
lines adjoining residential districts.
§ 550-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-91
1:1011
(5) Architectural standards. All development and redevelopment shall
comply with the standards in § 550-165, Evaluation standards and
criteria for planned developments. [Amended 4-2-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-013]
(6) Freestanding sign standards.
(a) Where freestanding signs are permitted by the underlying zone
district, one freestanding sign shall be permitted along each
street frontage.
(b) Maximum height shall be eight feet.
(c) Maximum area shall be 50 square feet.
(d) Freestanding signs shall not be located within 20 feet of a
public street or the boundary of a residential zone and shall not
in any way interfere with the safe functioning of any traffic
control signal nor be located within an intersection sight
triangle easement.
(e) Freestanding signs shall be monument-type signs or shall be
skirted to enclose the supporting pole(s) or pylon(s) of the sign.
The skirting shall extend the full dimensions of the sign at its
lower edge from ground to sign. The skirting shall not be
included in the sign size calculation unless it displays a
message.
(f) The base of the freestanding sign shall be liberally landscaped
with a combination of shrubs, ground cover, flowers or other
plant material.
(7) Placement of public art. The following standards shall apply to
outdoor sculpture within the Arts and Culture Overlay District
which is intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way or other
public property.
(a) The placement of outdoor sculpture shall not require site plan
approval; only a zoning permit shall be required, provided it
does not jeopardize the public health or safety and the
following standards are met:
1. Outdoor sculpture shall not be located within a sight
triangle.
2. Outdoor sculpture shall not impede the flow of pedestrian,
bicycle or vehicular traffic.
(b) Front, side and rear yard setback standards shall not apply to
outdoor sculpture.
(c) Outdoor sculpture shall be excluded from the calculation of
impervious surface coverage.
§ 550-91 HAMILTON CODE § 550-91
1:1012
§ 550-92. HH Hospital Healthcare District. [Added 5-6-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-025]
(d) Outdoor sculpture may be located within a surface parking lot.
Any parking spaces eliminated as a result shall not require
parking relief from the Planning Board, provided the Zoning
Officer is satisfied that the remaining parking and circulation is
adequate for the associated use.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Hospital.
(2) Hospital support facilities, such as medical laboratories, medical
clinics, surgical facilities, ambulatory care center, outpatient
facilities, research, diagnostic testing and inpatient pharmaceutical
facilities.
(3) Medical and related administrative offices.
(4) Long-term acute-care facility or subacute-care facility.
(5) Nursing homes and assisted living facilities.
(6) Hospice.
(7) Adult care center.
B. Accessory uses:
(1) Meeting, conference, educational and training facilities.
(2) Physical rehabilitation and treatment facilities.
(3) Fitness, wellness and exercise facilities.
(4) Cafeterias, snack shops, gift shops, bookstores, banks, florists,
newsstands and similar retail convenience for personnel, patients
and persons visiting patients.
(5) Hospital operation facilities, such as but not limited to food
preparation and service, laundry, housekeeping, security, storage
and maintenance.
(6) Chapels.
(7) Overnight accommodations and eating facilities for on-duty
personnel and persons visiting patients.
(8) Helistop.
(9) Radio and telecommunications facilities for dispatch and control of
medical transportation services.
(10) Emergency power generation for on-site use.
§ 550-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-92
1:1013
(11) Utility heating and cooling and cogeneration facilities.
(12) Child-care center.
(13)Off-street parking, including structured parking.
(14) Indoor and outdoor gardens.
(15) Fences and walls.
(16) Signs.
(17) Roof-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility.
(18) Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal permitted
use.
C. Maximum building height:
(1) No portion of a building located 500 feet or less from a public road
shall exceed 45 feet in height.
(2) No portion of a building located more than 500 feet from a public
road shall exceed 80 feet in height.
(3) Exceptions: ancillary structures such as parapet walls, elevator
penthouses, stair towers, HVAC equipment, communications
equipment and antennas and light stanchions may exceed the
maximum building height, provided they shall not exceed a height
of 30 feet above the roof on which they are mounted.
(a) Any such ancillary structure shall be screened to reduce its
visibility.
(4) Maximum height of a parking structure: 45 feet.
(5) Maximum height of an accessory structure: 20 feet.
D. Area and yard requirements.
(1) Principal building.
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(b) Minimum lot frontage: 400 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width: 400 feet.
(d) Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
(e) Minimum front yard setback: 150 feet.
(f) Minimum side yard setback: 75 feet.
(g) Minimum rear yard setback: 75 feet.
(h) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.4.
§ 550-92 HAMILTON CODE § 550-92
1:1014
(i) Maximum impervious cover: 55%.
(2) Accessory buildings.
(a) Accessory buildings shall not be located between a building
line and a public road.
(b) Minimum side yard setback: 75 feet.
(c) Minimum rear yard setback: 75 feet.
E. General requirements.
(1) Any principal building may contain more than one use or
organization. More than one principal building may be constructed
on any lot, provided that all chapter requirements are met.
(2) At least the first 50 feet adjacent to any street line, including state
and interstate roadways, and 50 feet adjacent to any lot line shall
not be used for parking and shall be planted and maintained in
lawn area or ground cover or landscaped with evergreen
shrubbery.
(3) Any parking, either on the ground or in a structure, proposed
within the front yard shall be screened by a landscaped berm of at
least 4 1/2 feet in height and having a slope of three to one. The
berm shall be landscaped sufficient to screen parking located
between buildings and any street, including any state or interstate
roadway.
(4) A minimum buffer area of 150 feet in width shall be provided along
any common property line with a residential district, use or with a
right-of-way adjacent to a residential district.
(5) Cross easements to allow for traffic and pedestrian circulation
between properties shall be encouraged.
(6) Parking structures.
(a) Parking structures shall be located at least 350 feet from a
public road.
(b) Architectural design and building materials of parking
structures shall be similar or complementary to the principal
buildings on the tract.
(c) A roof-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility
may be located on the roof or upper parking deck of a parking
structure, provided the maximum height of the solar or
photovoltaic energy-generating facility does not exceed 45
feet.
(7) No helistop shall be located less than 500 feet from a public road or
residential use.
§ 550-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-92
1:1015
§ 550-93. A/T-2 Multiple Family Residential - 2 District. [Added
3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-010]
(8) For additional general requirements see § 550-84, General
requirements in nonresidential districts.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Multifamily units, provided that:
(a) The maximum residential yield is 298 units.
(b) Twenty percent of the total dwelling units that are the subject
of a development application shall be low- and moderateincome
dwellings as required by Article V, §§ 550-165 through
550-170 with 55% affordable to low-income households and
45% affordable to moderate-income households.
(c) No more than 15% of the market-rate units may be threebedroom
units.
(d) No unit may have more than three bedrooms.
(2) Public parks, playgrounds, conservation areas and public purpose
uses.
(3) Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
(4) Farms. See § 550-136, Right to farm, of this chapter.
(5) Building structures and uses owned and operated by the Township
of Hamilton.
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Decks and patios which shall be uniform in size and materials and
complement the architectural style and design of the dwelling unit
and the overall project design, as established during the site plan
review and approval process. All decks and patios shall be
constructed when the development is constructed.
(2) Private residential tool or garden sheds not to exceed 12 feet by 12
feet by 12 feet and located three feet from property lines.
(3) Off-street parking and private garages.
(4) Fences and walls which shall be uniform in size and materials and
complement the architectural style, type and design of the dwelling
unit and the overall project design, as established during the site
plan review and approval process. All fences and walls shall be
constructed when the development is constructed.
(5) Entrance gatehouses and structures provided such structures are
located along entrance roadways to the property, are located
§ 550-92 HAMILTON CODE § 550-93
1:1016
outside of any required site triangle, and are designed to
complement the architectural style and the overall project design.
(6) Community amenities, such as but not limited to: pool, clubhouse,
walking trails.
(7) Signs.
(8) Temporary sales or construction trailer(s).
(a) The trailer(s) shall be located on the same lot as the principal
permitted use and shall meet all setback requirements for
principal buildings in the zone.
(b) The trailer(s) shall be shown on the site plan for the principal
permitted use and shall be reviewed by the administrative
officer on an individual case basis in accordance with the
performance standards in § 550-120.
(c) The trailer(s) shall be permitted to remain only for the period
of construction, renting or sale of the permitted use.
(d) Only one sales trailer and two construction trailers are
permitted per project.
(9) Roof-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) None.
D. Area and yard requirements:
(1) Tract development.
(a) Minimum tract area: 60 acres.
(b) Maximum impervious coverage: 40%.
(c) Maximum principal building height: three stories/40 feet.
(d) Maximum accessory building height: 30 feet.
(e) Open space: Not less than 20% of the gross development area
shall be designed as and devoted to common open space for
use primarily by the residents of the planned development or
subject to conservation easements restricting their
development.
(2) Lot sizes and dimensions, yard sizes and building arrangement may
be freely disposed and arranged, in accordance with the following
standards:
(a) Window wall to window wall: 50 feet minimum.
(b) End wall to window wall: 30 feet minimum.
§ 550-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-93
1:1017
(c) End wall (no openings) to end wall: 12 feet minimum.
(d) Any building face to parking area: 12 feet minimum.
(e) Any building face to street curb: 20 feet minimum.
(3) Buildings and parking areas shall be freely disposed and arranged,
in accordance with the following minimum distances:
(a) Boundary line: 30 feet.
(b) Offsite right-of-way: 75 feet.
(c) Common property line with nonresidential use and
nonresidential zoning district: 40 feet.
(d) Landscape buffer required to Klockner Road right-of-way: 50
feet.
(e) Landscape buffer required to any other lot line: 25 feet.
(f) Unit setback to existing interstate right-of-way: 200 feet.
(4) Each multifamily development shall contain a clubhouse in
accordance with the following standards:
(a) Minimum floor area: 25 square feet per unit.
(b) Minimum pool sitting area: Twice the pool surface area.
E. Natural features and critical areas, such as treed areas, scenic views;
historic sites; natural terrain including steep slopes and open waters;
wetlands and associated buffers; wildlife corridors; natural drainage
lines; open space of high ecological value; and other community assets
shall be preserved as much as practical.
F. Architectural standards.
(1) Building exteriors shall have vertical and/or horizontal offsets to
create visual breaks on the exterior.
(2) A variety of building heights is encouraged in a single development.
(3) A variety of building setbacks, rooflines, color schemes, and
elevations shall be required in the development to avoid a
repetitious or monotonous streetscape.
(4) The exteriors of all buildings in the development, including
accessory buildings, shall conform architecturally and be
constructed of materials of like character.
(5) Each building and combined complex of units shall have a
compatible architectural theme with variations in design to provide
attractiveness to the development, which shall include
consideration of landscaping techniques, building or orientation to
§ 550-93 HAMILTON CODE § 550-93
1:1018
the site and to other structures, topography, natural features and
individual dwelling unit design, such as varying unit width,
staggering unit setbacks, providing different exterior materials,
changing rooflines and roof designs, altering building heights and
changing types of windows, shutters, doors, porches, colors and
vertical or horizontal orientation of the facades, singularly or in
combination, for each unit.
(6) In order to prevent the development of long and monotonous
buildings and ridgelines, which serve to increase the sense of
density, lack interest and liken the development to a barracks,
overall structures of attached townhouses shall consist of no more
than eight townhouse dwelling units. There shall be at least three
different ridgeline heights in each overall structure of attached
townhouses, which shall vary by at least three feet. In any overall
structure of attached townhouses, no more than two adjacent
dwelling units shall have the same setback. Setbacks shall vary by
at least eight feet.
(7) The monotony of long overall structures of attached townhouses is
considerably diminished when such structures are sited on gently
rolling lands. In such instances, the Planning Board may approve
the construction of overall structures of attached townhouses
containing nine or 10 townhouse dwelling units.
G. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as follows:
(1) Residential: Residential parking shall be provided pursuant to the
Residential Site Improvement Standards ("RSIS"), N.J.A.C. 5:21-1
et seq. Guest parking is required as per RSIS.
(2) Clubhouse: One space for every six units.
H. Each development shall provide for the removal of trash and garbage.
Storage of trash and garbage shall be subject to Planning Board review
and approval.
I. There shall be provided a safe and convenient system of sidewalks and
bike paths accessible to all occupants. Due consideration should be
given in planning walks, paths and ramps to prevent slipping or
stumbling. Handrails and ample space for rest shall be provided. All
walks, paths and risers shall be designed according to the requirements
of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).196 When required,
sidewalks shall be at least five feet wide and bike paths six feet wide, as
approved by the Planning Board.
J. Artificial lighting shall be provided along all walks, paths and interior
roads and driveways and in all off-street parking areas with sufficient
illumination for safety and convenience.
196. Editor's Note: See 42 USCA § 12101 et seq.
§ 550-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-93
1:1019
K. Affordable units shall be provided in accordance with the following:
(1) A developer's agreement is required to establish low/moderate
apportionment, very-low-income requirement per N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.1, bedroom distribution, unit size, etc.
(2) The affordable units shall be developed in accordance with the
Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) regulations at N.J.A.C.
5:93197 and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC),
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., which govern the administration and
affordability controls of affordable units in New Jersey, with one
exception. The exception is for 13% very-low-income housing at
30% of the regional median income instead of the UHAC
requirement of 10% very-low-income housing at 35% of the
regional median income.
(3) At least 13% of the units shall be affordable to very-low-income
households, 42% of the units shall be affordable to low-income
households, and 45% of the units may be affordable to moderateincome
households. An odd number shall be split in favor of the
low-income unit.
(4) In addition to addressing the requirements of COAH and UHAC
noted above, the affordable units shall be developed in accordance
with the following:
(a) The affordable units cannot be age-restricted units.
(b) The bedroom distribution requirements pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:93-7.3198 and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(b).
(c) The unit distribution requirements pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3.199
(d) Pursuant to UHAC, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, the affordable units
shall be restricted to eligible very-low-, low- and moderateincome
households for a minimum of 30 years from the date of
their initial occupancy and thereafter until the affordability
controls are terminated by the Township (the "Control Period").
(e) The phasing requirements pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6(d).200
(f) The accessibility and adaptability requirements pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14.
197. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
198. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
199. Editor's Note: Former Subsection K(4)(d), regarding very-low-income distribution
requirements, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-20-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-050. This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection K(4)(e) through (g)
as Subsection K(4)(d) through (f).
200. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 550-93 HAMILTON CODE § 550-93
1:1020
§ 550-94. Special Housing Zone III. [Added 3-20-2018 by Ord. No.
18-011]
L. In the A/T-2 Multiple Family Residential - 2 Zone District, a ground sign
shall be permitted for the purpose of identifying a multifamily dwelling
project. It shall not exceed 30 square feet in area and not more than one
such sign shall be placed on a property unless such property fronts
upon more than one street, in which instance a sign may be erected on
each frontage. The sign shall not exceed the height of six feet and shall
not be located within 10 feet of a public street, parking area or
driveway and shall in no way interfere with the safe function of any
traffic control signal or directional device nor be located within an
intersection sight triangle easement.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Multifamily, townhouses, and single-family attached or detached
homes that are affordable to households of low- and moderateincome
and are eligible for affordable housing credit against the
Township's affordable housing obligation.
(2) Public parks, playgrounds, conservation areas and public purpose
uses.201
(3) Public recreational and community center buildings and grounds.
(4) Building structures and uses owned and operated by the Township
of Hamilton.
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Decks and patios which shall be uniform in size and materials and
complement the architectural style and design of the dwelling unit
and the overall design, as established during the site plan review
and approval process. All decks and patios shall be constructed
when the development is constructed.
(2) Off-street parking and private garages.
(3) Fences and walls which shall be uniform in size and materials and
complement the architectural style, type and design of the dwelling
unit and the overall project design, as established during the site
plan review and approval process. All fences and walls shall be
constructed when the development is constructed.
(4) Entrance gatehouses and structures, provided such structure(s)
are located along entrance roadway(s) to the property, are located
outside of any required site triangle, and are designed to
complement the architectural style and the overall project design.
201. Former Subsection A(2), regarding a manager’s unit, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-030. This ordinance also renumbered
former Subsection A(3) through (5) as Subsection A(2) through (4).
§ 550-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-94
1:1021
(5) Community amenities, such as but not limited to: pool, clubhouse,
walking trails.
(6) Signs.
(7) Temporary sales or construction trailer(s).
(a) The trailer(s) shall be located on the same lot as the principal
permitted use and shall meet all setback requirements for
principal buildings in the zone.
(b) The trailer(s) shall be shown on the site plan for the principal
permitted use and shall be reviewed by the administrative
officer on an individual case basis in accordance with the
performance standards in § 550-120.
(c) The trailer(s) shall be permitted to remain only for the period
of construction, renting or sale of the permitted use.
(d) Only one sales trailer and two construction trailers are
permitted per project.
(8) Roof-mounted solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) None.
D. Area and yard requirements.
(1) Tract development.
(a) Minimum tract area: seven acres. [Amended 7-16-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-031]
(b) Minimum tract frontage: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum number of affordable units: 72.
(d) Bulk requirements.
1. Minimum yards (feet).
a. Front: 50.
b. Rear: 50.
c. Side: 50.
2. Maximum impervious coverage: 50%.
3. Maximum principal building height: 3 stories, but not to
exceed 45 feet. [Amended 7-16-2019 by Ord. No.
19-031]
4. Maximum accessory building height: 30 feet.
§ 550-94 HAMILTON CODE § 550-94
1:1022
(e) Lot sizes and dimensions, yard sizes and building arrangement
may be freely disposed and arranged, in accordance with the
following standards:
1. No portion of a dwelling shall be closer than 15 feet to the
right-of-way of a local internal road or 50 feet to a public
road existing at the time the application for development is
deemed complete or any planned public road.
2. End wall (no openings) to end wall: 12 feet minimum.
3. 202End wall to window wall: 30 feet minimum.
4. Any building face to parking area: 10 feet minimum.
[Amended 7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-031]
5. Window wall to window wall: 40 feet minimum. [Amended
7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-031]
6. At least the first 30 feet adjacent to any street line shall not
be used for parking and shall be planted and maintained in
lawn area or ground cover or landscaped with evergreen
shrubbery. [Amended 7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-031]
7. Landscape buffer required to lot line: 30 feet.
E. Natural features and critical areas, such as treed areas, scenic views;
historic sites; natural terrain including steep slopes and open waters;
wetlands and associated buffers; wildlife corridors; natural drainage
lines; open space of high ecological value; and other community assets
shall be preserved as much as practical.
F. Architectural standards:
(1) Building exteriors are encouraged to have vertical and/or
horizontal offsets to create visual breaks on the exterior.
(2) A variety of building heights is encouraged in a single development.
(3) A variety of building setbacks, rooflines, color schemes, and
elevations shall be required in the development to avoid a
repetitious or monotonous streetscape to the extent practical.
(4) The exteriors of all buildings in the development, including
accessory buildings, shall conform architecturally and be
constructed of materials of like character.
(5) Each building and combined complex of units shall have a
compatible architectural theme with variations in design to provide
attractiveness to the development, which shall include
202. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(1)(e)3, regarding building faces, was repealed
7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-031. This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection
D(1)(e)4 through 8 as Subsection D(1)(e)3 through 7, respectively.
§ 550-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-94
1:1023
consideration of landscaping techniques, building or orientation
to the site and to other structures, topography, natural features
and individual dwelling unit design, such as varying unit width,
staggering unit setbacks, providing different exterior materials,
changing rooflines and roof designs, altering building heights and
changing types of windows, shutters, doors, porches, colors and
vertical or horizontal orientation of the facades, singularly or in
combination, for each unit.
(6) In order to prevent the development of long and monotonous
buildings and ridgelines, which serve to increase the sense of
density, lack interest and liken the development to a barracks,
overall structures of attached townhouses shall consist of no more
than eight townhouse dwelling units. There shall be at least three
different ridgeline heights in each overall structure of attached
townhouses, which shall vary by at least three feet. In any overall
structure of attached townhouses, no more than two adjacent
dwelling units shall have the same setback. Setbacks shall vary by
at least eight feet.
(7) The monotony of long overall structures of attached townhouses is
considerably diminished when such structures are sited on gently
rolling lands. In such instances, the Planning Board may approve
the construction of overall structures of attached townhouses
containing nine or 10 townhouse dwelling units.
G. Each development shall provide for the removal of trash and garbage.
Storage of trash and garbage shall be subject to Planning Board review
and approval.
H. Artificial lighting shall be provided along all walks, paths and interior
roads and driveways and in all off-street parking areas with sufficient
illumination for safety and convenience.
I. Affordable units shall be provided in accordance with the following:
(1) A developer's agreement is required to establish low/moderate
apportionment, very-low-income requirement per N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.1, bedroom distribution, unit size, etc.
(2) The affordable units shall be developed in accordance with the
Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) regulations at N.J.A.C.
5:93203 and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC),
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., which govern the administration and
affordability controls of affordable units in New Jersey, with one
exception. The exception is for 13% very-low-income housing at
30% of the regional median income instead of the UHAC
requirement of 10% very-low-income housing at 35% of the
regional median income.
203. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 550-94 HAMILTON CODE § 550-94
1:1024
§ 550-95. through § 550-110. (Reserved)
(3) At least 13% of the units shall be affordable to very-low-income
households, 37% of the units shall be affordable to low-income
households, and 50% of the units may be affordable to moderateincome
households. An odd number shall be split in favor of the
low-income unit.
(4) In addition to addressing the requirements of COAH and UHAC
noted above, the affordable units shall be developed in accordance
with the following:
(a) The affordable units cannot be age-restricted units:
(b) The bedroom distribution requirements pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:93-7.3204 and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(b).
(c) The unit distribution requirements pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3.205
(d) The length of controls requirement and deed restrictions
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, except that the length of the
control period may be limited to 45 years.
(e) The phasing requirements pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6(d).206
(f) The accessibility and adaptability requirements pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14.
J. In the Special Housing Zone III, a ground sign shall be permitted for the
purpose of identifying a multifamily dwelling project. It shall not exceed
30 square feet in area and not more than one such sign shall be placed
on a property unless such property fronts upon more than one street, in
which instance a sign may be erected on each frontage. The sign shall
not exceed the height of six feet and shall not be located within 10 feet
of a right-of-way line, parking area or driveway and shall in no way
interfere with the safe function of any traffic control signal or
directional device nor be located within an intersection sight triangle
easement. [Amended 7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-031]
204. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
205. Former Subsection I(4)(d), regarding very-low-income distribution requirements, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-030. This
ordinance also renumbered former Subsection I(4)(e) through (g) as Subsection I(4)(d)
through (f).
206. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 550-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-95
1:1025

ARTICLE IV
General Regulations and Design Standards
§ 550-111. Accessory buildings. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord. No.
93-008; 11-2-1994 by Ord. No. 94-048]
A. Accessory buildings as part of principal buildings. Any accessory
building attached to a principal building shall be considered part of the
principal building, and the total structure shall adhere to the yard
requirement for the principal building regardless of the technique of
connecting the principal and accessory buildings.
B. Accessory buildings not to be constructed prior to principal building.
No construction permit shall be issued for the construction of an
accessory building prior to the issuance of a construction permit for the
construction of the main building upon the same premises. If
construction of the main building does not precede or coincide with the
construction of the accessory building, the Construction Official shall
revoke the construction permit for the accessory building until
construction of the main building has proceeded substantially toward
completion.
C. Distance between adjacent buildings. The minimum distance between
an accessory building and any other building(s) on the same lot shall be
as prescribed in Article III, except that no poultry or livestock shelter
shall be erected nearer than 100 feet to any dwelling on the same lot.
D. Height of accessory buildings. The height of accessory buildings shall
be as prescribed in Article III.
E. Location. An accessory building may be erected in side and rear yard
areas only and shall be set back from side and rear lot lines as
prescribed in Article III, except that, if erected on a corner lot, the
accessory building shall be set back from the side street to comply with
the setback line applying to the principal building for that side street;
and except, further, that no poultry or livestock shelter shall be erected
nearer than 100 feet to any lot lines. Unless otherwise noted in Article
III, accessory buildings shall meet the setback lines for the principal
building.
F. Accessory buildings on corner lot. Accessory buildings on corner lots
shall not be erected closer to the street line than the front yard required
on the adjacent lot.
G. Location on lot with principal building required. An accessory building
shall not be located on a lot unless a principal building is also located on
that same lot.
H. Design. The design of accessory buildings shall be consistent with the
residential character of the neighborhood, and the exterior materials
shall match those of the principal building as much as possible.
§ 550-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-112
1:1027
§ 550-112. Appearance of buildings. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-008]
A. Within any residential district, no building with a permitted
professional home office or home occupation shall be constructed or
altered so as to be inharmonious with the residential character of the
adjacent residential areas.
(1) All new housing may be oriented on the lot so either the major axis
or the minor axis of the house is parallel to the street line. In all
cases, however, the facade facing the street line must be designed
to complement the street. Architectural articulation, using such
elements as windows, doors and/or porches, is required. Blank
facades facing the street line will not be permitted.
B. The governing body hereby finds that uniformity in the exterior design
and appearance of dwellings erected in the same residential
neighborhood tends to adversely affect the desirability of the immediate
and neighboring areas for residential purposes and impairs existing
residential property in such areas; tends to impair the value of both
improved and unimproved real property in such areas; and tends to
deprive the municipality of tax revenue and destroys a proper balance
between the taxable value of real property in such areas and the cost of
municipal services provided therefor. It is the purpose of this section to
prevent these and other harmful effects of uniformity in design and
appearance of dwellings erected in any housing development in the
same residential neighborhood and thus to promote and protect the
general welfare of the community.
(1) Not more than one construction permit shall be issued for any
particular single-family detached dwelling unit design in any
housing development consisting of two or more detached dwellings
when the houses are substantially alike in exterior design and
appearance, unless such similar houses either are separated by a
distance of at least 200 feet or are situated on individual lots which
are themselves separated at all points by a distance of at least 100
feet, whichever distance will provide the least separation between
houses.
(2) Houses within such specified distance from each other shall be
considered uniform in exterior design and appearance if they have
any one of the following characteristics:
(a) The same basic dimensions and floor plans are used without
substantial differentiation of one or more exterior elevations.
(b) The height and design of the roofs are without substantial
change in design and appearance.
(c) The size and type of windows and doors in the front elevation
are without substantial differentiation.
§ 550-112 HAMILTON CODE § 550-112
1:1028
§ 550-113. Stormwater management.
(3) In addition, there shall be not less than one basic house design and
two different exterior elevations in every housing development
consisting of eight or less houses; not less than two basic house
designs and four different exterior elevations in every housing
development consisting of nine to 15 houses; not less than three
basic house designs and six different exterior elevations in every
housing development consisting of 16 to 50 houses; not less than
four basic house designs and seven different exterior elevations in
every housing development consisting of 51 to 77 houses; and not
less than four basic designs and eight different elevations in every
housing development consisting of 78 or more houses.
(4) To ensure conformity with the provisions of this chapter, no
construction permit shall hereafter be issued for more than one
dwelling in any housing development until the builder shall post or
cause to be posted, on each specific lot on the map of the
subdivision on file with the Construction Official, the type and
model of each house for which a construction permit has been or is
being issued.
(5) The provisions, requirements and standards heretofore set forth
shall not be considered met where there is an attempt to make
minor changes or deviations from building plans and location
surveys, which changes show an obvious intent to circumvent the
purpose of this section.
(6) Building elevations and floor plans for each required house design
must be submitted for review by the Planning Division at final
subdivision. Where an applicant has no immediate plans for
construction, these building elevations and floor plans must be
submitted for review by the Planning Division prior to the issuance
of a building permit.
C. The governing body finds that the appearance of commercial and
industrial structures erected within the Township can directly affect the
long-term economic development of the Township. Improper or poor
maintenance of building facades tends to impair the value of both
improved and unimproved real property in commercial and industrial
zone districts and impede the overall economic development of the
community. In order to prevent such harmful effects, the front, side and
rear elevations of commercial and industrial structures which are to be
erected shall be finished with maintenance-free material.207
A. Purpose. Development often changes the hydrologic and hydraulic
regime of the watersheds in which it is effected. Increased flooding,
increased erosion of channels and increased pollutant loadings are
207. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Incongruous buildings, was repealed 6-19-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-020.
§ 550-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-113
1:1029
some of the problems associated with uncontrolled development. The
objectives, therefore, of this section of the Code of the Township of
Hamilton, Mercer County, New Jersey, are:
(1) To effectively and efficiently control and manage the quantity of
stormwater runoff for flood mitigation.
(2) To reduce pollutant loadings to both surface waters and
groundwaters due to developments.
(3) To preserve and enhance environmentally sensitive areas.
(4) To uphold the quality of life and the public good.
B. General standards. Each site shall take into consideration the general
and specific concerns of the Township, county and state on the
environment and flood control. To this end, a stormwater management
system shall be designed and installed for the development and shall
satisfy the following:
(1) The system shall be adequate to carry off or store the stormwater
and natural drainage water which originates not only within the lot
or tract boundaries but also that which originates beyond the lot or
tract boundaries. No stormwater runoff or natural drainage water
shall be so diverted as to overload existing drainage systems or
create flooding or increase erosion or cause the need for additional
drainage structures on other private properties or public lands
without proper and approved provisions being made for
management of these conditions.
(2) Wherever possible, all lots shall be designed to provide positive
drainage to the roadway fronting the same. Where this is
impossible, the disposal of storm drainage through adjacent
properties shall be through easement areas.
(3) Drainage structures which are proposed to be located on state or
county highway rights-of-way shall be approved by the state or
county highway engineer's office. Any drainage structures within
wetlands or resulting in stream encroachments shall be submitted
to the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, and a
letter from that office shall be directed to the administrative officer
prior to final approval or any construction.
(4) Where a lot or tract is traversed by a watercourse, surface or
underground drainageway or drainage system, channel or stream,
there shall be provided and dedicated a drainage easement to the
Township. This easement shall substantially conform to the lines of
such watercourse and be of such width as will be adequate to
accommodate expected stormwater runoff in the future.
C. Design criteria. The stormwater management system design shall
contain features to provide for the following:
§ 550-113 HAMILTON CODE § 550-113
1:1030
(1) Water quality control. Water quality control shall be accomplished
without considering infiltration of the runoff generated by the oneyear
twenty-four-hour Type III storm or 1 1/4 inches of rainfall in
two hours. Provisions shall be made for the runoff to be detained
and released at a rate so that not more than 90% is evacuated in 18
hours for residential developments and 36 hours for other
developments or, alternatively, utilize a minimum orifice of three
inches.
(2) Flood mitigation.
(a) Flood mitigation shall be accomplished by detention and
control of the post-development two-, ten- and one-hundredyear
twenty-four-hour SCS-Type III storms. In all cases, the
post-development discharges from the site shall not exceed the
corresponding predevelopment discharges. At a low point
where possible road flooding could occur, the storm drains
shall be designed for a twenty-five-year storm. All other
internal storm sewers shall be designed for fifteen-year storm
frequency. All bridges and culverts shall be designed for a onehundred-
year storm elevation plus one foot. The lowest level of
all buildings (including the basement) shall be one foot above
the design elevation of the five-hundred-year storm frequency
or 125% of the one-hundred-year storm.
1. Underdrains shall be provided for all streets where the
seasonal high-water table is within two feet of the final
grade.
2. For roadside swales used to control drainage to, from or in
the development, the twenty-five-year twenty-four-hour
storm shall be used. Inlets shall be provided a maximum of
500 feet apart in roadside swales. The minimum grade for
roadside swales shall be 2%, or swales shall be
underdrained.
3. The minimum size of pipes shall be 15 inches in diameter.
The minimum pipe cover shall be 12 inches (surface to the
top of the pipe).
(b) Detention facilities.
1. Detention storage shall be above the elevation of the onehundred-
year flood. If this cannot be maintained, then the
usable storage shall be a proportionate share of the actual
volume of the basin as indicated in the table below:
§ 550-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-113
1:1031
Detention Storage Actual
Volume
Usable
Volume
Less than 2 feet below the
100-year flood elevation
X 0.4X
2 to 4 feet below the 100-year
flood elevation
Y 0.25Y
Over 4 feet below the
100-year flood elevation
Z 0.10Z
2. Detention basins and their outfalls shall have sufficient
easement for the facility plus an unobstructed access
around the top of the basin for maintenance. The size of
the easement shall be 10 feet to 30 feet, as site conditions
dictate. All detention basins shall have a one-foot or
greater freeboard above the maximum one-hundred-year
flood elevation.
3. Where safety is a concern, the Township may request the
installation of fences around detention basins. For safe
movement of personnel and safe operation of equipment,
fences should not be constructed within five feet of either
the top or toe of any side slope that exceeds five horizontal
to one vertical.
4. Maximum side slopes for detention basins shall be three
horizontal to one vertical for detention basins not greater
than five feet deep. For basins five feet deep and greater,
the maximum side slope shall be four horizontal to one
vertical. Flatter side slopes are recommended whenever
possible.
5. Minimum bottom slopes for detention basins shall be 2%
and graded to the outlet structure. Concrete low-flow
channels are acceptable if the minimum grade is 1/2 of 1%.
6. All outfalls, flare-end sections, headwalls and erodible soils
shall be adequately protected according to the Standards
for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey.
7. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
demonstrate that existing storm sewer systems are not
overloaded by the discharge of additional stormwater into
the system.
8. Basins shall be designed and landscaped to be an aesthetic
asset to the site.
9. The basin must be readily accessible from a street or other
public right-of-way. Inspection and maintenance
easements, connected to the street or right-of-way, should
§ 550-113 HAMILTON CODE § 550-113
1:1032
be provided. The exact limits of the easements and rightsof-
way shall be specified on the project plans and other
appropriate documents.
10. Access roads shall be wide enough to allow the passage of
necessary maintenance vehicles and equipment, including
trucks, backhoes, grass mowers and mosquito-control
equipment. In general, a minimum right-of-way width of 15
feet and a minimum roadway width of 10 feet shall be
provided. To facilitate entry, a curb cut shall be provided
where an access road meets a curbed roadway. To allow a
safe movement of maintenance vehicles, access ramps
shall be provided to the bottoms of all detention facilities
greater than five feet in depth. Access ramps shall not
exceed 10% in grade.
(c) Outlet devices.
1. In all cases, multiple-level outlets or other fully automatic
outlets shall be designed so that discharge rates from the
development for the design storms will not be increased
from that which would occur if the development were not
constructed. Outlets' waters shall be discharged from the
development at such locations and velocities as not to
cause additional erosion. No outlets shall be permitted
directly into adjacent lands without proof of a zero
increase in the rate or runoff at the point of discharge and
a stability analysis of the off-site channel.
2. If there is no stable outlet downstream, an off-site
easement must be obtained to a stable outlet. Outlets from
detention facilities shall be designed to function without
manual or electric controls. The location of the principal
outlet shall allow for easy access.
3. Grading and landscaping around outlet structures shall be
designed to facilitate mowing, trimming, debris removal
and other general maintenance tasks.
4. Trash racks with hinges are required to protect the outlet
from clogging. The inside of the outlet structure should be
depressed below the lowest outlet to minimize clogging of
this outlet due to sedimentation.
(d) Emergency spillways.
1. Emergency spillways are required on all detention basins
and shall be designed to pass discharges in excess of 150%
of the one-hundred-year post-development peak discharge
into the detention basin.
§ 550-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-113
1:1033
2. Emergency spillways shall be located in cut sections
wherever possible. Stable channels shall be provided to
convey stormwater through the emergency spillway to the
discharge points.
(e) Uncontrolled runoff.
1. Uncontrolled runoff is stormwater flow not tributary to
detention basins or other stormwater control facilities on
the development site.
2. The total peak runoff from the site after development
cannot exceed predevelopment rates; therefore,
uncontrolled runoff shall be allowed only if:
a. The stormwater-control facilities on site are
adequately sized to reduce the composite peak rates
of runoff to below predeveloped conditions for the
entire site.
b. The uncontrolled runoff will not exceed predeveloped
peak rates at the point of discharge. Uncontrolled
runoff shall be limited to overland and swale flows.
c. No degradation in the water quality is anticipated.
(f) Dams. Any stormwater basin that has more than five feet
between the downstream toe-of-slope and the emergency
spillway crest is classified as a dam and subject to N.J.A.C.
7:20, the New Jersey Dam Safety Standards. All such dams
must be designed, constructed, approved, operated and
maintained in compliance with N.J.A.C. 7:20, as amended and
approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (NJDEP).
D. Submission requirements.
(1) The principles and standards stipulated in this section shall be
applicable to all developments which are subject to review and
approval by the Township of Hamilton. The stormwater
management report to be submitted shall include, at a minimum,
the following:
(a) A summary page to include drainage area, predevelopment
and post-development curve number (CN), time of
concentration (TC), predevelopment and post-development
discharge (CFS) for the two-, ten- and one-hundred-year
storms and the total storage volume in the basin.
(b) Computations of runoff curve numbers (CN), which shall
include soil types and existing and proposed land uses. A
predevelopment and post-development drainage map is
required.
§ 550-113 HAMILTON CODE § 550-113
1:1034
(c) Calculations for determination of the time of concentration.
The path of surface runoff used to determine the time of
concentration for predevelopment and post-development
conditions shall be shown. Calculations shall include off-site
drainage, if applicable. A plan is required to show the
predevelopment and post-development drainage areas as well
as the path used for time of concentration (TC).
(d) Calculations for predevelopment and post-development
discharges for all required design storms. The detention basin
chart shall include for incremental elevations the basin area,
basin volume and cumulative basin volume.
(e) Design and calculations of emergency spillways, riprap aprons,
swales and other soil erosion and sediment control features.
Design and calculations shall be in conformance with the
Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey.
(f) Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations for the storm sewer
collection system, culverts and other stormwater facilities. A
drainage area map showing subdrainage areas shall be
submitted.
(g) Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations for stream delineations,
floodway and flood hazard limits in accordance with the NJDEP
Stream Encroachment Manual, where the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the state has not delineated a
stream.
(2) In order to provide general guidelines for the many types of
development covered by this section, the following categorizations
are made:
(a) Category No. 1: development that concurrently contains
mostly impervious area and where additional development
and/or site modifications will cause no increase in runoff and/
or impervious area. Stormwater management reports for this
type of development shall address water quality control as the
dominant concern. However, if the area is known to have
persistent flooding problems, a detention basin or some other
kind of storage or flood mitigation shall be required.
(b) Category No. 2: development not covered in Category No. 1
and where the site is less than 10 acres in total area.
Stormwater management reports shall require both water
quality control and flood mitigation measures. Either the
Modified Rational Method or the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) TR-55 Method may be used to generate the
hydrographs for predevelopment and post-development
conditions.
§ 550-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-113
1:1035
§ 550-114. Fences, walls and sight triangles. [Amended 12-21-1994
by Ord. No. 94-058; 1-18-1995 by Ord. No. 95-003; 8-21-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-038; 9-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-034]
(c) Category No. 3: development not covered under either of the
two categories above. Stormwater management reports shall
require both water quality control and flood mitigation
measures. The USDA TR-55 Method shall be used to generate
the hydrographs for predevelopment and post-development
conditions.
E. Maintenance and repair.
(1) Unless assumed by a governmental agency, responsibility for the
operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities
shall remain with the owner or owners of the property with
permanent deed provisions requiring that it shall pass to any
successive owner or operator of the site. The operation and
maintenance of detention facilities shall include but not be limited
to the periodic removal and disposal of accumulated particulate
material and debris.
(2) If portions of the land are to be sold, legally binding arrangements
shall be made to pass the basic responsibility to successors in title.
These arrangements shall designate for each project the property
owner, governmental agency or other legally established entity to
be permanently responsible for maintenance.
(3) Prior to granting final approval to any project subject to review
under this section, the applicant or responsible party shall enter
into an agreement with a government agency or a legally
established entity to ensure the continued operation and
maintenance of the stormwater management facility. The
responsible party may be but is not limited to a homeowners'
association if the property is subdivided and sold separately. This
agreement shall be in a form satisfactory to the Township and may
include but may not necessarily be limited to personal
responsibility, covenants and bonds. Penalties for noncompliance
with the maintenance requirements shall be part of the agreement.
(4) An easement shall be executed with the governmental agency or
other entity to ensure the continued operation and maintenance of
the stormwater management facility. If the responsible party fails
to maintain the stormwater management facility, the governmental
agency or entity shall perform the maintenance, charge the owner
and place a lien upon the property of the owner until such charges
are satisfied.
(5) The applicant or owner shall submit an as-built plan of the basin
and its outlet structure after construction to ensure proper volume
and outlet structure construction.
§ 550-113 HAMILTON CODE § 550-114
1:1036
A. All permitted fences shall be situated on a lot in such a manner that the
finished side of the fence shall face adjacent properties. No fence shall
be erected of barbed wire, topped with metal spikes, nor constructed of
any material or in any manner which may be dangerous to persons or
animals, except that the provisions in this section shall not apply to
farms and except further that fences permitted for industrial uses may
be topped by a barbed wire protective barrier in RD, REO, REO-4, MFG
and I Districts. All barbed wire fences shall be faced into the property.
B. Fences are permitted in all zones in accordance with the following
design criteria and regulations:
(1) On any corner lot, no wall or other structure shall be erected or
altered except utility poles or light standards not exceeding a crosssectional
area of one square foot, and no embankment or hedge,
shrubbery, tree or other growth shall be maintained which would
cause an obscuring or obstruction of traffic sight distances on a
street or public road. A clear sight triangle, formed by the
intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets or railroads or a
street intersection with a railroad right-of-way line at two points,
each 30 feet distant from the intersection of the right-of-way line,
or in the case of a rounded corner, from the point of intersection of
their tangents, shall be maintained. Such fences, structures,
plantings or other obstruction shall be limited to a height of not
more than three feet or less than seven feet above the street grade.
A construction permit is required for the installation of all fencing.
(2) Except as stipulated above, a fence, wall or hedge shall be not more
than four feet in height along the front lot line and six feet in height
along a side lot line and rear lot line. The height shall not exceed
four feet between the front lot line and front building line, and the
fence shall not be of solid construction within this area. To qualify
as not being of solid construction, the fence must be at least 50%
open. For a wooden fence, the solid portion cannot exceed a
maximum of six inches in width. Other fencing to be determined by
the administrative officer. Rear yard fences for residential lots with
reverse frontage shall adhere to Subsection B(11).
(3) Fences should complement the structural style, type and design of
the principal building.
(4) Fences which are deemed to be inferior in quality, and therefore
not maintenance-free (except for painting or refinishing), are
prohibited.
(5) Solid fences are more appropriately used adjacent to or attached to
the buildings as architectural extensions, and careful consideration
should be given to coordination with the lines, materials and color
of the principal structure.
(6) Semitransparent fences are less architecturally related and should
be finished in a more natural manner.
§ 550-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-114
1:1037
(7) Transparent fences should be as unobtrusive as possible and blend
into the surrounding landscape.
(8) Plantings shall be considered as part of any fencing plan.
(9) Metal fences, when used to enclose electrical supply stations
having energized electrical conductors or equipment, shall be a
minimum of seven feet in height and shall be effectively grounded.
Other types of construction, such as high-metallic material, shall
present equivalent barriers to climbing or other unauthorized
entry.
(10) A tennis court area, located in rear yard areas only, may be
surrounded by a fence a maximum of 12 feet in height, said fence to
be set back from any lot line the distances required for accessory
buildings in the zoning district as stipulated in Article III.
(11) Due to the public impact of reverse frontage lots located on the
Township's public road system, it has been found that a uniform
fencing design is necessary to ensure the interests of the public
domain. Therefore, residential lots with reverse frontage may have
rear yard fences, provided that they follow the following design
standards:
(a) Fences are to be constructed with a board-on-board design.
(b) The street side of the fence is to remain a natural color and is
not to be painted. Natural color protective finishes are
permitted.
(c) Fences shall be six feet high and they must be constructed five
feet inside the residential rear property line. The five-foot area
on the street side of the fence is to be maintained in shrubs,
trees, grass or other natural plant material.
(d) To ensure maintenance of the public side of the fence, each
residential property with a fence must provide a gate to allow
access between the rear yard and the street side of the fence.
The gates are for private use only and, therefore, may have
security locks.
(e) Corner lots with reverse frontage may have a fence along the
street frontage that is parallel to the side yard of the house,
conforming to the requirements of Subsection B(11)(a)
through (d) preceding. The fence must be constructed five feet
inside the lot line and may not extend beyond the front building
line of the house. This provision does not supersede
regulations governing fences in sight triangles or sight
easements.
C. Sight triangle easements shall be required at intersections, in addition
to the specified right-of-way width, in which no grading, planting,
§ 550-114 HAMILTON CODE § 550-114
1:1038
§ 550-115. Lighting. [Amended 1-5-2006 by Ord. No. 05-038]
fences in excess of three feet, parking lot or structure shall be erected
or maintained except for street signs, fire hydrants and light standards.
The "sight triangle" is defined as that area outside the street right-ofway
which is bounded by the intersecting street lines and the straight
line connecting sight points, one each located on the two intersecting
street center lines: arterial streets at 300 feet, collector streets at 200
feet and local streets at 90 feet. Where the intersecting streets are
both arterials, both collectors or one arterial and one collector, two
overlapping sight triangles shall be required, formed by connecting the
sight point 90 feet on the intersecting street. (See Plate 1 attached.208)
Such easement dedication shall be expressed on the site plan as
follows: "Sight triangle deeded for the purposes provided for and
expressed in the Land Development Ordinance."
D. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, no fence
shall be installed on any property in a location or in a manner so as to
adversely affect the utility of an adjacent property. The administrative
officer shall have the authority to enforce this provision through
application of reasonable discretion. The administrative officer shall not
authorize the issuance of any permit for fence installation where this
provision applies, unless upon express written authorization of the
owner of the adjacent property.
A. Streetlighting of a type supplied by the utility and of a type and number
approved by the Director of Public Works shall be provided for all street
intersections and along all arterial, collector and local streets and
anywhere else deemed necessary for safety reasons. Wherever electric
utility installations are required to be underground, the applicant shall
provide for underground service for streetlighting.
B. All parking areas and walkways thereto and appurtenant passageways
and driveways serving commercial, public, office, industrial, apartment
or other similar uses having common off-street parking and/or loading
areas and building complexes requiring area lighting shall be
adequately illuminated for security and safety purposes. The lighting
plan in and around the parking areas shall provide for nonglare colorcorrected
lights focused downward. The light intensity provided at
ground level shall be a minimum of 0.5 footcandle anywhere in the area
to be illuminated, shall average a minimum of 1.0 footcandle over the
entire area, and shall be provided by fixtures with a mounting height
not more than 25 feet or the height of the building, whichever is less,
measured from the ground level to the center line of the light source.
Any other outdoor lighting, such as building and sidewalk illumination,
driveways with no adjacent parking, the lighting of signs and
ornamental lighting, shall be shown on the lighting plan in sufficient
detail to allow determination of the effects to adjacent properties,
208. Editor's Note: Plate 1 is attached to this chapter.
§ 550-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-115
1:1039
§ 550-116. Lot configuration.
§ 550-117. Natural features and tree preservation. [Amended
1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008; 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 11-021]
traffic safety and overhead sky glow. The objective of these
specifications is to minimize undesirable off-premises effects. No light
shall shine into windows or onto streets and driveways in such manner
as to interfere with or distract driver vision. To achieve these
requirements, the intensity of such light sources, the light shielding and
similar characteristics shall be subject to site plan approval. [Amended
9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-064]
A. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be either at right angles or
radial to street lines.
B. Each lot must front upon an approved public street.
C. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such new street line and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line (see Plate 2 attached209).
D. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as poor drainage conditions or flood
conditions, percolation tests or test borings indicating the ground
conditions to be inadequate for proper sewage disposal for on-lot
sewage treatment or similar circumstances, the Board, after adequate
investigation, may withhold approval of such lots. If approval is
withheld, the Board shall give reasons and notify the applicant and
enter same in the minutes.
A. Natural features, such as trees, hilltops and views, natural terrain, open
waters and natural drainage lines, shall be preserved whenever
possible in designing any development containing such features.
B. No topsoil shall be removed from areas intended for lawn or open
space. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide at least four inches of cover to all such
areas, which shall be stabilized by approved seeding and/or planting.
C. A conscious effort shall be made to preserve all worthwhile trees and
shrubs which exist on the site. Stripping trees from a lot or filling
around trees on a lot shall not be permitted unless it can be shown that
grading or construction requirements necessitate removal of trees, in
which case those lots shall be replanted with trees to reestablish the
tone of the area. Trees shall be replanted using the following formula:
(1) Large-growing deciduous trees shall be planted using a ratio of 100
trees planted for every one acre of woodlands lost or four trees per
209. Editor's Note: Plate 2 is attached to this chapter.
§ 550-115 HAMILTON CODE § 550-117
1:1040
§ 550-118. Nonconforming lots, structures and uses. [Amended
1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008]
lot, whichever is greater. Trees shall be a minimum of 1 1/2 inches
to two inches caliper at time of planting.
(2) Large-growing conifers may be substituted for the above-required
deciduous trees at a ratio of three conifers for every one deciduous
tree required. No more than 40% of the required replantings,
however, may be conifers. Conifers must be a minimum of six feet
at time of planting. The above formula represents requirements for
plantings over and above required street tree plantings and
landscape packages (§ 550-130) in residential developments and
required street tree plantings, buffers and parking lot plantings in
nonresidential developments. Should it be determined by the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment that plantings
required in this section cannot be accommodated on the subject
site, the applicant/developer will be required to contribute trees to
the Township at a rate of 130% of the required number of trees
specified or equal monetary contribution to the Township for the
purchase of trees for street, park and open space beautification.
See § 550-130 for additional standards.
A. Lots.
(1) Whenever title to two or more lots, contiguous along the same
street frontage, is held by the same owner, regardless of whether or
not each of said lots may have been approved as portions of a
subdivision prior to 1976 or acquired by separate conveyance or by
other operation of law, should by reason of exceptional
shallowness, topographical conditions, substandard area or yard
space or similar measurements not conform with the minimum lot
area and dimension requirements for the zone in which it is
located, the contiguous lots of said owner shall be considered as a
single lot.
(2) Whenever the owner of a lot existing at the time of adoption of this
chapter has dedicated or conveyed land to the Township in order to
meet the minimum street width requirement of the Official Map or
Master Plan of the Township, the Construction Official shall issue
building and occupancy permits for the lot whose depth and/or
areas are rendered substandard in area only because of such
dedication and where the owner has no other adjacent lands to
provide the minimum requirements.
(3) Any existing lot on which a building or structure is located, and
which lot does not meet the minimum lot size, or a structure which
violates any yard requirements may have additions to the principal
building and/or construction of an accessory building without an
appeal for variance relief, provided that it can be demonstrated to
the administrative officer that:
§ 550-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-118
1:1041
§ 550-119. Off-street parking, loading areas and driveways.
[Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008; 9-16-1998 by Ord. No.
98-034; 5-20-2004 by Ord. No. 04-016]
(a) The existing use(s) on the lot are conforming to the permitted
use(s) stipulated in this chapter for the lot in question.
(b) The total permitted building coverage is not exceeded.
(c) The accessory building and/or addition do not violate any other
requirements of this chapter, such as but not limited to height,
setback and parking.
B. Structures and uses.
(1) A nonconforming building or structure which is damaged or
partially destroyed by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other
calamity or by the public enemy to an extent less than 60% of its
market value at the time of such calamity may be restored, and the
occupancy or use of such building, structure or part thereof which
lawfully existed at the time of such partial destruction may be
continued, provided that such restoration is started within a period
of one year and is diligently prosecuted to completion. In the event
that such damage or destruction exceeds 60% of the market value
of such building at the time of such calamity, no repairs or
reconstruction shall be made unless every portion of such building
and its use is made to conform to all regulations of this chapter for
the zone in which it is located; or reconstruction of any building or
structure under the provisions of this section shall be in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 167, Construction
Codes, Uniform, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton. The
restrictions of this subsection shall not apply to single-family
residences, which may be reconstructed in kind as the residence
existed prior to damage or destruction, so long as reconstruction is
commenced within one year.
(2) Repairs and maintenance work required to keep a structure in
sound condition may be made to a nonconforming structure
containing a nonconforming use. However, no nonconforming
structure or structure containing a nonconforming use shall be
enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed or structurally
altered in any manner without an appeal for variance relief.
(3) The vacation of a nonconforming building or use for a consecutive
period of one year shall be deemed a permanent vacation, and
thereafter the building shall not be reoccupied except in conformity
with the regulations of the district in which it is located, and the
use may not be resumed.
(4) Any nonconforming use of land and/or a building or structure shall
not be changed to any other nonconforming use.
§ 550-118 HAMILTON CODE § 550-119
1:1042
A. Landscaping.
(1) Except for detached dwelling units, a screen planting of a dense
evergreen material not less than four feet in height shall be
provided between the off-street parking areas and any lot line or
street line except where a building intervenes or where the
distance between such areas and the lot line or street line is
greater than 150 feet.
(2) All loading areas shall be landscaped and screened sufficiently to
obscure the view of the parked vehicles and loading platforms from
any public street, adjacent residential districts or uses and the
front yards of adjacent commercial and industrial uses. Such
screening shall be by an extension of a building, a fence, wall,
planting or combination thereof and shall not be less than five feet
in height.
(3) Each off-street parking area shall have a minimum area equivalent
to one parking space per every 10 parking spaces landscaped, with
1/2 of said spaces having shrubs no higher than three feet and the
other half having trees with branches no lower than seven feet.
Such landscaped spaces shall be distributed throughout the
parking area in order to break the view of long rows of parked cars
in a manner not impairing visibility and shall not be construed as
meeting the requirements for buffers or screening as specified in
this chapter.
B. Lighting. Lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be
arranged to reflect the light away from residential premises and streets
and shall be in accordance with § 550-115.
C. Surfacing and curbing.
(1) Off-street parking lots and loading areas, together with their access
aisles, driveways and fire lanes, shall not occupy more than 45% of
the lot area. All parking and loading areas and access drives shall
be paved as outlined below or the equivalent, as determined by the
Township Engineer, and approved as part of the development
application approval. All parking areas, regardless of size and
location, shall be suitably drained and maintained.
(a) Areas of ingress or egress, loading and unloading areas, major
interior driveways or access aisles and other areas likely to
experience similar heavy traffic shall be paved with not less
than five inches of compacted base course of 3/4 inch quarryprocessed
stone, shall be utilized with a minimum of two-inchthick
compacted wearing surface of bituminous concrete
(FABC), and shall be constructed thereon in accordance with
Division 3, Section 10, of the aforesaid New Jersey State
Highway Department specifications and amendments thereto.
§ 550-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-119
1:1043
(b) Parking stall areas and other areas likely to experience similar
light traffic shall be paved with not less than four inches of
compacted 3/4 inch quarry-processed stone and a two-inchthick
compacted wearing surface of bituminous concrete
(FABC).
(c) Where subbase conditions of proposed parking and loading
areas are wet, springy or of such a nature that surfacing would
be inadvisable without first treating the subbase, the treatment
of the subbase shall be made in the following manner: The
areas shall be excavated to a depth of six to 12 inches below
the proposed finished grade and filled with suitable subbase
material as determined by the Township Engineer. Where
required by the Township Engineer, a system of porous
concrete or PVC pipe subsurface drains shall be constructed
beneath the surface of the parking area and connected to a
suitable drain. After the subbase material has been properly
placed and compacted, the parking area surfacing material, as
described heretofore, shall be spread thereon.
(2) All off-street parking lots shall have adequate designations to
indicate traffic flow and parking spaces.
(3) Curbing shall be provided along all off-street parking and loading
areas as well as along all traffic aisles providing access to said
parking and loading areas. Curbing shall be Belgian block, unless
otherwise approved by the administrative officer.
D. Access. Access points from any one lot crossing the street line shall be
limited to a maximum of two along the frontage of any single street. The
center line of any separate access point shall be spaced at least 65 feet
apart, shall handle no more than two lanes of traffic, shall be at least 12
feet from any property line unless otherwise specified in this chapter
and shall be set back from the street line of any intersecting street at
least 50 feet or 1/2 the lot frontage, whichever is greater, except in no
case shall the setback distance exceed 200 feet. Continuous open
driveways in excess of 23 feet at the cartway line shall be prohibited,
except that for nonresidential uses driveways of more than 23 feet may
be permitted, giving due consideration to the proposed width, curbing,
direction of traffic flow, radii of curves and method of dividing traffic
lanes. Curbing shall be depressed at the driveway or the curbing may
be rounded at the corners and the driveway connected with the streets
in the same manner as another street.
E. Off-street parking and loading area requirements.
(1) In all zones, in connection with every industrial, commercial,
business, institutional, recreational or any other use, there shall be
provided at the time any building or structure is erected, enlarged
or increased in capacity off-street parking for automotive and other
vehicles in accordance with the requirements set forth herein.
§ 550-119 HAMILTON CODE § 550-119
1:1044
Such facilities shall be completed prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
(2) Each automotive parking space shall not be less than 180 square
feet in area, not less than nine feet wide and not less than 20 feet
deep, exclusive of passageways. In addition, there shall be provided
interior driveways to connect each parking space with a public
right-of-way. Where the front or rear of vehicles will overhang the
curb and there is at least a two-foot clearance beyond the curb,
parking stalls may be reduced in size to nine feet wide and 18 feet
deep.
(3) Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked, preferably
with hairpin striping, and on-pavement directional arrows or signs
shall be provided wherever necessary. All striping, markers,
directional arrows and signs shall be properly maintained so as to
ensure their maximum efficiency.
(4) Except in the case of one-family and two-family dwellings, no
parking area shall be established for less than three spaces unless
adequate on-street parking spaces in front of the site do not exist.
(5) Garage space or space within buildings, in basements or on the
roofs of buildings may be used to meet the off-street parking
requirements of this section, provided that such space is
designated to serve as an off-street parking space.
(6) All off-street parking should conform to the following widths:
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Aisles
(feet)
Bay Widths
Parking Both
Sides
(feet)
Bay Widths
Parking One
Side
(feet)
90° 25 64 44
60° 18 60 39
45° 13 53 33
30° 11 47 29
(7) Off-street parking spaces for one-family and two-family dwellings
shall be located on the same lot as the main building to be served.
Off-street parking spaces for multifamily dwellings shall be located
not more than 300 feet distant, as measured along the nearest
pedestrian walkway. Off-street parking spaces for all other uses
shall be provided on the same lot as the main building to be served
or not more than 500 feet distant, as measured along the nearest
pedestrian walkway.
(8) The off-street parking requirements for two or more neighboring
uses of the same or different types may be satisfied by the
allocation of the required number of spaces for each in a common
§ 550-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-119
1:1045
parking facility, provided that the number of off-street parking
spaces is not less than the sum of individual requirements; and
provided, further, that there be compliance with all other
provisions of these regulations.
(9) Off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be considered as
providing the required facilities for any other use, provided that 1/2
of the off-street parking space required by any use whose peak
attendance will be at night or on Sundays, such as churches,
theaters and assembly halls, may be assigned to a use which will be
closed at night or on Sundays.
(10) When the off-street parking facility for a proposed building or use
cannot be provided on the site occupied by the building or use, the
applicant shall submit with his application an instrument, fully
executed and acknowledged to the satisfaction of the Board, which
accepts as a condition for the issuance of a building permit and/or
occupancy permit the continued availability of the off-street
parking facility.
F. Off-street parking standards.
(1) Computation of number of employees. For the purpose of the
following subsection, the number of employees shall be computed
on the basis of the average number of persons to be employed,
taking into consideration day, night and seasonal variations.
(2) Number of spaces. Each individual use shall provide parking
spaces according to the following minimum provisions. Where a
permitted use of land includes different specific activities with
different specific parking requirements, the total number of
required parking spaces shall be obtained by individually
computing the parking requirements for each different activity and
adding the resulting numbers together.
Use Minimum Parking Space Requirements
Automobile sales
establishment
1 space for every 1,000 square feet of the
area used for such purposes and 1 space per
employee
Bank 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area or 8 spaces for each teller window,
whichever is greater; stacking lanes shall
accommodate at least 8 vehicles per teller
window
Boardinghouse or
rooming house
At least 1 space for each rental unit plus 1
additional space for owner or manager
§ 550-119 HAMILTON CODE § 550-119
1:1046
Use Minimum Parking Space Requirements
Bowling
establishment
At least 4 spaces for each bowling lane; if
additional facilities, such as bar or
restaurant, are provided, additional parking
spaces shall be provided in accordance with
the requirements for similar uses set forth
in this subsection
Child and infant care
centers
1 space for each employee plus 1 space for
every 10 children permitted under
maximum capacity
Church, synagogue
or other place of
worship
At least 1 space for each 4 seats
Commercial,
personal service
establishment or
retail service
1 space for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area
Community
buildings, social
halls and places of
public assembly
1 parking space for each 2 seats, except
where a specific amount of seating is
undetermined, then 1 parking space shall be
required for 75 square feet of assemblage
area
Construction
enterprise or vehicle
repair garage
1 space for every 300 square feet of floor
area used for repair and 1 space for every
500 square feet of floor area used for inside
storage and warehousing
Country club 1 parking space for each 100 square feet
of floor area occupied by all principal or
accessory structures, except those used for
parking purposes
Educational
institution, public or
private
At least 1 space for each 2 employees,
including teachers and administrators;
sufficient off-street parking space for the
safe and convenient loading and unloading
of students; additional facilities for student
parking, taking into consideration the total
number of students driving automobiles;
stadiums, gymnasiums and auditorium uses
shall be in addition to these requirements
Eleemosynary or
philanthropic
institution
At least 1 space for each 2 employees, plus
such additional facilities for residents and
visitors as shall be deemed necessary
Funeral home,
mortuary
10 parking spaces plus 1 space for each 50
square feet of floor area
§ 550-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-119
1:1047
Use Minimum Parking Space Requirements
Furniture store 1 1/2 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Garden center,
flower or plant
nursery, landscape
gardener's business
6 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area of buildings plus 1 space per 1,000
square feet of outside storage, sale or
display area
Golf course or club 10 parking spaces for each tee
Golf driving range or
miniature golf
1 1/2 parking spaces for each tee
Government-owned
or -operated building
or use, such as a
post office
At least 1 space for each 100 square feet of
gross floor area
Home occupation At least 1 parking space in addition to the
requirement for the dwelling unit
Hospital At least 1 space for each 2 patient beds,
excluding bassinets, plus 1 additional space
for each medical staff member or visiting
doctor, based on the average number of
such persons serving the hospital, plus 1
additional space for each 4 employees,
including nurses
Hotel 1 parking space per guest room;
1 parking space for each employee – the
shift having the most employees shall be
used to calculate employee parking needs;
1 parking space for every 3 seats in the
restaurant(s) and/or lounge(s) and/or
conference/banquet space; where it can be
proved that shared parking will occur,
reductions in the required number of
parking spaces may be permitted
Indoor tennis,
racquetball, squash
or handball courts
4 spaces per each court
Industrial or
manufacturing
establishments
At least 1 parking space for each employee
on the maximum work shift and 1 additional
space for each vehicle used directly in the
conduct of the enterprise or 1 space for
each 600 square feet of floor area,
whichever is greater
§ 550-119 HAMILTON CODE § 550-119
1:1048
Use Minimum Parking Space Requirements
Laboratory or
research use
At least 1 parking space for each employee
or 1 parking space for each 500 square feet
of gross floor area, whichever is greater.
Medical or dental
practitioner's or
attorney's office
1 parking space for each 175 square feet of
gross floor area or 5 spaces for each doctor,
dentist, or attorney plus 1 additional space
for each employee, whichever is greater
Multiple-family
dwelling
At least 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Museum, exhibition
hall, art gallery,
library, music
conservatory or
other cultural facility
1 space for each 1.5 persons of rated
occupancy
Nursing home 1 for each bed
Office, business,
other than medical,
dental and attorney
or other professional
office
1 space for each 250 square feet of gross
floor area for each building up to 100,000
square feet;
1 space for each 285 square feet of gross
floor area for each building containing
between 100,001 and 300,000 square feet;
1 space for each 330 square feet of gross
floor area for each building containing over
300,000 square feet
One- or two-family
detached dwelling
At least 2 spaces per dwelling unit, which
shall have immediate access to the street
Private club or union
hall
At least 1 space for each 100 square feet of
gross floor area
Professional office,
other than medical,
dental or attorney
1 space for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area or 5 spaces for each professional
person occupying or using each office,
whichever is greater
Railroad or bus
station
At least 1 space for every 100 square feet
of waiting room space, including concession
and dining areas
Recreation
establishment
At least 1 space for each 100 square feet of
nonstorage floor area
§ 550-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-119
1:1049
Use Minimum Parking Space Requirements
Restaurant, bar or
tavern
At least 1 space for every 3 seats or 1 space
for every 3 persons of rated building
capacity, whichever is greater, but in all
cases a sufficient number of spaces to
prevent obstruction of driveways, fire lanes
and aisles
Senior citizen
housing
At least 1 space per dwelling unit
Service stations At least 6 spaces for the first lift, wheel
alignment pit or similar work area, 5
additional spaces for a second work area
and an additional 3 spaces for each
additional work area; such spaces shall be
separated from the driveway and general
apron areas which give access to the
gasoline and air pumps and service areas;
no designated parking space shall obstruct
access to such facilities
Shopping center For purposes of application of these parking
ratios, a shopping center shall be a complex
containing multiple retail or personal
service establishments totaling at least
50,000 square feet of gross floor area. For
retail facilities containing less than 75,000
square feet of gross floor area or single
freestanding retail establishments for any
size, the parking ratio for a commercial,
personal service establishment or retail
store shall be applied in determining the
number of parking spaces required, which
is 1 space for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area;
4 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area for centers containing between
75,000 and 400,000 square feet of gross
floor area;
4 1/2 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area for centers containing
between 400,001 and 600,000 square feet
of gross floor area;
5 spaces for each 100 square feet of gross
floor area for centers containing over
600,000 square feet of gross floor area
§ 550-119 HAMILTON CODE § 550-119
1:1050
Use Minimum Parking Space Requirements
Stadium, ball park or
other outdoor sports
arena
At least 1 space for each 5 seats
Swimming pool or
natural bathing
place operated for
profit
At least 1 space for each 4 persons within
the recommended or legal capacity
prescribed under applicable state or local
laws, ordinances or resolutions
Theater, auditorium
or indoor sports
arena
At least 1 space for each 4 seats or similar
vantage accommodations provided
Wholesale
establishment and
warehouse
Wholesale warehouse establishments,
excluding retail use: 1 space for each 750
square feet of gross floor area or 1 space
per employee, and 1 space for each vehicle
used directly in the conduct of the business,
whichever is greater; when wholesale sales
to the general public are permitted, 1
parking space per 200 square feet shall be
require
Uses not specified In determining minimum parking space
requirements for uses not covered in this
article, the number of persons to be
employed in said building or by the use and
the number of persons expected to reside in,
visit or patronize the building or use and the
anticipated percentage of residents, visitors
or patrons using various transportation
modes shall be considered
(3) Handicapped parking spaces.
(a) Where parking lots are provided, designated parking spaces
for handicapped persons shall be required as follows:
Total Number of Parking
Spaces in Lot
Required Number of
Accessible Spaces
Up to 50 1
51 to 200 2
Over 200 1% of total spaces in lot (to
nearest whole number)
(b) Designated parking spaces for handicapped drivers shall be as
close as possible to the route of travel to the accessible
principal entrance or entrances to the building and shall be
identified with a clearly visible sign mounted off the ground
and displaying the international symbol of access.
§ 550-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-119
1:1051
(c) Where the designated space cannot be within 200 feet of the
accessible principal entrance or entrances, a dropoff area is to
be provided within 100 feet of such entrance or entrances.
(d) Parking spaces for individuals with physical handicaps shall be
12 feet wide with an unobstructed, near-level, paved surface
that is suitable for wheeling and walking.
1. Such parking spaces shall allow room for individuals in
wheelchairs or individuals on braces, canes and crutches
to get in and out of either side of an automobile.
2. A standard parking space parallel to a curb shall constitute
an acceptable space for handicapped parking, provided
that it allows sufficient area for individuals in wheelchairs
or individuals on braces and crutches to get in and out of
either side of an automobile onto a near-level, paved
surface that is suitable for wheeling and walking, and
affords route-of-travel accessibility to the building.
3. Care in planning shall be exercised so that individuals in
wheelchairs and individuals using braces and crutches are
not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked cars.
(e) Curb ramps shall be provided to permit handicapped people
access from parking area to sidewalk.
(4) Excess spaces and banked parking. Where it can be demonstrated
at the time of Planning Board review that the parking requirements
of this section will result in more parking spaces than actual needs
require, the Board may waive the paving of such spaces and instead
reserve spaces for such future facilities' needs, and if conditions in
use or actual operation of the proposed use increase parking needs,
the administrative officer may require such reserved unpaved
spaces to be paved. A lien or other suitable legal instrument may be
placed on the property to ensure enforceability of this delayed
parking installation provision.
G. Off-street parking and loading design details.
(1) All off-street parking, off-street loading and service facilities shall
be so drained as to prevent damage to abutting properties and/or
public streets and shall be constructed of materials which will
assure a surface resistant to erosion. Such drainage and materials
shall be installed as required by the Township Engineer. All such
areas shall, at all times, be maintained at the expense of the owners
thereof in a clean, orderly and dust-free condition.
(2) Curbing and loading shall be required along all off-street parking
areas as well as along all traffic aisles leading to and from the offstreet
parking and loading areas.
§ 550-119 HAMILTON CODE § 550-119
1:1052
(3) All off-street parking, off-street loading and service areas shall be
separated from walkways, sidewalks, streets and alleys by curbing
or other protective devices as approved by the Township Engineer.
(4) A private walk provided adjacent to a business or industrial
building shall be not less than four feet in width and shall conform
to all the other requirements of this section. Vehicles are not
permitted to overhang any private walk, unless the private walk is
6 1/2 feet wide.
(5) Required loading space, including maneuvering space for such
loading space, shall not be established in the area between the
front building line and street right-of-way line in the GC, GSC, REO,
REO-4, RD, MFG and I Districts.
(6) No off-street parking or loading areas shall be used for the sale,
repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment,
materials or supplies.
(7) Where off-street parking, loading or service areas are proposed to
be located closer than 50 feet to a lot in any residential zoning
district or to any lot upon where there exists a dwelling as a
permitted use under this article, and where such parking, loading
and service areas are not entirely screened visually from such lot
by an intervening building or structure, there shall be provided
along the lot line a continuous screen. The screen shall consist of
evergreens five feet in height planted four feet on center. No such
screen shall extend nearer to a street right-of-way line than the
established building line of the adjoining residential lot.
(8) No off-street parking area shall be reduced in size or encroached
upon by buildings, vehicle storage, loading or unloading or any
other use where such reduction or encroachment will reduce the
off-street parking and/or loading spaces below that required by this
article.
(9) A loading berth shall be at least 12 feet wide with at least 15 feet of
overhead clearance. The length of the loading berth shall be at
least 48 feet or shall be a length such that the horizontal distance
from the front of the dock for back-in parking to the limiting
boundary of the loading and unloading area shall be not less than
twice the overall length of the longest vehicle expected to use the
facility. The sufficiency of the off-street loading and maneuvering
space shall be determined based upon the kind and amount of
loading and unloading operations required by the given use. In no
case shall the use of any loading berth hinder the free movement of
vehicles and pedestrians over a street, sidewalk or alley. Such
spaces shall be screened from view.
(10) Where a property proposed for commercial development abuts an
existing commercial property, a common-access curb cut between
parking areas must be provided with appropriate easements
§ 550-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-119
1:1053
between the two properties. Where a property proposed for
commercial development abuts a residential property within a
commercial zone, appropriate easements which would allow access
from the residential property through the commercial property are
required in the event that the residential property is converted to
commercial use. With new development, side yard, rear yard and/or
front yard parking areas must be connected with existing parking
areas or adjacent properties.
(11) Shopping center proposals shall be reviewed on a case-by-case
basis to establish the adequacy of proposed loading facilities.
[Added 9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-064]
H. Off-street loading standards.
(1) The following off-street loading area requirements shall be applied
to the corresponding uses:
Use
Minimum Loading Space
Requirements
Hospitals and nursing homes (in
addition to space for
ambulances)
1 for each 10,000 to 30,000
square feet; for each additional
30,000 square feet or fraction
thereof, 1 additional space
Industrial and wholesale
operations with a gross floor
area of 10,000 square feet or
over, as follows:
10,000 to 40,000 square feet 1
40,000 to 100,000 square
feet
2
100,000 to 160,000 square
feet
3
160,000 to 240,000 square
feet
4
240,000 to 320,000 square
feet
5
320,000 to 400,000 square
feet
6
Each 90,000 square feet
above 400,000 square feet
1 additional space
Office building or hotel with a
gross usable floor area of 100
square feet or more devoted to
such purposes
1 for every 100,000 square feet
of floor area
§ 550-119 HAMILTON CODE § 550-119
1:1054
Use
Minimum Loading Space
Requirements
Retail operations and all firstfloor
nonresidential uses with a
gross floor area of more than
3,000 square feet and less than
20,000 square feet and all
wholesale and light industrial
operations with a gross floor
area of less than 10,000 square
feet
1
Retail operations, including
restaurant and dining facilities
with hotels and office buildings
with a gross usable floor area of
20,000 square feet or more
devoted to such purposes
1 for every 20,000 square feet
of floor area
Schools (if over 15,000 square
feet)
1
Undertakers and funeral parlors 1 for every 5,000 square feet
I. General circulation design principles for multifamily circulation
systems.
(1) Multiple-family developments should be serviced by a complete
loop street system of at least 30 feet in width affording at least two
means of ingress and egress to the site. Crossovers should be
provided. When a complete system is not practical, thirty-four-foot
or forty-foot side streets should be considered with a divided road
at least at the entrance.
(2) Parking areas should be designed to focus on major walkways.
(3) Parking space allocation should be oriented to specific buildings.
(4) Parking areas may be designed to focus on major walkways, which
should be fenced or marked. Where pedestrians must cross service
roads or access roads to reach parking areas, crosswalks should be
clearly designated by pavement markings or signs. Crosswalks
should be raised slightly or crosshatched to designate them to
drivers unless drainage problems would result.
(5) A one-way car movement (to the right or counterclockwise) should
be encouraged.
(6) A major loop road should be developed around the parking area,
and parking bays should run perpendicular off the road.
(7) Driveways should approach from the right to permit passengers to
alight to or from the sidewalk.
§ 550-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-119
1:1055
(8) Whenever possible, one-way traffic should be established at
building entrances.
(9) Where buses are a factor, consideration should be made for special
bus indentation slots off the roadway to allow passengers to get on
and off easily and safely.
(10) Roads and driveways from main roads should be located at grade
and not below the crest of vertical curves.
J. Residential driveways.
(1) Only one driveway access shall be permitted for any residential lot.
(2) In the case of a corner lot, the driveway shall be constructed from
the roadway carrying the lesser amount of traffic, unless this would
otherwise result in an unsafe condition. The Township Engineer,
after consultation with the Township Planner and the Chief of the
Traffic Bureau, shall determine the roadway from which access is
taken and shall advise the Construction Official prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
(3) In the case where the driveway is to be constructed from a major
collector, residential boulevard or arterial roadway, as designated
on the traffic circulation plan of the Master Plan, an on-site
turnaround or maneuvering area must be provided on the lot so
that vehicles may exit the driveway in a forward manner.
(4) Driveways for single-family or two-family residential dwellings
must be situated on the property so as to line up with the garage
door opening(s) with a minimum of curvature involved. In those
instances, where there is no garage(s), the driveway must be
situated within the side yard setback area of the property. In both
instances, driveways shall be no closer than five feet to any side or
rear property line and shall be constructed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the engineering construction details
of the Township of Hamilton. No parking areas shall be created
within the front setback or rear yard areas except in accordance
with the aforementioned conditions. Any deviations from this
section will require a waiver from the administrative officer or
Planning Board. All off-street parking must be paved with
bituminous or concrete materials. This shall not be construed as
prohibiting hammerhead driveways. Only one driveway may be
permitted for single-family or two-family homes, which should
conform to the aforementioned standards and not exceed a width of
20 feet. Horseshoe or circular driveways shall be permitted in the
RRC Zone District only. In those instances where there is a sideentry
garage, the driveway pad may not extend more than 35 feet
from the garage door and may not extend past the existing front
and rear building lines.210
§ 550-119 HAMILTON CODE § 550-119
1:1056
§ 550-120. Performance standards for all uses.
An application for a permit shall provide documentation that the intended
use will comply with the performance standards enumerated below. In
the case of a structure being built where the future use is not known, a
construction permit may be issued with the condition that no certificate of
occupancy will be issued until such time as this documentation is submitted
with respect to the particular occupant. A new application and a new
certificate of occupancy shall be required in the event of a change of any
user of any structure. In reviewing any site plan, the Board shall consider
the following:
K. Paving permit. A permit is required from the Division of Engineering
prior to concrete or bituminous paving or repaving or replacement of
concrete or bituminous material in any parking area and/or driveway,
either residential or nonresidential. The application must include a plot
plan showing a typical paving cross section, existing and proposed
topography, and direction of drainage. Details may be waived by the
administrative officer upon the recommendation of the Township
Engineer. The owner or contractor shall be subject to a fine if this
permit is not obtained. The Public Works Department should be notified
prior to pouring of concrete or installation of bituminous material.
A. Traffic. Pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement within and adjacent
to the site, with particular emphasis on the provision and layout of
parking areas, off-street loading and unloading and movement of
people, foods and vehicles from access roads within the site, between
buildings and between buildings and vehicles, should be carefully
reviewed. The Board shall ensure that all parking spaces are usable and
are safe and conveniently arranged. Access to the site from adjacent
roads shall be designed so as to interfere as little as possible with traffic
flow on these roads and to permit vehicles a rapid and safe ingress and
egress to the site.
B. Design and layout. The design and layout of buildings and parking areas
shall be reviewed so as to provide an aesthetically pleasing design and
efficient arrangement. Particular attention shall be given to safety and
fire protection, impact on surrounding development and contiguous and
adjacent buildings and lands.
C. Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided to ensure safe movement
of persons and vehicles and for security purposes. Lighting standards
shall be of a type approved by the Board. Directional lights shall be
arranged so as to minimize glare and reflection on adjacent properties.
D. Buffers. Buffering shall be located around the perimeter of the site and/
or in groupings at strategic locations in order to minimize the glare of
headlights of vehicles, lights from structures, noise and the movement
210. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-120
1:1057
of people and vehicles and to shield activities from adjacent properties,
etc. Buffering may consist of fencing, evergreens, shrubs, bushes,
deciduous trees, etc., or combinations thereof, to achieve the stated
objectives.
E. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall site
plan design and integrated into building arrangements, topography,
parking and buffering requirements. Landscaping shall include trees,
bushes, shrubs, ground cover, perennials, annuals, plants, sculpture,
art and the use of building and paving in an imaginative manner.
F. Signs. Signs shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing,
harmonious with other signs on the site and located so as to achieve
their intended purpose without constituting a hazard to vehicles and
pedestrians. (See § 550-124.)
G. Storm drainage, sanitary waste disposal and water supply. Storm
drainage, sanitary waste disposal and water supply shall be reviewed
and considered. Particular emphasis shall be given to the adequacy of
the existing system and the need for improvements, both on-site and offsite,
to adequately carry runoff and sewerage and to maintain an
adequate supply of water at sufficient pressure.
H. Garbage disposal. Garbage disposal should be adequate to ensure
freedom from vermin and rodent infestation.
I. Environmental elements. Environmental elements relating to soil
erosion, preservation of trees, protection of watercourses and
resources, emission of glare, noise, odor, air and water pollution,
aesthetic conditions, topography, soil and animal life shall be reviewed
and the design of the plan shall minimize any adverse impact on these
elements.
J. Support facilities. Support facilities, including the proximity and
capacity of community facilities necessary to sustain the needs and
demands of the proposed development, should be carefully considered
so as to maintain and promote balanced community environments.
These support facilities may include phone booths, benches, bike racks,
trash receptacles, bus shelters, tot-lots, game fields, open space and
land dedication for educational facilities, firehouses, etc.
K. Electrical and/or electronic devices. All electrical or electronic devices
shall be subject to the provisions of Public Law 90-602, 90th Congress,
HR 10790, dated October 18, 1968, entitled "An Act for the Protection
of Public Health and Safety from the Dangers of Electronic Production
Radiation." Radiation products, as defined in DHEW Publication No.
(FDA) 78-8003, shall be so limited and controlled that no measurable
energy can be recorded at any point beyond the property boundaries.
The applicant, upon request, shall produce certified data wherein
measurements made in accordance with the procedures and standards
set forth in the DHEW Publication No. (FDA) 75-8003 adequately
demonstrate compliance with the minimum standards established by
§ 550-120 HAMILTON CODE § 550-120
1:1058
the act. All other forms of electromagnetic radiation lying between 100
KHz and 10 MHz shall be restricted to the technical limits established
in the Federal Communications Commission's rules and regulations.
Additionally, electric or electronic equipment shall be shielded so that
there is no interference with any radio or television reception at the lot
line (or beyond the operator's dwelling unit in the case of multifamily
dwellings) as the result of the operation of such equipment.
L. Glare. No use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or a reflection of a
strong, dazzling light or glare beyond its lot lines. Exterior lighting shall
be shielded, buffered and directed so that glare, direct light or
reflection will not become a nuisance to adjoining properties, adjoining
dwelling units, adjoining districts or streets.
M. Heat. No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond its lot lines.
Further, no use shall be permitted which would cause the temperature
to rise or fall in any body of water.
N. Noise. Noise levels shall be designed and operated in accordance with
local regulations and those rules established by the New Jersey State
Department of Environmental Protection, as they are adopted and
amended.
O. Odor. Odors due to nonagricultural operations shall not be discernible
at the lot line or beyond.
P. Storage and waste disposal. No materials or wastes shall be deposited
upon a lot in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the
lot by natural causes or forces, nor shall any substance be deposited
which can contaminate an underground aquifer or otherwise render
such underground aquifer undesirable as a source or water supply or
recreation, or which will destroy aquatic life. All materials or wastes
which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or
which may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall
be stored indoors and enclosed in appropriate containers adequate to
eliminate such hazards. With respect to solid wastes, each business and
industry shall:
(1) Assume full responsibility for adequate and regular collection and
removal of all refuse.
(2) Comply with all applicable provisions of the Air Pollution Code,
including prohibition of open burning on dumps and regulations
applicable to sanitary landfill and incineration.
(3) Comply with all provisions of the State Sanitary Code, Chapter VIII,
Refuse Disposal, Public Health Council of the State Department of
Health.
(4) Permit no accumulation on the property of any solid waste, junk or
other objectionable materials.
§ 550-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-120
1:1059
Q. Ventilation. No use shall obstruct the natural ventilation of adjacent
uses nor contaminate the air with excessive heat or odor. Further, no air
conditioners or exhaust fans shall be permitted to discharge exhausted
air unless set back from all property lines 10 feet or equipped with
baffles to deflect the discharged air away from the adjacent use.
R. Vibration. There shall be no vibration which is discernible to the human
sense of feeling beyond the immediate need.
S. Air pollution. As per Air Pollution Control Code of the Township of
Hamilton, adopted January 16, 1978, by Ordinance No. 77-078.211
T. Liquid wastes. No liquid waste shall be discharged into any
watercourse in the Township. No industrial waste shall be discharged
into the Hamilton Township sewerage system except in accordance with
the Hamilton Township Industrial Waste Code and the Superintendent
of the Division of Water Pollution Control, who shall first have
investigated the character and volume of such waste and shall certify
that the sewer system will accept the discharge of such waste material.
U. Radiation. All use of materials, equipment or facilities which are or may
be sources of radiation shall comply with all controls, standards and
requirements of the Radiation Protection Act, Chapter 116, P.L. 1958,
as amended December 4, 1961, and any codes, rules or regulations
promulgated under such act. No radioactive materials shall be buried
on the premises. This subsection shall not be effective until approved by
the Commissioner of the Department of Health, as provided in N.J.S.A.
26:2d-17.
V. Noise and vibration noise.
(1) When measured at any point along the lot line, the sound pressure
level radiated continuously from a facility between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not exceed the following in any
octave band of frequency:
Frequency Band
(cycles per second)
Sound Pressure Level
(in decibels re 0.0002
microbar)
20 to 75 69
75 to 150 54
150 to 300 47
300 to 600 41
600 to 1,200 37
1,200 to 2,400 34
2,400 to 4,800 31
211. Editor's Note: See Ch. 90, Air Pollution Control.
§ 550-120 HAMILTON CODE § 550-120
1:1060
Frequency Band
(cycles per second)
Sound Pressure Level
(in decibels re 0.0002
microbar)
4,800 to 9,600 28
(2) If the noise is not smooth and continuous and is not radiated at
nighttime, one or more of the following corrections shall be added
to or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given below:
Type of Operation or Character
of Noise Correction in Decibels
Daytime operation only +5
Noise source operates less than
20% of the time
+5*
Noise source operates less than
5% of the time
+10*
Noise source operates less than
1% of the time
+15*
Noise of impulsive character
(hammering, etc.)
-5
Noise of periodic character (hum,
screech, etc.)
-5
* Apply one of these corrections only
(3) The sound pressure shall be measured with a sound level meter
conforming to American Standard Specification for General
Purpose Sound Level Meters, S1.4-1961, rev. of Z24.3-1944, and
with an octave band analyzer conforming to the American Standard
Specification for an Octave-Band Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise
and Other Sounds, Z24.10-1953, Vibration. No manufacturing,
fabricating, research, testing or other processes requiring the use
of blasting shall be permitted. Any necessary occasional,
emergency or construction blasting shall conform to the limits of
the Table of Frequency/Amplitude Relations and all other
requirements of the Rules and Regulations Governing Blasting on
Construction and Related Operations, Bureau of Engineering and
Safety, State Department of Labor and Industry. No machinery,
process or other use will be permitted that causes any mechanical
or earth vibration that is detectable beyond the lot line. When
operations involve the use of heavy machinery, testing or other
facilities likely to produce mechanical vibration, the building shall
be constructed and the machinery and equipment shall be installed
in such manner as to eliminate the possibility of mechanical
vibration or earth vibration of such extent that it is detectable
beyond the lot line. For the purpose of measuring compliance, no
mechanical vibration or earth vibration shall be permitted that
§ 550-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-120
1:1061
§ 550-121. Principal uses and buildings.
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, no more than one principal
dwelling or building shall be permitted on one lot.
§ 550-122. Public utilities. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord. No.
93-008]
exceeds 10% of the limits of the aforementioned Table of
Frequency/Amplitude Relations.
W. Fire and explosion hazards. As a condition to approval, the Planning
Board shall require proof that the applicant for a proposed industry has
registered such industry with the Commissioner of Labor and Industry.
If in the judgment of the Planning Board a proposed building, use,
structure, process, product or material appears to involve a fire or
explosion hazard, the Planning Board may require the applicant to
supply:
(1) A copy of the approved plans from the State Department of Labor
and Industry showing that adequate safeguards against the origin
and spread of fire have been or shall be taken in regard to such
things as the construction and materials of the building or
structure, the installation of safety and warning devices and the
adoption of fire prevention procedures in operations.
(2) Statement from the appropriate Township fire company officials
that the applicant has complied with all applicable Township fire
prevention regulations.
A. All public services shall be connected to an approved public utilities
system where one exists. The developer shall arrange with the servicing
utility for the underground installation of the utilities' distribution
supply lines and service connections in accordance with the provisions
of the applicable standard terms and conditions incorporated as part of
its tariff as the same are then on file with the State of New Jersey Board
of Public Utility Commissioners, and the developer shall provide the
Township with four copies of a final plan showing the installed location
of the utilities. The developer shall submit to the Board, prior to the
granting of final approval, a written instrument from each serving
utility which shall evidence full compliance or intended full compliance
with the provisions of this subsection; provided, however, that lots
which abut existing streets where overhead electric or telephone
distribution supply lines and service connections have heretofore been
installed may be supplied with electric and telephone service from
these overhead lines, but any new service connections from the utilities'
overhead lines shall be installed underground. In cases where
extensions of service to existing buildings or new buildings in
established subdivisions, industrial parks or shopping centers are
needed, the present method of service may be continued, subject to
approval by the administrative officer, upon determination by the
§ 550-120 HAMILTON CODE § 550-122
1:1062
§ 550-123. Sanitary sewers and septic systems. [Amended
1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008]
administrative officer that the proposal is of similar character to the
neighborhood. In the case of existing overhead utilities, however,
should a road widening or an extension of service or other such
condition occur as a result of the development and necessitate the
replacement or relocation of such utilities, such replacement or
relocation shall be underground, unless, upon application, this
condition is waived by the administrative officer.
B. In large-scale developments, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such easements shall
be located on consultation with the companies or Township
departments concerned and, to the fullest extent possible, shall be
centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines. Easement dedications
shall be expressed in the plan in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
A. Utilities. The design and location of storm drain, sanitary sewer lines
and waterlines shall be based on Township standards and those of the
public utility having primary jurisdiction. The location of all utilities
shall be coordinated with the Township Engineer.
B. If a public treatment and collection system is accessible or planned, the
developer shall construct facilities in such a manner as to make
adequate sewage treatment available to each lot and structure within
the development from said treatment and collection system. New or
expanded structures within the Township's sewer service area must
hook up to the public sewer system if the sewer is within 200 feet of the
property line or a distance as deemed reasonable by the Township
administrative officer. For existing structures with septic problems,
where the property line is within 200 feet of a public sewer and the
septic system cannot be remedied without expanding or otherwise
altering the system, that structure must connect to the public sewer
system.
C. Any treatment plant and collection system, including individual on-lot
septic systems, shall be designed in accordance with the requirements
of the State Department of Environmental Protection or Township
ordinances enforced by the Township Division of Health and Division of
Inspections, whichever is more restrictive.
D. All lots requiring on-site disposal systems must meet the following
requirements:
(1) Approved (by the Hamilton Township Division of Health) soil
profiles and permeability test pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:9A, Standards
for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems, for each lot
proposed must be submitted as part of every preliminary major
subdivision, minor subdivision, site plan or development of a single
§ 550-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-123
1:1063
§ 550-124. Signs. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008;
10-20-2004 by Ord. No. 04-041; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-029]
lot. Approval from the Township Division of Health will consist of
a permit to construct a sewage disposal system. This permit to
construct a sewage disposal system will be valid for three years
unless extended by the administrative officer or limited by
subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) Each application must be accompanied by a specific sewage
disposal system design for each lot. The design shall include the
location of the system on the lot. As a minimum, the design must
meet all criteria of N.J.A.C. 7:9A et seq., Standards for Individual
Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems. The Township reserves the
right to have the design and location of each system reviewed by a
qualified, independent consultant. Said review shall be performed
by a consultant selected by the Township and shall be funded by the
applicant.
(3) The design and location of a reserve sewage disposal area must be
provided for any lot and for any application for development at the
preliminary approval stage. The reserve system is to provide a
long-term backup in the event of original system failure. Soil
profiles and permeability testing pursuant to the N.J.A.C. 7:9A,
Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems,
approved by the Township Division of Health must also be
submitted as part of the sewage disposal system application. The
applicant must provide the necessary grading for the installation of
the reserve sewage disposal area.
(4) Mounded on-site sewage disposal systems shall not be used unless
the proposed grading plan has been approved by the Township
Engineer. Grading must be such that the septic system is not an
isolated raised area and cannot be out of character with adjacent
properties.
(5) Where 50 or more realty improvements are involved, two separate
state certifications are required pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:9A-3.18.
A. General provisions. No sign may be placed on or attached to a building
or erected independently for any purpose other than to advertise a
permitted business occupant, service, address, use or product offered,
sold or conducted on the same premises or off-site premises designated
by this chapter. Outdoor advertising signs may be erected in designated
areas. No signs shall be erected, altered or replaced which are not in
accordance with the standards established in this chapter. Unless
otherwise specified in this chapter, the erection of any sign shall require
a construction permit. No sign shall be attached to trees, fence posts,
stumps, utility poles or other signs but shall be freestanding or attached
to buildings in an approved manner. Coming events, community bulletin
boards and time-and-temperature signs shall be permitted.
§ 550-123 HAMILTON CODE § 550-124
1:1064
(1) Animated, flashing and illusionary signs. Signs using mechanical or
electrical devices to revolve, flash or display movement or the
illusion of movement are prohibited, except for time-andtemperature
signs.
(2) Height. No freestanding or attached sign shall be higher at any
point than the roofline of the building or 25 feet, whichever is
lower, except that no sign shall exceed any lesser height if
particularly specified.
(3) Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be supported by one
or more columns or uprights which are firmly embedded in the
ground. Exposed guy wires, chains or other connections shall not
be made a permanent support of the freestanding sign. The height
of the sign shall be measured from the ground to the top of the
sign.
(4) Illuminated signs. Illuminated signs shall be arranged as to reflect
the light and glare away from adjoining premises and away from
adjoining highways. No sign with red, green, orange, white or blue
illumination in a beam, beacon or flashing form resembling an
emergency light shall be erected in any location.
(5) Information and direction signs. Street number designations,
postal boxes, on-site direction and parking signs and warning signs
are permitted in all zones but are not to be considered in
calculating sign area. No such sign shall exceed two square feet in
area nor shall a construction permit be required.
(6) Maintenance. Signs must be constructed of durable materials,
maintained in good condition and not allowed to become
dilapidated. Whenever a sign shall become dilapidated or
structurally unsafe, the Construction Official shall order the owner
to repair said sign or remove it. Such order shall be made in
writing, and the owner shall comply with the order within 10 days.
(7) Political signs. Political signs temporarily giving notice of political
campaigns shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Signs shall be
permitted within 60 days prior to any municipal, county, state or
national election and shall be removed within 15 days after the
election. All such signs do not need a construction permit.
(8) Portable signs. No sign shall be exhibited which is portable, i.e.,
fixed on a movable stand; self-supporting without being firmly
embedded in the ground; supported by another object; mounted on
wheels or movable vehicles; or made easily movable in some other
manner except as provided in Subsection D of this section.
(9) Real estate signs. Real estate signs temporarily advertising the
sale, rental or lease of the premises or portion thereof shall be, if
not attached to the building, set back from all street and property
lines a distance equivalent to 1 1/2 linear feet for each one square
§ 550-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-124
1:1065
foot of sign area, provided that the required setback shall in no
case be less than 10 feet. Signs shall not exceed four square
feet in area on individual residential lots and 32 square feet in
area within nonresidential districts and within major residential
subdivisions of four or more lots where said signs are used to
advertise development. All such signs shall be removed at the
expense of the advertiser within 15 days after the termination or
completion of the matter of business being advertised or, in the
case of major residential subdivisions, when 95% of the lots have
been initially sold.
(10) Sign area. The area of a sign shall be measured around the outside
edges of a framed or enclosed sign or by the area utilized by
isolated words and/or symbols, including the background, whether
open or enclosed, but said area shall not include any supporting
framework and bracing incidental to the display itself, unless such
framework and bracing form an integral portion of the display.
Signs within the interior of a structure designed to be seen and
read from the exterior shall be considered as part of any maximum
sign area.
(11) Signs with two exposures. Such signs shall be measured for area by
using the surface of one side of the sign only. Both sides may be
used.
(12) Temporary signs. Interior window signs shall not require a
construction permit; provided, however, that such interior signs
shall not exceed 30% of the total window area.
(13)Wall fascia or attached signs. Wall fascia or attached signs shall be
firmly attached to the exterior wall of a building and shall not
project more than 15 inches from the building.
(14) Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall not be permitted.
(15) Proximity to historic place. No sign shall be permitted within 100
feet of the property line of any historic site or monument.
(16) Ground signs. Ground signs are designed with a minimum or no
height support standards. A ground sign is at eye level and is
accented by landscaping at its base.
(17) Outdoor advertising signs. Outdoor advertising signs are
freestanding signs of all types, located in designated areas, erected
for the purpose of off-site commercial advertising.
B. Street signs. Street signs shall be metal on metal posts of the type,
design and standard previously installed elsewhere in the Township.
The location of the street signs shall be determined by the Board, but
there shall be at least two street signs furnished at each intersection.
All signs shall be installed free of visual obstruction.
§ 550-124 HAMILTON CODE § 550-124
1:1066
C. General location and construction standards; prohibited signs.
(1) Signs, whether permanent or temporary, other than municipal,
county or state signs or official traffic control devices, shall not be
erected within or overhang the right-of-way of any street or
approved site easements, nor shall any sign be located so as to
constitute a traffic hazard.
(2) A permit shall be required for the erection, alteration or
reconstruction of any sign, except as noted below. The advertiser
shall be responsible for securing the permit.
(3) Advertising signs shall not be permitted in any residential district
in the municipality.
(4) No sign shall be erected in the Township that:
(a) Obstructs the sight triangle distance at an intersection along a
public right-of-way.
(b) Tends by its location, color, shape, message or nature to be
confused with or obstruct the view of traffic signs or traffic
signals by motorists or pedestrians; no red, green or yellow
illuminated signs shall be permitted within 300 feet of any
traffic signal.
(c) Uses admonitions such as "stop," "go," "slow," "danger," etc.,
which might be confused with traffic signals.
(5) No sign shall be erected or constructed that will violate any of the
Township regulations as to health, required light, safety or air as
defined in the Building Code of the Township.
(6) Any sign within 100 feet of any residential zoning district which is
illuminated shall be shielded in such a manner as to prevent direct
rays of light from being cast into any residential premises.
(7) Illumination devices, such as but not limited to floodlights or
spotlights, shall be so placed and so shielded as to prevent the rays
of illumination thereof from being cast into neighboring dwellings
and approaching vehicles.
(8) No portion of any sign shall be located within or suspended over a
pedestrian or bicycle passageway unless 10 feet above grade level,
nor may it project over a right-of-way.
(9) Signs shall not be located closer than the following distance to a
street right-of-way:
§ 550-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-124
1:1067
Area of Sign
(square feet)
Minimum Distance
(feet)
Less than 25 20
25 to 75 25
76 or more 30
(10) The area surrounding the signs shall be kept clean, neat and
landscaped. The tenant, owner or occupant to which the sign
applies shall be responsible for maintaining the condition of the
area. Common or directory signs shall be maintained by the
property owner or his designee.
(11) Directional signs having areas less than two square feet are exempt
from location and area regulations, provided that they do not
constitute a hazard to the traveling public, but shall be shown on an
approved site plan.
(12) Any location where business goods are no longer sold or produced
or where services are no longer provided shall have 90 days to
remove any sign remaining or derelict on the premises. Where due
written notification has been given by the municipality and
compliance has not been made within the required ninety-day
period, the municipality may cause removal of such sign with the
cost of such removal attached to the property.
(13) The applicant shall also comply with all applicable county, state and
federal sign regulations.
(14) No sign shall be erected on top of a roof.
(15) When signs are located along the district boundary line of any
residential district, they shall be set back not less than 10 feet from
such residential district boundary line.
(16) In the case of two or more business uses occupying the same
structures, the front wall area to be used in determining permitted
sign area shall only include that portion of the front wall area
occupied by the use in question.
(17) Where a business structure is located at the intersection of two
public streets, an additional sign may be erected or inscribed upon
the side wall on the street side, provided that the combined areas of
the two signs do not exceed the sign area permitted in that zone for
one facade.
(18) Where the side or rear of a business structure adjoins a public
parking area or a private parking area intended for the use of the
structure in question, signs may be placed or inscribed on said wall
to identify the business use or uses in the structure and access
thereto. Such signs shall not exceed 10 square feet or 2%,
§ 550-124 HAMILTON CODE § 550-124
1:1068
whichever is the lesser, of the wall surface on which they are
inscribed for each separate business use in the structure.
(19) Except as permitted in Subsection C(17) and (18) above, no signs
shall be permitted to be placed or inscribed on a side or rear wall of
a structure.
(20) Signs with any lighting or control mechanism which may cause
radio or television interferences are prohibited.
(21) Any sign so erected, constructed or maintained as to obstruct or be
attached to any fire escape, window, door or opening used as a
means of egress or ingress or for firefighting purposes or placed so
as to interfere with any opening required for legal ventilation is
prohibited.
(22) Any advertisement which uses a series of two or more signs or
units placed in a line parallel to the highway or in similar fashion,
all carrying a single advertising message, part of which is
contained on each sign, is prohibited.
D. Signs which do not require a permit. The following signs may be
erected, constructed, placed and maintained without a permit from the
Building Inspector:
(1) Any temporary real estate sign, subject to Subsection A(9).
(2) Any incidental sign advertising the sale of farm products grown or
produced on the premises in any zoning district wherein an
agricultural use is permitted, provided that such sign shall not
exceed 12 square feet in area and shall be at least 100 feet from the
nearest intersection of a street, road or highway and at least five
feet from the nearest property line. Such sign shall not be
illuminated.
(3) Temporary construction site signs which do not exceed 12 square
feet in area for residential districts and 100 square feet in area for
nonresidential districts. Such signs may be erected on the site
during the period of construction, subject to the setbacks
established in Subsection C of this section. The signs are permitted
to announce the name of the owner, lessee, developer, contractor,
architect or engineer, financing institution and similar data. Such
signs shall not be illuminated.
(4) Temporary sign of mechanics, painters and other artisans, provided
that such sign shall be erected only on the property where such
work is being performed, shall not exceed 12 square feet, and shall
be removed promptly upon completion of the work.
(5) Signs incident to the legal process of law and necessary to the
public welfare.
§ 550-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-124
1:1069
(6) Customary warning, trespassing and posted signs or a sign
indicating the private nature of a driveway or property, provided
that the size of the sign does not exceed three square feet.212
E. Signs permitted in residential zone districts and the Conservation Zone
District. None other than the following signs shall be permitted in these
districts:
(1) Nameplates and identifications signs for single-family dwellings.
(a) A sign indicating the name or address of the occupant may be
permitted, provided that the sign shall be no larger than two
square feet. Identification of a permitted professional or home
occupation may be included on the sign. Only one sign per
dwelling unit is permitted in addition to a mailbox
identification sign.
(b) One additional sign, not exceeding 12 square feet, may be
posted at the entrance of an active farm.
(2) Signs of schools, colleges, churches, libraries, museums, art
galleries, public utility installations, parks and other institutions of
a similar public or semipublic nature.
(a) The size of any freestanding sign shall not exceed 30 square
feet and not more than one such sign shall be placed on a
property unless such property fronts upon more than one
street, in which instance a sign may be erected on each
frontage. The height shall not exceed 10 feet. The minimum
sign setback shall be 20 feet from the property line. [Amended
7-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045]
(b) Signs affixed to the facade of the structure shall be permitted,
provided that the signs shall not exceed an area of one square
foot for each one foot in width of the front of the building or
portion thereof devoted to such use or activity.
(c) Electronic message centers (EMCs) shall be permitted as per
this section of the chapter. All EMC signs shall remain fixed for
a period of at least 30 seconds minimum, and a message
change shall be accomplished completely within one second or
less. Multiple message signs shall not display any image that
moves, or appears to move. The use of an EMC sign for the
display of videos, films, motion video clips, and streaming video
images are strictly prohibited. Multiple message signs shall not
contain, include or be illuminated by any flashing, intermittent
or moving graphics or text. Maximum sign area, height and
setback are as stipulated within this section. [Added
7-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045]
212. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 160-124(d)(7), regarding development application signs, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 9-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-031
§ 550-124 HAMILTON CODE § 550-124
1:1070
(d) Electronic Message Center (EMC) signs. EMC signs shall be
arranged as to reflect the light and glare away from adjoining
premises and away from adjoining highways. No sign with red,
green, orange, white or blue illumination in a beam, beacon or
flashing form resembling an emergency light or traffic control
device shall be erected in any location. [Added 7-15-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-045]
1. EMC illumination standards.
a. Illumination measurement criteria. The illuminance of
an EMC shall be measured with an illuminance meter
set to measure footcandles accurate to at least two
decimals. Illuminance shall be measured with the
EMC sign off, and again with the EMC displaying a
white image for a full-color-capable EMC or solid
message for a single-color EMC. All measurements
shall be taken perpendicular to the face of the EMC at
the distance determined by the total square footage of
the EMC as set forth in the accompanying Sign Area
Versus Measurement Distance Table.
Area of Sign
(square feet)
Measurement Distance
(feet)
10 32
15 39
20 45
25 50
30 55
35 59
40 63
45 67
50 71
55 74
60 77
65 81
70 84
75 87
80 89
85 92
90 95
95 97
100 100
§ 550-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-124
1:1071
Area of Sign
(square feet)
Measurement Distance
(feet)
110 105
120 110
130 114
140 118
150 122
160 126
170 130
180 134
190 138
200 141
b. Illumination limits. The difference between the off and
solid-message measurements using the EMC
measurement criteria shall not exceed 0.3 footcandle
at night.
c. Dimming capabilities. All EMC signs shall have
automatic dimming controls, either by photocell
(hardwire) or via software settings that determine the
ambient illumination and programmed to
automatically dim according to ambient light
conditions or that can be adjusted to comply with the
0.3 footcandle measurement.
(3) Signs of golf courses. One freestanding sign not to exceed 30
square feet in area or 10 feet in height.
(4) Real estate signs as per Subsection A(9) of this section.
(5) Temporary signs announcing or advertising any educational,
charitable, civic, professional, religious or like campaign or event
for a consecutive period not to exceed 21 days in any calendar year.
(6) Official signs erected by the Township, county, state or federal
government.
(7) Signs for hospitals, medical institutions, philanthropic or
eleemosynary uses and nursing homes.
(a) The size of any freestanding sign shall not exceed 30 square
feet in area and not more than one such sign shall be placed on
the property, unless such property fronts on more than one
street, in which instance a sign may be erected on each
frontage. The height shall not exceed 10 feet.
§ 550-124 HAMILTON CODE § 550-124
1:1072
(b) Signs affixed to the facade of the structure shall be permitted,
provided that the signs shall not exceed an area of one square
foot for each one foot in width of the front of the building or
portion thereof devoted to such use or activity.
(8) Signs identifying a permitted quasi-public club, lodge, social
building or recreation area, provided that each is a nonflashing
sign, not exceeding 12 square feet in area on any one side and
bearing only the name of the quasi-public club, lodge, social
building or recreation area.
(9) For all other permitted or conditional uses in these zones, signs
affixed to the facade of the structure shall be permitted, provided
that the signs shall not exceed an area of one square foot for each
one foot in width of the front of the building or portion thereof
devoted to such use or activity.
(10) Signs identifying a permitted professional office or home
occupation. Such signs shall bear only the name of the person
residing on the premises and the professional or home occupation
being conducted on the premises, shall not be illuminated and shall
be situated within the property lines of the premises it identifies.
Signs for home occupations shall not exceed 150 square inches in
area; signs for professional offices shall not exceed two square feet
in area. Freestanding signs may be used, provided that they do not
exceed a height of six feet and shall not be located within 10 feet of
a public street parking area or driveway, and shall in no way
interfere with the safe functioning of any traffic control signal or
directional device nor be located within an intersection sight
triangle easement.
(11) A ground sign shall be permitted for the purpose of identifying a
single-family residential dwelling project and a planned
neighborhood or planned community. The sign itself shall not
exceed an area of 30 square feet. Such a sign may be mounted on a
decorative wall with appropriate landscaping. Such a wall shall not
exceed a height of six feet and an overall length of 30 feet. Such a
sign shall not be located within 10 feet of a public street, parking
area or driveway and shall in no way interfere with the safe
functioning of any traffic control signal or directional device nor be
located within an intersection sight triangle easement.
(12) In an A/T Apartment Townhouse Zone District, a ground sign shall
be permitted for the purpose of identifying a multifamily dwelling
project. It shall not exceed 30 square feet in area and not more than
one such sign shall be placed on a property unless such property
fronts upon more than one street, in which instance a sign may be
erected on each frontage. The sign shall not exceed the height of
six feet and shall not be located within 10 feet of a public street,
parking area or driveway and shall in no way interfere with the safe
§ 550-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-124
1:1073
functioning of any traffic control signal or directional device nor be
located within an intersection sight triangle easement.
F. Signs permitted in nonresidential zone districts.
(1) Neighborhood Commercial District. None other than the following
signs shall be permitted in this zone district:
(a) Those signs permitted in the Conservation District and all
residential districts, when associated with the specified uses in
those districts.
(b) One sign placed or inscribed upon the front facade of a
building for each permitted use or activity. Said signs shall not
exceed an area of one square foot for each one foot in width of
the front of the building or portion thereof devoted to such use
or activity and shall not project more than 15 inches in front of
the building facade. Such signs may be illuminated but shall
not be of the flashing type.
(c) Two business signs painted on the windows and/or doors of
each business, bearing the name, street number and/or type of
business of the principal occupants, provided that there shall
be not more than one such sign on each window or door frame,
and the total area of all such signs shall not exceed six square
feet.
(d) Business signs painted on the valance of an awning bearing
only the name of the principal occupant and/or the street
number of each business, but not exceeding a total of eight
square feet in area.
(e) Special signs serving the public convenience, such as "notary
public," "public telephones," "public restrooms" or words or
directions of similar import, provided that each such sign does
not exceed one square foot in area and only one sign of each
type is displayed.
(f) Signs required by law to be exhibited by the occupant of the
premises.
(2) Community Commercial District. None other than the following
signs shall be permitted in this zone district:
(a) Those signs permitted in the Conservation District and all
residential districts, when associated with the specified uses in
those districts.
(b) Those signs permitted in the Neighborhood Commercial
District.
(c) Gasoline filling stations and public garages.
§ 550-124 HAMILTON CODE § 550-124
1:1074
1. Gasoline filling stations and public garages only may
display one freestanding sign advertising the name of the
station or the garage and/or the principal products sold on
the premises, including any special company or brand
name, insignia or emblem, provided that each such sign
shall not exceed 35 square feet in area on each side and
shall be erected within the property line and not less than
10 feet above the ground. All refuse and paper shall be
kept constantly removed from the ground spaces at least
five feet in all directions around the sign. No sign shall
exceed 30 feet in height.
2. Gasoline filling stations and public garages only may
display, in addition to the above-permitted signs, special
signs which are deemed customary and necessary to their
respective businesses, provided that such signs do not
exceed four in number, do not total more than 20 square
feet in area and are situated within the property lines of
the premises to which they relate. Such signs shall be
anchored to the ground and shall be used to advertise
prices of gasoline only.
3. In addition, one temporary sign located inside the property
line along each street frontage and specifically advertising
special seasonal servicing of automobiles may be
permitted, provided that the sign does not exceed eight
square feet in area. Furthermore, one facade sign may be
permitted, which shall not exceed one square foot for each
one foot in width of the front of the building and shall not
project more than 15 inches in front of the building.
(d) One ground sign may be permitted, provided that the
aggregate area of all sides of any such signs shall not exceed
60 square feet. Such signs may be illuminated but shall not be
of the flashing type, shall not exceed the height of six feet, shall
not be located within 10 feet of a public street or parking area
or driveway or within 20 feet of the boundary of a residential
zone and shall in no way interfere with the safe functioning of
any traffic control signal or directional device nor be located
within an intersection sight triangle easement.
(3) Highway Commercial, General Commercial and Government
Service Center Zone Districts. None other than the following signs
shall be permitted in these zone districts:
(a) Those signs permitted in the Conservation District and all
residential districts when associated with the specified uses in
those zone districts.
(b) Those signs permitted in the Neighborhood Commercial and
Community Commercial Zone Districts.
§ 550-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-124
1:1075
(c) Signs in shopping centers shall comply with the following
regulations:
1. Store signs (facade). One sign shall be placed or inscribed
upon only the front facade of a building for each occupant,
provided that such sign shall not exceed an area equal to
10% of the area of the facade or portion thereof devoted to
said occupant. Such signs may be illuminated but shall not
be of a flashing type and shall not project more than 15
inches from the facade or extend above the top or beyond
the ends of the facade. The sign as proposed should
conform to a shopping center signing plan which promotes
uniformity in the entire signing scheme.
2. Store signs (canopy). In the case of a shopping center
wherein walkways are roofed over with a permanently
installed rigid canopy or other structural device, one sign
may be hung vertically from the underside of said canopy
for each store or occupant in the center. Said signs shall
not exceed four square feet in area on each of two sides
and shall not be less than 10 feet above the walks. Such
signs may be illuminated but shall not be of the flashing
type. (Canopy signs shall conform in overall character to a
canopy signing plan for the shopping center which will
promote uniformity in signing.)
3. Identification signs. Freestanding signs may be erected to
identify a shopping center or other permitted use and to
list individual occupants, provided that no more than one
such freestanding sign shall be erected for each shopping
center, and further provided that the aggregate area of all
sides of any such sign shall not exceed 200 square feet.
Such signs may be illuminated but shall not be of a flashing
type, shall not exceed the height of 30 feet, shall not be
located within 50 feet of a public right-of-way or within
300 feet of a boundary of a residential zone and shall in no
way interfere with the safe functioning of any traffic
control signal or any directional device. This sign shall
conform in overall character with the overall signing plan.
The base of the freestanding sign shall be heavily planted
with evergreen plantings of a moderate ultimate height.
(d) Each permitted business other than in retail shopping centers
may have one main sign located on the principal frontage or
facade of the area occupied by such business. Said sign shall
not exceed an area equal to 10% of the front wall area of the
building or portion thereof devoted to such use or activity and
shall not project more than 15 inches in front of the facade of
the building.
§ 550-124 HAMILTON CODE § 550-124
1:1076
(e) Each permitted business may have one freestanding sign,
provided that each sign shall not exceed 50 square feet on any
one side and not exceed 25 feet in height. Any such signs shall
not be located in the area within 30 feet from the street line of
a public street and shall be erected within the property lines of
the premises to which it relates. The area around such sign
shall be attractively maintained and kept clean of all debris and
rubbish.
(f) Gasoline filling stations and public garages.
1. Gasoline filling stations and public garages only may
display one freestanding sign advertising the name of the
station or the garage and/or the principal products sold on
the premises, including any special company or brand
name, insignia or emblem, provided that each such sign
shall not exceed 35 square feet in area on each side and
shall be erected within the property line and not less than
10 feet above the ground. All refuse and paper shall be
kept constantly removed from the ground spaces at least
five feet in all directions around the sign. No sign shall
exceed 30 feet in height.
2. Gasoline filling stations shall be permitted to utilize LED
digital displays for gasoline pricing only. [Amended
7-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045213]
(4) Research, Engineering and Office; Research, Engineering and
Office-4; and Research and Development Districts. None other than
the following signs shall be permitted in these zone districts:
(a) Two ground signs and two wall signs not to exceed 100 square
feet each, which shall refer to the firm name or product(s)
made. The ground signs shall be set back 50 feet from the
property line. The ground sign shall not exceed six feet in
height.
(b) One ground sign not to exceed 300 square feet to identify the
name of the office research park shall be permitted. It shall be
set back 50 feet from the property line and shall not exceed 10
feet in height.
(5) Manufacturing and Industrial Zone Districts. None other than the
following signs shall be permitted in these zone districts:
(a) Signs for permitted uses shall not exceed, in the aggregate,
15% of the area of the front facade of the building.
213. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original subsection 3, regarding temporary
sign placement, which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 550-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-124
1:1077
(b) Two ground signs not to exceed 100 square feet each, which
shall refer to the firm name or product(s) made. The ground
signs shall be set back 50 feet from the property line. The
ground signs shall not exceed six feet in height.
(c) One freestanding sign identifying the industrial park may be
erected, provided that the aggregate area of all sides of any
such signs shall not exceed 200 square feet and a height of 30
feet. Such signs may be illuminated but shall not be of the
flashing type, shall not be located within 50 feet of a public
street or parking area driveway or within 100 feet of the
boundary of a residential zone district and shall in no way
interfere with the safe functioning of any traffic control signal
or directional device.
(6) Hospital Healthcare (HH) District. None other than the following
signs shall be permitted in this zone district: [Added 5-6-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-025]
(a) Facade signs.
1. One sign per building facade which faces a public street
shall be permitted. One additional sign may be located at
the building entrance to provide a directory of that
building's tenant(s).
2. The total area of facade signs shall not exceed an area
equal to 10% of the building facade to which they are
affixed.
3. Signs shall not be located above the first floor of the
building on which it is placed.
4. Such signs may be illuminated but shall not be of a flashing
type.
5. Awning signs shall be considered facade signs for
purposes of regulation of facade signs within the HH
District.
(b) Ground signs.
1. One ground sign to identify the name of the hospital and
its major components shall be permitted at each public
entrance to the site from a public street.
2. The area of each ground sign shall not exceed 100 square
feet.
3. The maximum height shall be 10 feet.
4. Such signs may be illuminated but shall not be of a flashing
type.
§ 550-124 HAMILTON CODE § 550-124
1:1078
5. The base of the sign shall be heavily planted with
evergreen plantings of a moderate height at maturity.
(c) Identification signs.
1. Freestanding signs may be erected on site to identify and
to provide directions to the respective uses/occupants.
2. Signs shall be located on the site interior and shall not be
intended for viewing from public roads.
3. The maximum area of such signs shall not exceed 30
square feet each.
4. The maximum height shall be six feet.
5. Signs shall conform in overall character with the overall
signage plan.
6. The base of the sign shall be heavily planted with
evergreen plantings.
7. Such signs may be illuminated but shall not be of a flashing
type.
G. Outdoor advertising signs.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, outdoor
advertising signs shall be considered a permitted use in the
following designated areas on properties bordering I-195 or I-295:
(a) Along the south side of I-195 in the Highway Commercial Zone
within 1,000 feet west of the Route 206 overpass.
(b) Along the north side of I-195 in the Research Development
Zone within 1,500 feet east of the Yardville-Hamilton Square
Road overpass.
(c) Along the north side of I-195 in the Research Development
Zone within 1,500 feet east of the railroad bridge abutment for
the railroad underpass of I-195.
(d) Along the west side of I-295 in the Highway Commercial Zone
within 1,000 feet north of the Independence Avenue overpass.
(e) Along the east side of I-295 within 1,000 feet north of the Kuser
Road overpass in the Government Services Center Zone and
along the east side of I-295 within 1,000 feet south of the
Klockner Road overpass in the Research, Engineering and
Office Zone.
(f) Along the east side of I-295 in the Industrial Zone within 1,500
feet south of the Sloan Avenue overpass.
§ 550-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-124
1:1079
(g) Along the east side of I-295 in the Government Services Center
Zone within 1,000 feet south of the Cypress Road overpass.
(2) All new outdoor advertising signs shall comply with the following:
(a) Outdoor advertising sign faces shall be primarily directed to
motorists on I-195 or I-295.
(b) Outdoor advertising signs shall be no less than five feet from
the I-195 or I-295 right-of-way and 10 feet from any other
bordering property line.
(c) No outdoor advertising sign shall exceed 60 feet in height
measured from the top of the sign to the grade at the base of
the sign; provided, however, where topography or vegetation
requires additional height in order for the sign to be
adequately seen from I-195 or I-295, a height waiver of up to
90 feet shall be available.
(d) Each outdoor advertising sign may have up to two advertising
faces, placed either back to back or in a V-shaped configuration
on a sign. Each face shall be no more than 14 feet high or 48
feet long for a maximum square footage of 672 square feet per
face excluding temporary cutouts or extensions.
(e) All outdoor advertising signs shall comply with New Jersey
Department of Transportation regulations (N.J.A.C. 16:41C-1.1
et seq.) concerning outdoor advertising signs.
(f) All outdoor advertising signs shall be spaced no less than 1,000
feet apart on the same side of the interstate highway,
measured along the nearest edge of the advertising sign face
nearest the pavement edge.
(g) For each new fixed (non-EMC) outdoor advertising sign
constructed or placed along I-195 or I-295, prior to the
issuance of a certificate of approval the applicant shall remove
or cause to be removed two existing outdoor advertising signs
with each sign face having a minimum of 250 square feet of
outdoor advertising sign area. Each removed sign must have a
current outdoor advertising permit from the New Jersey
Department of Transportation. For each new EMC outdoor
advertising sign placed along I-195 or I-295, prior to the
issuance of a certificate of approval the applicant shall remove
or cause to be removed three existing outdoor advertising
signs with each sign face having a minimum of 250 square feet
of outdoor advertising sign area. Each removed sign must have
a current outdoor advertising permit from the New Jersey
Department of Transportation. The existing sign structures
shall be removed within 30 days after construction is
completed on a new sign structure. Additionally, the permits
from the New Jersey Department of Transportation for the
§ 550-124 HAMILTON CODE § 550-124
1:1080
§ 550-125. Streets, curbs, sidewalks and bike paths. [Amended
1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008; 1-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-010;
2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 97-005]
removed sign shall be cancelled upon removal. Failure to
remove an existing sign within 30 days after construction of a
new sign structure shall be cause to issue penalties, including
withdrawal of the approval of the new sign. [Amended
7-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045]
(h) The lighting of outdoor advertising signs shall be permitted
and restricted to the hours of operation from sunset to 12:00
midnight. Each sign face shall be illuminated by no more than
three four-hundred-watt fixtures that shall be placed at the
bottom of the sign face and angled upwards toward the sign
face.
(i) Electronic message centers (EMCs) shall be permitted and
shall comply with New Jersey Department of Transportation
regulations (N.J.A.C. 16:41C-8.8, Off-premises multiple
message signs). [Amended 7-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045]
(j) Outdoor advertising signs shall not be considered a principal
use or structure on a lot and shall be allowed on lots that
already have principal uses or structures.
(k) The erection of any outdoor advertising sign shall require a site
plan application to the Planning Board or other board having
jurisdiction.
(l) For the conversion of any existing fixed (non-EMC) outdoor
advertising sign to an EMC outdoor advertising sign along
I-195 or I-295, prior to the issuance of a certificate of approval
the applicant shall remove or cause to be removed one existing
outdoor advertising sign with each sign face having a minimum
of 250 square feet of outdoor advertising sign area. Each
removed sign must have a current outdoor advertising permit
from the New Jersey Department of Transportation. [Added
7-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045]
A. Streets.
(1) All developments shall be served by paved public streets and
conform to the Township Master Plan and Township construction
details. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan
or Official Map, as adopted by the Township, shall be such as to
provide for the appropriate extension of existing streets and should
conform with the topography as far as practicable. All streets or
roads which are so designed or situated as to become parts of the
major thoroughfare system of the Township, as may have been
indicated by the Township Planning Board, shall be coterminous
§ 550-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-125
1:1081
with adjoining links in said system and shall be at the same or
greater widths, and minor streets shall be so arranged as to
discourage fast driving and use by through traffic.
(2) When a new development adjoins land susceptible of being
subdivided, suitable provisions shall be made for optimum access
of the remaining and/or adjoining tract to existing or proposed
streets.
(3) Local streets shall be so planned and identified with appropriate
signs so as to discourage through traffic.
(4) In the event that a development adjoins or includes existing streets
that do not conform to widths as shown on the adopted Master Plan
and/or Official Map or the street width requirements of this
chapter, additional land along either or both sides of said street,
sufficient to conform to the right-of-way requirements, shall be
dedicated for the location, installation, repair and maintenance of
streets, drainage facilities, utilities and other facilities customarily
located on street rights-of-way. The necessary deeds of ownership
shall be furnished, and the dedication shall be expressed as follows:
"Street right-of-way granted permitting the entrance upon these
lands for the purposes provided for and expressed in the
Development Ordinance of the Township." This statement shall in
no way reduce the developer's responsibility to provide, install,
repair or maintain the facilities in the area dedicated by ordinance
and/or as shown on the plan and/or as provided for by any
maintenance or performance guaranties. If the development is
along one side only, the developer shall be required to construct
75% of the width of the designed cartway. In such cases, no
building permits shall be granted to any lot not contiguous to an
accepted street unless a bond has been posted for the purpose of
ensuring that said street will be constructed and paved to at least
75% of its dedicated cartway. Additionally, that portion of the
existing street or road adjoining or included within a site plan or
major subdivision shall be improved, including excavation, grading,
base courses and surfacing, in accordance with the road
improvement standards of this chapter. All new traffic streets or
roads shown on the Township Master Plan shall have right-of-way
widths of not less than 60 feet, and greater widths may be required
when warranted by anticipated traffic volumes. All other streets
shall have right-of-way widths of not less than 50 feet. When a
subdivision fronts on an existing street or road of insufficient width,
the Board may require the subdivider to cede a sufficient strip
along such frontage to enable the necessary widening of his side of
the existing street or road, and whenever practicable, frontage
upon major arterial streets and highways designed for fast and
heavy traffic shall be developed with a minimum of direct access
upon the main traveled way by introduction of marginal service
roads or reversing the frontage and providing a planted buffer strip
§ 550-125 HAMILTON CODE § 550-125
1:1082
between the highway and the rear of lots or other such means.
Land fronting on other main streets and highways shall be
developed generally with the long way of blocks running parallel to
the main thoroughfare.
(5) In all developments, the minimum public street right-of-way shall
be measured from lot line to lot line and shall be in accordance with
the following schedule, but in no case shall a new street that is a
continuation of an existing street be continued at a width less than
the existing street, although a greater width may be required in
accordance with the following schedule:
Roadway and Right-of-Way Width Guidelines
Classification
Minimum
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Minimum
Cartway1
(feet)
Typical
(ultimate)
Number of
Lanes
Limited access 300 722 6
Major arterial 100 64 53
Arterial 80 504 4
Major collector 70 444 4
Secondary
collector
60 405 2
Local:
Urban 56 34 2
Rural 56 286, 7 2
Commercial — 8 — 9
Service road 50 28 2
Residential 52 3010 2
Boulevard 80 2211 2
NOTES:
1 Curb-to-curb width.
2 Exclusive of shoulder widths.
3 Four through lanes plus left-turn lane.
4 Exclusive of any required median or center (left) turn lanes.
5 In rural areas, a twenty-four-foot roadway width and eightfoot
paved shoulders may be permitted.
6 In rural areas, a twenty-four-foot roadway width and two-foot
paved shoulders may be permitted.
§ 550-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-125
1:1083
NOTES:
7 With striping where necessary for shoulder delineation.
8 Within the right-of-way shall be a twenty-eight-foot cartway,
seven feet of lawn area on either side of the cartway, and a
six-foot-wide bituminous walking path on one side of the
cartway.
9 Curb-to-curb width plus any required left-turn lane at
intersection.
10 Curb-to-curb width with on-street parking within a planned
retirement development.
11 Two twenty-two-foot-wide one-way roadways with on-street
parking separated by a ten-foot-wide landscaped center
median within a planned retirement development.
(6) Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible
and in no case shall be less than 75°, and approaches to all
intersections shall follow a straight line for at least 100 feet. No
more than two streets shall meet or intersect at any one point, and
the center lines of both intersecting streets shall pass through a
common point. Measuring from this common point, two
intersections shall be spaced a sufficient distance to permit a
minimum of two lots between the two street rights-of-way. Any
development abutting an existing street classified as an arterial or
collector shall be permitted only one new street connecting with
the same side of the existing street, except that, where the frontage
is sufficient, more than one street may intersect with the same side
of the existing street at intervals of less than 800 feet. The block
corners at the intersection shall be rounded at the curbline with the
street having the highest radius requirement determining the
minimum standards for all curblines, as outlined in the Township
construction details. Street grades shall not exceed 4% on main
traffic streets and 10% on all other streets. All streets shall have
sufficient gradient for proper surface drainage, and in no case shall
the grade be less than 6/10 of 1%. High and low points where both
grades are a minimum 6/10 of 1% shall be constructed with no
vertical curves to avoid flat spots.
(7) A tangent at least 200 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. When connecting
street lines deflect from each other at any one point, they shall be
connected by a curve with a radius conforming to standard
engineering practice so that the minimum sight distance within the
right-of-way shall be 350 feet for a local street, 500 feet for a
collector street and 800 feet for an arterial street. In no case shall
the minimum center-line street radius be less than 150 feet.
(8) Culs-de-sac of a permanent nature (where provision for the future
extension of the street to the boundary of the adjoining property is
§ 550-125 HAMILTON CODE § 550-125
1:1084
impractical or impossible) or of a temporary nature (where
provision is made for the future extension of the street to the
boundary line of adjoining property) shall be no more than 750 feet
in length and shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius
of 50 feet on the curbline, plus a utility and planting strip width of
10 feet around the entire cul-de-sac. The center point for the radius
shall be on the center line of the associated street or, if offset, offset
to a point where the radius becomes tangent to the right curbline
of the associated street. (See Plate 3 attached.214)
(9) No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly
duplicate the name of an existing street that confusion results. The
continuation of an existing street shall have the same name.
Curvilinear streets shall change their names only at street
intersections. The Board shall reserve the right to approve or name
streets within a proposed development.
(10) The pavement width of streets and the quality of surfacing and
base materials shall adhere to the minimum standards set forth by
the Township, county or state engineers when said paving concerns
roads under their jurisdiction and where such standards exist.
Streets under the jurisdiction of the Township shall conform to
Township construction details on file with the Township Engineer's
office.
(11) The approval of any map of land delineating streets by the
governing body of the Township shall in no way be construed as an
acceptance of any street indicated thereon.
(12) Ordinarily, blocks (the distance between street intersections) shall
not be less than 600 feet nor more than 1,200 feet in length and not
less than 200 feet nor more than 350 feet in width.
(13) The following is a classification of Township roadways, both
existing and proposed segments:
Roadway Classification
Roadway Classification
Apollo Drive Local
Back Road to Allentown Major collector
Back Road to Allentown Road
Extension to New Road
Major collector
Basin Road Secondary collector
Central Avenue Major collector
Crosswicks-Extonville Road Secondary collector
214. Editor's Note: Plate 3 is attached to this chapter.
§ 550-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-125
1:1085
Roadway Classification
Roadway Classification
Crosswicks-Extonville Road
Extension to South Broad Street
(Co. 672)
Secondary collector
Crosswicks-Hamilton Square Road
(between U.S. 130 and Yardville-
Allentown Road)
Major collector
Crosswicks-Hamilton Square Road
(south of Co. 524)
Secondary collector
Cypress Lane Major collector
Cypress Lane connection to Co.
533
Major collector
Dodge Avenue Local
East State Street Arterial
Englewood Boulevard Extension
to Kuser Road
Major collector
Estates Boulevard Major collector
Estates Boulevard connection
from Kuser Road to Klockner
Road
Major collector
Estates Boulevard connection
from Whitehall to Whatley Streets
Major collector
Estates Boulevard connection
from Whitehorse-Hamilton Square
Avenue to Yardville-Hamilton
Square Road
Major collector
Extonville Road Secondary collector
Rock Road (south of Co. 535) Major collector
Rock Road (Quakerbridge to
Mercerville-Edinburg Road)
Arterial
Iron Bridge Road Secondary collector
Kenwood Avenue Local
Klockner Road (between
Nottingham Way and Hamilton
Avenue)
Arterial
Kuser Road (between Kuser Road
Extension and U.S. 130)
Major collector
Main Street/Groveville-Allentown
Road
Secondary collector
§ 550-125 HAMILTON CODE § 550-125
1:1086
Roadway Classification
Roadway Classification
Mercer Street (north of Hughes
Drive)
Major collector
Merrick Road Secondary collector
Merrick Road Extension to Iron
Bridge Road
Secondary collector
New Jersey Route 33 (north of Co.
533)
Major arterial
New Jersey Turnpike Interstate/limited access
New Road from Crosswicks-
Hamilton Square Road to Merrick
Road
Secondary collector
New Road from Kuser Road to
U.S. 130
Arterial
New Road from Merrick Road to
Uncle Pete's Road (includes
connection to United States Route
130)
Major collector
New Road from U.S. 130 to
Crosswicks-Hamilton Square Road
Major collector
Newkirk Avenue Local
Old York Road Secondary collector
Park Avenue (north of South
Broad Street)
Major collector
Paxson Avenue Major collector
Paxson Avenue connection
between Flock Road and
Mercerville-Edinburg215
Major collector
Paxson Avenue Extension from
New Jersey 33 to Whitehorse-
Hamilton Square Road
Major collector
Pitman Avenue Local
Princeton Avenue Secondary collector
Quakerbridge Road/Mercerville-
Whitehorse Road (Co. 533)
Major arterial
Route 29 Extension Interstate/limited access
Route 130 service road Commercial service road
Route I-195 Interstate/limited access
215. Editor’s Note: A portion of Paxson Avenue, in the area of Mercer County Park was
renamed Richard J. Coffee Boulevard 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-059.
§ 550-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-125
1:1087
Roadway Classification
Roadway Classification
Route I-295 Interstate/limited access
Route I-295 Extension Interstate/limited access
Sloan Avenue Arterial
South Broad Street (Co. 672) Secondary collector
South Broad Street (Co. 672)
(between Church Street and Old
York Road)
Local
South Olden Avenue Major collector
Sweetbriar Avenue Arterial
Tattletown Road Local
Thomas J. Rhodes Industrial Drive
Extension to Sloan Avenue
Major collector
U.S. 130 Major arterial
Washington Township Ring Road Arterial
Wert Avenue Local
Yardville-Allentown Road (Co.
524) (between U.S. 130 and
Township limit)
Major collector
Yardville-Hamilton Square Road
(north of U.S. 130, south of Apollo
Drive)
Arterial
B. Curbs. Belgian block or concrete curbing shall be installed along every
street and at intersections with existing Township, county or state roads
and shall be laid in a manner approved by the Township Engineer and
shall conform to the Township construction details. A curb and sidewalk
permit must be obtained before any new work or repair work is done.
Permits may be obtained from the Township Engineer's office.
C. Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all streets serving a
collector function as stipulated in the adopted Master Plan and/or
Official Map of the Township and on local residential streets as
required by the Board. Sidewalks in nonresidential developments
shall be required, at the Board's discretion, depending upon the
probable volume of pedestrian traffic, the development's location in
relation to other populated areas and the general type of
improvement intended. A curb and sidewalk permit must be
obtained before any new work or repair work is done. Permits may
be obtained from the Township Engineer's office.
§ 550-125 HAMILTON CODE § 550-125
1:1088
§ 550-126. Swimming pools. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord. No.
93-008; 1-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-008]
(2) Where required, sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide and
located as approved by the Board. Sidewalks shall be concrete or
an equivalent approved by the Board and shall be constructed in
accordance with current Township construction details and
specifications of the New Jersey Highway Department.
D. Trees. Street trees shall be planted at the following intervals: Large
shade trees shall be planted an average of 40 feet on center. Trees shall
be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches' caliper at time of planting.
E. Bike paths. Where required, bike paths shall be constructed. Bike paths
shall be six feet wide and located as approved by the Township.
Construction shall consist of two inches of bituminous concrete, I-5,
over four inches of stone or four inches of recycled concrete. Subbase
shall be inspected and approved by a Township Public Works Inspector
prior to the placing of stone base.
A. No private residential swimming pool shall be constructed or installed
on any lot unless the lot contains a residence building. Pools shall be
located in rear yards only. A minimum seven-foot setback from water's
edge to each property line shall be required for in-ground pools. A
minimum four-foot-wide landscape buffer in the form of grass, shrubs
or trees shall be provided between the pool structure and the side and
rear lot lines. Filters and other mechanical equipment associated with
the operation of the pool are not permitted within the seven-foot
setback. Aboveground pools are required to have a minimum ten-foot
setback between all property lines and the water's edge or the closest
portion of the deck constructed to serve the pool, whichever is closest
to the property line. Filters and other mechanical equipment associated
with the operation of the pool are not permitted within the ten-foot
setback. A minimum distance from the nearest portion of the principal
building to the closest portion of the swimming pool structure should
not be less than five feet. A pool may be constructed closer than five
feet to an open deck which is attached to the principal building. Decks
may be built up to the water's edge of the pool.
B. A private residential swimming pool area must be secured with fencing
and/or other safety devices pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code
(UCC).216
C. All swimming pools shall meet the appropriate design standards as set
forth by the National Swimming Pool Institute.
D. In-ground swimming pools shall require a grading plan showing
existing and proposed grades and the proposed flow of surface
216. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-126
1:1089
§ 550-127. Water supply.
§ 550-128. Yards.
No open space provided around any principal building for the purpose of
complying with the front, side, rear or other yard provisions of this chapter
shall be considered as providing the yard provisions for another principal
building.
§ 550-129. Rural residential development. [Amended 1-20-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-008]
drainage. The plan is to be presented with the application. This plan
must also show the location of the proposed pool and any
appurtenances and must be signed and sealed by a licensed New Jersey
professional engineer.
E. Aboveground pools shall require a plot plan of the site showing the
location of the proposed pool and any appurtenances. This plan is not
required to show grades.
F. Pools that are less than 24 inches deep or having a surface area less
than 250 square feet, except when such pools are permanently
equipped with a water-recirculating system or involve structural
materials, shall not require a construction permit.
G. Filters and other mechanical devices associated with the pool shall be
located on the site, designed and buffered in such a way as to not cause
undue negative impacts on adjoining properties.
A. Where public water is accessible, water mains shall be constructed in
such a manner as to make adequate water service available to each lot
or building within the development. The entire system shall be designed
in accordance with the requirements and standards of the local and/or
state agency having approval authority and shall be subject to its
approval. The system shall also be designed with adequate capacity and
sustained pressure.
B. Where no potable public water is accessible, potable water shall be
furnished on an individual lot basis. All parts of the well water system
shall be tested, installed, designed, located, and constructed in
accordance with all applicable sections of N.J.A.C. 7:9D, Well
Construction and Maintenance; Sealing of Abandoned Wells. All wells
shall be disinfected and tested pursuant to the applicable requirements
of N.J.A.C. 7:10-12 or 11 and the Private Well Testing Act (PWTA)
required parameters. A copy of the above referenced information/tests
shall be submitted to the Township Health Department. PWTA results
are only good for a period of nine months. [Amended 7-17-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-028]
§ 550-126 HAMILTON CODE § 550-129
1:1090
A. Any person desiring to subdivide property in any residential district
may elect to apply to the Board for a major subdivision under the
following reduced street improvement requirements. The Board shall
examine each request to determine whether it meets the following
criteria:
(1) Every lot in the development shall have a minimum of 80,000
square feet.
(2) Each lot shall have a minimum frontage and width of 300 feet and a
minimum depth of 225 feet.
(3) The design of the development shall blend with the rural
atmosphere of the Township.
(4) The development will not adversely affect the development of
adjacent or adjoining property.
(5) The proposed local streets will interconnect with existing streets to
form logical and gradual transitions from traditional street patterns
to rural street patterns. If applicable, sidewalks and/or curbs will
be extended in the rural development and terminate in a logical
location as will be determined on a case-by-case basis.
B. If it is determined by the Board that the proposed development
conforms with the criteria established for rural residential
development, the following reduction in standards and improvements
for the local streets will be allowed:
(1) The right-of-way for all local streets which are entirely within the
subdivision shall be 50 feet.
(2) The pavement width for all such local streets shall be 30 feet with a
stabilized grass shoulder 10 feet in width each side thereof.
(3) Subject to approval by the Board in each specific case, surface
stormwater drainage may be carried in open ditches outside the
right-of-way of the local streets or in such other suitable drainage
structures within the right-of-way as may be approved by the
Township Engineer.
(4) Curbs will not be required except where excessive grades or other
conditions require their installation.
(5) Sidewalks will not be required.
(6) Culs-de-sac may be 1,200 feet in length.
C. No further subdivision of any lot or lots subdivided under this chapter
shall be permitted within 50 years from the date of final approval by the
Township, and a statement to this effect shall be written on all plats
submitted to the Township for review and approval.
§ 550-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-130
1:1091
§ 550-130. Landscaping and buffers. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-008; 1-5-2006 by Ord. No. 05-038]
A. Landscaping. A landscaping plan shall accompany all site plan
applications and should identify existing and proposed trees, shrubs,
bushes, plant material, ground cover and natural features, such as
boulders, berms, rock outcroppings, etc. The plan shall show where
they are or will be located and planting details. The following design
principles and standards shall be adhered to:
(1) Locate landscaping to provide for climate control. For example,
shade trees should be located on the south to shield the hot
summer sun and evergreens on the north to act as windbreaks.
(2) Use landscaping to accent and complement buildings. For example,
group tall trees in order to break up long, low buildings.
(3) Landscaping should be provided in public areas and recreation
sites as well as adjacent to buildings.
(4) Consider mass trees at critical points rather than in a straight line
at predetermined intervals. Tree types should be varied. Consider
varying the type depending upon its intended location. For
example, in narrow areas, use smaller trees or trees which grow
more vertically than horizontally.
(5) Ground cover should be used extensively to prevent erosion.
(6) Provide a variety and mixture of landscaping. Factors to be
considered when selecting vegetation are its susceptibility to
disease, colors, seasons, temperatures, shapes, blossoms and
foliage, soil conditions and water availability.
(7) The impact of any proposed landscaping plan should be considered
at various time intervals. For example, shrubs may grow and
eventually block sight triangle distances.
(8) It is more preferable, in most instances, to have fewer larger
specimens than more smaller ones.
(9) Deciduous trees shall have a caliper of at least 2 1/2 inches at
planting, and evergreens shall be at least five feet tall. Shrubs shall
be at least two feet tall at planting. All trees shall be balled and
burlapped.
(10) Street trees shall be planted at intervals an average of 40 feet on
center. Trees shall be planted along all public rights-of-way. Species
selection of trees shall be subject to the approval of the Department
of Community Planning and Compliance. See § 550-125 for
additional standards.
(11) Entrances to sites deserve special landscaping treatment.
§ 550-130 HAMILTON CODE § 550-130
1:1092
(12) Existing large trees should be saved by not varying the grade
around the tree by more than six to 12 inches, by constructing free
wells and by erecting protective fences. In general, it is better to
save clumps of trees rather than individual trees unless an
individual tree is one of distinctive, rare, mature or unusual quality.
(13) In parking lots, at least 5% of the parking lot shall be landscaped.
The landscaping should be located in protected areas along
walkways, center islands and at the ends of bays. In narrow islands,
low plants, such as creeping juniper, English ivy, myrtle or
pachysandra, are appropriate.
(14) All landscaping in parking areas shall be carefully located so as not
to obstruct vision. A variety of different types of trees should be
grouped to break up the mass of cars.
(15) At least one tree shall be planted for every 10 parking spaces
provided in off-street parking areas.
(16) Avoid certain trees because of problems. For example, the female
gingko has messy fruit and willow trees have shallow roots.
(17) Trees should be selected that can tolerate an urban environment.
These include the London plane, male gingko, and certain oak
trees. For additional tree listings, contact the Hamilton Township
Division of Planning.
B. Buffers. In order to minimize any adverse impact or nuisances on the
site or from adjacent areas, buffers, such as fences, landscaping berms
or mounds, should be installed. The following design principles should
be considered:
(1) Buffers shall be located along property lines shielding various uses
from each other.
(2) Where interior roads run parallel to roads exterior to the site, a
buffer shall be erected to prevent confusion, particularly at night.
(3) Parking areas, garbage collection areas and loading and unloading
areas shall be heavily buffered.
(4) Consider prevailing wind patterns and use buffers to stop wind and
prevent windborne debris from leaving the site.
C. Landscape package for new dwellings. A landscape package must be
provided for each single-family detached dwelling in a major
subdivision. The minimum value of the landscape package will be
$2,500 in 2005 dollars. The $2,500 represents the cost of living
landscape material. The landscape package shall be bonded for at the
time of final subdivision for each lot in that subdivision. A minimum of
one landscape plan for each housing model offered shall be provided for
review with final subdivision plans. Each plan shall provide a minimum
offering of three large-growing deciduous trees (a minimum of two-inch
§ 550-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-130
1:1093
§ 550-131. Performance and maintenance guaranties.
§ 550-132. Environmental considerations.
The site plan shall be designed in accordance with applicable Township
regulations designed to protect the environment.
caliper at time of planting, one large-growing conifer four feet at
planting, and five shrubs, 24 inches in diameter – three flowering,
two evergreen). The balance of the offering may consist of additional
deciduous trees or conifers, flowering trees and shrubs. Where the
applicant has no immediate plans for construction, the landscape plans
shall be provided to the Planning Division prior to the issuance of
building permits. Where a prospective purchaser of a dwelling chooses
not to accept the landscape package, a certificate of occupancy will not
be issued until a contribution of $2,500 is made by the developer to the
Township for street and park beautification. A prospective purchaser
must also sign a statement to the effect that he does not want the
landscape package, and he is aware the developer will be contributing
$2,500 to the Township for street and park beautification.
A. Performance guaranties. As a condition of final site plan approval, the
developer shall have built or installed all on-tract improvements or shall
have furnished a performance guaranty in favor of the Township in an
amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation for improvements
which the Township Engineer may deem necessary or appropriate,
including but not limited to streets, grades, pavement, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, bikeways, streetlighting, shade trees, surveyor's
monuments, water mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or
other means of sewage disposal, drainage structures, erosion control
devices, improvements of public open space and landscaping.
B. Maintenance guaranties. Upon satisfactory inspection by the Township
of the on-site improvements, the performance guaranty shall be
released, provided the developer posts a maintenance guaranty. The
maintenance guaranty shall not exceed 15% of the cost, for a period not
to exceed one year, for those improvements which the Township
Engineer may deem necessary or appropriate.
A. Conservation, erosion and sediment control. The following measures
shall be included where applicable as part of any site plan review and
approval:
(1) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be
done in such a way as to minimize erosion.
(2) Development shall preserve salient natural features, keep cut-fill
operations to a minimum and ensure conformity with topography
so as to create the least erosion potential and adequately handle
the problem and velocity of surface water runoff.
§ 550-130 HAMILTON CODE § 550-132
1:1094
(3) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected
and supplemented.
(4) The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
(5) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
(6) Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be used to protect exposed
critical areas during development.
(7) The permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control
measures shall be installed as soon as practical on the site.
(8) Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and
after development. Where necessary, the rate of surface water
runoff should be mechanically retarded.
(9) Until the disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in the runoff water
shall be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt
traps or other acceptable methods.
(10) Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation,
regrading or other development, it shall be the responsibility of the
developer causing such sedimentation to remove it from all
adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and watercourses and to
repair any damage at his expense as quickly as possible.
(11) Maintenance of all drainage facilities and watercourses within any
project shall remain the responsibility of the developer unless the
improvements are accepted by the Township of Hamilton or some
other governmental agency.
(12) It is the responsibility of any person doing any act on or across a
communal stream, watercourse or swale or upon the floodway or
right-of-way thereof to maintain as nearly as possible in its present
state the stream, watercourse, swale, floodway or right-of-way
during the duration of such activity and to return it to its original or
equal condition after such activity is completed.
(13) Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses originating and
completely on private property is the responsibility of the owner to
the point of open discharge at the property line or at a commercial
watercourse within the property.
(14)No person shall block, divert, disturb, impede the flow of, alter or
construct any structure or deposit any material or thing or commit
any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any communal
stream or watercourse without having obtained prior approval
from the Planning Board and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Division of Water Resources.
§ 550-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-132
1:1095
(15) Each person who makes any surface changes shall be required to:
(a) Collect on-site surface runoff and dispose of it into the common
natural watercourse of the drainage area.
(b) Handle existing off-site runoff through his development by
designing the stormwater system to adequately handle
stormwater runoff from a fully developed area upstream.
B. Site conditions.
(1) Site maintenance during construction. During construction, the
site shall be maintained and left each day in a safe and sanitary
manner, and any condition which could lead to personal injury or
property damage shall be immediately corrected by the subdivider
upon an order by the Township or its authorized agent. The
developer shall make provision for the disposal of oil and grease
from equipment. The site area shall be regularly sprayed to
eliminate airborne dust and dirt from construction activity.
(2) Disposal of dead trees, litter and building materials. Developed
areas shall be cleared of all stumps, litter, rubbish, brush, weeds,
dead and dying trees, roots, debris and excess scrap building
materials, which shall be removed or destroyed immediately upon
the request of and to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector prior
to issuing an occupancy permit.
(3) Changes in elevation. No change shall be made in the elevation or
contour of any lot or site by the removal of earth to another lot or
site other than is shown on an approved site plan. Minimal changes
in elevations or contours necessitated by field conditions may be
made only after approval by the Township Engineer. All said
changes necessitated by field conditions shall be shown on the final
plat and indicated as a change from the preliminary plat or, if final
approval has been granted, said changes shall be shown on the asbuilt
plans.
(4) Temporary improvements. Prior to or during construction, the
Township Engineer may require the installation or construction of
improvements to prevent or correct temporary conditions on the
site which could cause personal injury or damage to property or
constitute a health hazard. These conditions may result from
landslide, flooding, heavy construction, traffic, creation of steep
grades and pollution. Improvements may include berms, mulching,
sediment traps, detention guardrails, temporary roads and other
improvements appropriate to the specific condition. All temporary
improvements shall remain in place and in operation until
otherwise directed by the Township Engineer.
§ 550-132 HAMILTON CODE § 550-133
1:1096
§ 550-133. Township reservation of land.
The Township may reserve for future public use rights-of-way, public
drainageways, flood control basins, lands for schools, firehouses, recreation
areas and other public uses as provided for and in keeping with the
appropriate revisions of the Master Plan.
§ 550-134. Solid waste disposal and recycling; site and space
planning requirements. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008;
12-22-1993 by Ord. No. 93-068]
This section shall apply to any land development application for the
construction of 10 or more units of single-family housing, five or more units
of multifamily housing, and any commercial or industrial land development
application for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more of land.
A. Definitions. The definitions provided at Chapter 420, Solid Waste,
§ 420-17, Definitions and word usage, of the Code of the Township of
Hamilton shall be applicable to this section and are incorporated herein
by reference.
B. Single-family homes/units.
(1) Each single-family home/unit shall provide at least 18 cubic feet of
storage space designed to accommodate at least two weeks'
accumulation of mandated recyclable material. Actual location of
the storage area may vary, but the kitchen is the recommended
location. Examples of suitable locations in the kitchen include
under the sink or in the pantry, closet or cabinet. The garage,
basement, laundry room/area or broom closet are other acceptable
areas. The storage area shall be designed to comply with applicable
fire codes.
(2) Appropriate colored containers, in coordination with the Mercer
County Solid Waste and Recycling Collection System, should be
provided to each household upon completion of construction. The
containers should be marked for recyclables only.
C. Multifamily housing developments, condominiums, townhouses,
apartment buildings
(1) Each multifamily unit shall provide at least 12 cubic feet of storage
space designed to accommodate at least two weeks' accumulation
of mandated recyclable material. Actual location of the storage
area may vary, but the kitchen is the recommended location.
Examples of suitable locations in the kitchen include under the sink
or in the pantry, closet or cabinet. The laundry room/area or broom
closet are other acceptable areas. The storage area shall be
designed to comply with applicable fire codes.
(2) Appropriate colored containers, in coordination with the Mercer
County Solid Waste and Recycling Collection System, should be
§ 550-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-134
1:1097
provided to each household upon completion of construction. The
containers should be marked for recyclables only.
(3) Outdoor recyclables storage area.
(a) An outdoor recyclables storage area, at least 18 feet by 18 feet,
shall be provided for each 75 living units, or fraction thereof. In
the case of a development with less than 75 units, at least one
eighteen-foot by eighteen-foot area shall be provided. The
outdoor storage area shall be conveniently located, preferably
near but clearly separated from a refuse container or
dumpster.
(b) The outside recyclables storage area shall be well lit and shall
be easily accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. The
storage area shall be designed to comply with applicable fire
codes.
(c) Containers or bins provided for paper or cardboard shall
contain a lid to keep the paper or cardboard dry.
(d) Signs clearly identifying the outside recyclables storage
recycling area and the materials accepted therein shall be
posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling area.
Individual containers or bins shall be equipped with signs
indicating the materials to be placed therein.
(e) Landscaping, fencing and/or other visual screening shall be
provided around any outdoor recycling storage area.
D. Nonresidential development. All nonresidential developments required
to provide recycling facilities under the New Jersey Statewide
Mandatory Source Separation and Recycling Act shall submit a
recycling plan that includes the following:
(1) Business type.
(2) A list of recyclable materials expected to be generated and waste
expected to be generated.
(3) Approximately amount (in cubic yards or tons) of each recyclable
material expected to be generated (by month or year).
(4) Material separation and handling practices, which shall include the
following:
(a) A list of areas where material is to be generated.
(b) Method of storing material at point of generation (where
applicable).
(c) Method of moving material from generation area to storage
area (where applicable).
§ 550-134 HAMILTON CODE § 550-134
1:1098
(d) Location of designated storage area.
(e) Size of storage area. An explanation of method used to
determine size of storage area shall be provided.
(f) Size and type of container used to store each material, both at
point of generation and storage prior to vendor pickup. An
explanation shall be provided concerning how determination
was made for the sizing of storage containers.
(g) Method of material removal, including frequency of pickup and
type of vehicle expected to be used for pickup.
(h) Safeguards to minimize confusion between recycling areas,
and collection procedures.
(5) A separate recycling plan to be followed during all construction
activities. This shall include:
(a) A list of designated materials;
(b) A list of vendors capable of removing, storing and/or recycling
the material;
(c) A schedule for removal, i.e., weekly, monthly, etc.;
(d) A location of containers on construction site;
(e) Procedures and training to be used to educate all workmen,
contractors and subcontractors.
(6) Site and space requirements for designated materials are listed
below.
(a) Office paper. The average office worker generates 20 pounds of
office paper per month. The size of the storage area and the
number of containers required will be dependent on the
number of workers in the building(s) and the frequency with
which the vendor picks up the materials. Adequate storage
shall be provided both at the point of generation and of pickup
by vendor. The loading dock, service area or other suitable
areas should be designed to house storage containers such as
gaylords or hampers. These containers are approximately four
feet by four feet by four feet and hold approximately 500
pounds of paper. The chosen storage area shall be accessible to
vendor's vehicles and meet fire codes.
(b) Corrugated cardboard. The amount of space required for
storage and the size of the container used to store the material
will depend on the amount of material generated by the
establishment and whether the material is baled, tied in
bundles or compacted. Adequate space shall be provided at an
area accessible to vendor's vehicles and shall meet fire codes.
§ 550-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-134
1:1099
§ 550-135. Development options in RRC Rural Resource
Conservation Zone District. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord. No.
93-008; 11-4-2005 by Ord. No. 05-025]
Lots of at least 40,000 square feet shall be permitted for Development
Option I (Lot Size Averaging), Development Option II (Open Lands
Subdivision) and Development Option III (Conservation Cluster Subdivision)
in the RRC District, provided the following conditions are met:
§ 550-136. Right to farm.
(c) Glass. There is approximately 600 pounds of uncrushed glass
per cubic yard. The size of the storage area and container(s)
will depend upon generation rates, whether the glass is to be
sorted by color and whether the glass will be crushed.
Adequate storage space shall be provided, both at area of
generation and pickup by vendor. The area for vendor pickup of
material shall be accessible to vendor's vehicles. Small
dumpsters or drums are popular containers for storage of
glass.
(d) Aluminum cans. Each cubic yard of uncrushed aluminum cans
weighs approximately 74 pounds. The size of the storage area
and container will depend upon generation rate. Adequate
storage space shall be provided, both at the point of generation
and pickup by the vendor. The area for vendor pickup of
materials shall be accessible to vendor's vehicles. Large plastic
bags or drums are popular containers for storage of aluminum
cans.
(e) Newspaper. Each cubic yard of newspaper weighs
approximately 600 pounds. The size of the storage area and
container will depend upon generation rate. Adequate storage
space shall be provided, both at the point of generation and
pickup by the vendor. The area for vendor pickup of material
shall be accessible to vendor's vehicles.
A. Approved (by Township Health Department) percolation tests and soil
logs prior to final subdivision approval for each RRC lot proposed to be
created shall be submitted as part of a final subdivision application.
B. A reserve septic treatment bed area shall be provided on each lot to
provide a long-term backup in the event of original bed failure.
Approved percolation tests and soil logs prior to final subdivision
approval for each RRC lot's reserve area shall be submitted as part of a
final subdivision application.
A. Purpose. It is the intent of this section to define and prescribe
acceptable, necessary and recognized farming practices and to
guarantee that they may be encouraged, established and preserved
within the RRC and R-15 Zoning Districts. Further, this section is
§ 550-134 HAMILTON CODE § 550-136
1:1100
designed to preserve existing farming operations within REO and RD
Zoning Districts.217
B. The right to farm activities protected. In accordance with the purposes
set forth above, the following farming activities shall be deemed
established as acceptable, recognized and entitled to protection and
encouragement; subject in all cases, however, to all applicable federal,
state, county and local regulations:
(1) The production of agricultural and horticultural crops, landscaping
and natural Christmas trees, livestock, poultry and other related
commodities.
(2) The processing and packaging of agricultural output produced on
the farm.
(3) Wholesale and retail marketing, including "U-pick" marketing and
sales, of agricultural output produced on the farm.
(4) The construction of off-street parking, loading and driveway areas
as they relate to the movement of goods to and from the site and as
they relate to wholesale and retail marketing operations.
(5) The construction of barns, silos and other structures as they
directly relate to the farm or wholesale and retail operation.
(6) The replenishing of soil nutrients, including but not limited to the
spreading of manure and applying chemical or organic fertilizer.
(7) The use of federally approved products in accordance with labeled
instructions as recommended by the New Jersey Agricultural
Experiment Station and the United States Environmental
Protection Agency for the control of pests, predators, varmints,
diseases affecting plants and livestock and for the control of weed
infestation.
(8) The use of irrigation pumps and equipment and the use of aerial
and ground seeding and spraying, using tractors and other
necessary equipment.
(9) The hiring and utilization of necessary farm labor.
(10) The construction of fences.
(11) Transporting large, slow-moving equipment over roads within the
Township.
(12) Conducting farm activities year-round, including weekends and
holidays, in the early morning, day and evening hours,
notwithstanding the production of normal but unavoidable noise,
217. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-136
1:1101
dust, odors and fumes caused by such necessary activities when
conducted in accordance with recognized agricultural practices.
C. Permit procedure.
(1) Those activities requiring physical improvements to the site (i.e.,
customer parking, access to public roadways, buildings, etc.) shall
submit an application for an administrative waiver to the
administrative officer. The administrative officer shall review the
application for issues relating to health, safety and welfare.
(a) The owner/applicant shall provide the administrative officer
with a survey and/or plans prepared by a professional
engineer, land surveyor, planner or architect licensed in the
State of New Jersey indicating lands affected. In the case of
large farms, only the portion of the lot and any streets and
rights-of-way within a three-hundred-foot radius of the area of
disturbance shall be required to be shown on the survey.
(b) The plans shall address such issues as traffic circulation,
loading, parking and drainage.
(c) If building structures are proposed, the owner/applicant shall
provide architectural plans prepared by a professional
architect or engineer licensed in the State of New Jersey. All
plans shall satisfy the requirements of the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code.218
(2) The administrative officer shall review all plans. For any
application for construction in conjunction with an active farming
operation as outlined above, the administrative officer may waive
requirements for site plan review, provided that the activities
reflected in the application are consistent with commonly accepted
lawful agricultural practices.
(3) Building permits are required for all structures.
D. Notice of farm use. For the purpose of giving due notice of nearby
farming uses to proposed new residential areas adjacent to unimproved
land then being commercially farmed or suitable therefor, the Planning
Board shall require an applicant for an adjacent major or minor
subdivision, as a condition of approval of such application, to include as
a provision in each and every contract for and deed conveying all or any
portion of the lands thereby subdivided, as well as on filed final
subdivision maps, the following record notice to and waiver by grantees
of such present or future proximate farming uses, which provision shall
be made to run with the land: "Grantee hereby acknowledges notice
that there are presently or may in the future be farm uses adjacent to or
in close proximity to the above-described premises from which may
218. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-136 HAMILTON CODE § 550-136
1:1102
§ 550-137. Satellite dish antennas.
Satellite dish antennas, as defined in § 550-7, shall be a permitted accessory
use when located in the rear yard, side yard or on the roof of a principal
building.
emanate noise, odors, dust and fumes associated with lawful
agricultural practices permitted under applicable right to farm laws,
regulations and ordinances, and by acceptance of this conveyance,
grantee does hereby waive objection to such activities."
E. Rights granted by other programs. With respect to all persons and
properties affected by this section, including cases where a farm is
under a state or municipally approved farmland preservation or
agricultural retention program, this chapter shall not limit the activities
and/or rights currently or in the future provided under the law;
however, in cases where this chapter broadens a farmer's rights or
privileges, all persons and properties affected by this chapter shall be
entitled to the benefits thereof.
A. General requirements. Satellite dish antennas proposed to be
constructed and operated within Hamilton shall comply with all the
following general requirements:
(1) There shall be a maximum of one satellite dish per principal
structure, and it shall be solely for the use of such structure. No
satellite dish shall be placed on a lot without a principal structure.
(2) Ground-mounted satellite dish antennas shall be not more than 12
feet in diameter and no higher than 13 feet from the base, including
the stand, to the highest point of its outer circumference, with any
extensions.
(3) Roof-mounted satellite dish antennas shall not exceed 12 feet in
diameter.
(4) The satellite dish shall contain no lettering, advertising or
identification markings.
(5) No satellite dish antenna shall be constructed or installed without a
construction permit.
(6) Satellite dish antennas shall not be permitted within front yards.
B. Design and location. Minimum standards for the design and location of
the satellite dish shall be as follows:
(1) Rear yard.
(a) Satellite dishes located in the rear yard shall observe the
minimum setbacks required for accessory structures within
the zone district. The setback shall be measured to the closest
point of the satellite dish structure.
§ 550-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-137
1:1103
(b) All wiring to and from the dish shall be placed underground.
(2) Side yard.
(a) The satellite dish must be at least five feet away from the
principal structure, 10 feet away from any side property line
and 50 feet from the front street line. The setback shall be
measured to the closest point of the satellite dish structure.
(b) All wiring to and from the dish shall be placed underground.
(3) Rooftop.
(a) Where practical, the satellite dish shall be placed on the rear
portion of the roof.
(b) The maximum height of the satellite dish antenna shall not
extend higher than the highest point of the roof to which it is
attached on structures, except where roofs are flat. The
administrative officer shall review applications for flat-roof
installations to ensure that the location of the satellite dish is
such that visibility from residential properties is minimized.
(4) Pole-mounted satellite dish antennas.
(a) Pole-mounted dish antennas are permitted to be higher than 13
feet when attached to the rear facade of the principal
structure.
(b) The maximum height of the satellite dish antenna shall not
extend higher than the highest point of the roof of the principal
structure, except where roofs are flat. The administrative
officer shall review applications for flat-roof installations to
ensure that the location of the satellite dish is such that
visibility from residential properties is minimized.
C. Waivers. Where satellite dish antenna installation in conformance with
the terms of this section precludes reception of signals from the
servicing satellite, the administrative officer shall grant a waiver of the
requirements of this section which shall be no more than necessary to
enable reception of signals from the servicing satellite.
(1) Application for waiver shall be by written request to the
administrative officer, specifying the location on the premises in
question where the applicant will install the satellite dish antenna.
(2) The waiver application shall include a certification by an authorized
installer containing the statement that the requirements of this
section have been analyzed and that the satellite dish antenna
cannot receive signals from the servicing satellite if installed in
conformance with this section.
§ 550-137 HAMILTON CODE § 550-137
1:1104
§ 550-138. Child- and infant-care centers. [Added 1-20-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-008]
§ 550-139. Warehouse design standards. [Added 1-20-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-008]
Structures developed for warehousing, as defined in § 550-7, shall be
designed according to the following guidelines:
(3) The administrative officer may undertake the appropriate
investigation in connection with any waiver application.
A. All child-care center facilities to be used by the children shall be located
on the principal entrance floor and any other level which is not more
than 1/2 story above or below the grade at the location from which
egress is provided to the street.
B. A minimum of 100 square feet per child of outdoor space shall be
provided and shall be adequately fenced or otherwise protected from
hazards, traffic and driveways.
C. The minimum site area shall be one acre.
D. The hours of operation should be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
E. All loading and unloading of children shall take place on site and not in
the public right-of-way.
F. Infant-care centers are exempt from the minimum outdoor space
provision.
A. The architectural character of each building and/or structure shall be of
current design and style. No commercial statements, other than
signage permitted by ordinance, shall be allowed as part of the building
facade or elevation.
B. To maintain interesting and tasteful exteriors and to mitigate against
the negative impacts on adjacent parcels of excessively long,
monotonous facades, the building design shall incorporate one or more
of the following design techniques:
(1) Architectural articulation of the facade through the use of
fenestration and other similar apertures.
(2) Variations within the horizontal and/or vertical building plane.
(3) Variations in colors and/or types of building materials.
(4) Articulations of foundations and rooflines.
C. Building facades are to be constructed of durable, permanent materials
and tastefully designed (i.e., carefully selected brick, treated concrete,
glass or other architectural surfaces).
§ 550-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-139
1:1105
§ 550-140. Telecommunications towers and antennas. [Added
9-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-028]
D. All exterior service, loading, storage and utility areas (including
transformers, dumpster, etc.) will be located at the side or rear of the
building and will be screened or sheltered using architectural elements,
landscaping, or a combination thereof, so as not to be visible from the
street right-of-way or from adjacent parcels. The size and quantity of
planted landscaping shall be such that the buffer is effective.
Architectural walls are equally encouraged as well as landscaping.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines
for the placement of wireless communications towers and antennas.
The goals of this section are to: 1) protect residential areas and land
uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas; 2)
encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas; 3) minimize
the total number of towers throughout the community; 4) require the
joint use of either new and existing tower sites or predesignated tower
properties as sites for new towers, or predesignated existing buildings
or structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional
single-use towers; 5) encourage users of towers and antennas to locate
them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal; 6) encourage users of towers and antennas to
configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the
towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape
screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; 7) enhance the
ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such
services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently; 8)
consider the public health, safety and welfare in relation to the
construction of communication towers; and 9) avoid potential damage
to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and
careful siting of tower structures. In furtherance of these goals,
Hamilton Township shall give due consideration to the Hamilton
Township's Master Plan, Zoning Map, existing land uses, Hamilton
Township's Inventory Map of Existing Towers and Structures and
environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of
towers and antennas.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers,
bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or
towers.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications
signals or other communications signals.
§ 550-139 HAMILTON CODE § 550-140
1:1106
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/
cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices and/or long
distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on
the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
PREEXISTING TOWERS and PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower
or antenna for which a building permit has been properly issued prior
to the effective date of this section, including permitted towers or
antennas that have not yet been constructed, so long as such approval
is current and not expired.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio
and similar communications purposes, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio
and television transmission towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like. The term
includes the structure and any support thereto.
C. Applicability.
(1) Use variance and site plan approval are required from the Hamilton
Township Zoning Board of Adjustment for the construction of any
new tower or antenna or additional towers on preexisting sites or
any site where towers did not exist prior to the adoption of this
section.
(2) Administrative site plan approval may be granted for the
replacement or rebuilding of existing towers or antennas.
(a) The height of the proposed structure must not exceed that of
the existing tower or antenna by 30 feet.
(b) Administrative approval may be granted for the addition of
communications equipment on existing towers or antennas.
(3) Amateur radio station operators/receive antennas. This section
shall not govern any tower or the installation of any antenna that is
under 65 feet in height if retractable and 45 feet if not, and which is
owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station
operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas. [See
§§ 550-72B(6), 550-73B(2)(j), 550-74B(12), 550-75B(7), 550-76C(5),
550-77C(5), 550-78C(6) and 550-79C(5), 550-81B(8) and
550-87C(8).]219
219. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-140
1:1107
(4) Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
section, other than the requirements of Subsection D(6) and (7)
unless altered or additional equipment is added to same.
D. General requirements.
(1) Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses.
(2) Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with district development regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
(3) Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or
tower shall provide to the administrative officer an inventory of its
existing towers, antennas, sites approved for towers or antennas,
and plans for future antennas, towers, etc., if available, that are
either within the jurisdiction of Hamilton Township or within one
mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the
location, height and design of each tower. The administrative
officer may share such information with other applicants applying
for land use approvals under this section or other organizations
seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of Hamilton
Township; provided, however, that the administrative officer is not,
by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting
that such sites are available or suitable.
(4) Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or,
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a
neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(b) At a tower site, the design of the building's related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening and landscaping that will blend them into the
natural setting and surrounding buildings.
(c) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment
must be of neutral color that is identical to or closely
compatible with the color of the supporting structure so as to
make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
(5) Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the
§ 550-140 HAMILTON CODE § 550-140
1:1108
lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views.
(6) State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any
other agency of the state or federal government with the authority
to regulate tower and antennas. If such standards and regulations
are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed
by this section shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six
months of the effective date of such standards and regulations,
unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and
antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
(7) Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local
building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended
from time to time. If upon inspection Hamilton Township concludes
that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and
constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon notice
being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30
days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards.
Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days
shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at
the owner's expense.
(8) Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities
located in Hamilton Township irrespective of municipal and county
jurisdictional boundaries.
(9) Nonessential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated or
permitted as nonessential service, public utilities or private
utilities.
(10) Franchises. Owners or operators of towers or antennas shall certify
that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or
operation of a wireless communication system in Hamilton
Township have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required
franchises with the administrative officer.
(11) Signs. No signs or otherwise shall be allowed on an antenna or a
tower.
(12) Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support
equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply with
the requirements of Subsection G in this section below.
§ 550-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-140
1:1109
E. Administratively approved uses.
(1) General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
administrative approvals for towers and antennas:
(a) The administrative officer may administratively approve the
uses listed in this section.
(b) Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the
administrative officer, providing the information set forth in
this section and a nonrefundable fee as established by
§ 550-254E regarding administrative waiver of site plan
review.
(c) The administrative officer shall review the application for
administrative approval and determine if the proposed use
complies with the conditions of this section.
(d) In connection with any administrative approval, the
administrative officer may, in order to encourage the use of
monopoles, administratively allow the reconstruction of an
existing tower to monopole construction.
(2) Administratively approved uses. The following uses may be
approved by the administrative officer after conducting an
administrative review:
(a) Antennas or towers located on property as designated as
appropriate tower sites owned, leased or otherwise controlled
by Hamilton Township, provided that a license or lease
authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by
Hamilton Township Council.
(b) Antennas located on predesignated buildings or structures or
towers consistent with the terms of this section.
1. Antennas on predesignated building or structure,
provided:
a. The antenna does not extend more than 30 feet above
the highest point of the structure;
b. The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations; and
c. The antenna complies with all applicable building
codes.
2. Antennas on predesignated towers. An antenna which is
attached to an existing tower may be approved by the
administrative officer and, to minimize adverse visual
impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of
towers, co-location of antennas by more than one carrier
§ 550-140 HAMILTON CODE § 550-140
1:1110
on existing towers shall take precedence over the
construction of new towers, provided such co-location is
accomplished in a manner consistent with the following:
a. A tower which is modified or reconstructed to
accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna
shall be of the same tower type and height as the
existing tower, unless the administrative officer allows
reconstruction as a monopole.
b. On-site location.
c. A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the colocation
of an addition antenna may be required to be
moved on site to better conform with the setback.
d. After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate co-location,
only one tower may remain on the site.
F. Administrative waiver application requirements. The following
information is required to be provided by the applicant with the
submission of an application for the construction of towers, antennas or
predesignated buildings, structures or towers:
(1) Predesignated buildings, structures or towers.
(a) A scaled site plan prepared by a New Jersey licensed engineer
or land surveyor clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning,
adjacent land uses and zoning, adjacent roadways, proposed
means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation
drawings of the proposed tower and any other structures,
topography, parking, landscaping, lighting plan, fencing and
other information deemed by the administrative officer to be
necessary to assess compliance with this section, including but
not limited to a bond estimate reflecting the costs of the
proposed on-site improvements.
(b) A description of compliance with the terms of this section and
all applicable state, federal and local laws.
(c) A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the tower will accommodate co-location of
additional antennas for future users.
(d) Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network
for the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular
sites owned or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
(e) A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers,
other structures or alternative technology not requiring the
use of towers or structures to provide the services to be
provided through the use of the proposed new tower.
§ 550-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-140
1:1111
(f) A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Township based upon existing physical,
engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the
event the property tower is erected.
(g) As a condition of approval, the following shall be required:
1. A performance guarantee representing the full amount of
on-site improvement.
2. A Mylar with a signature block for applicant, owner and
administrative officer.
3. An executed Mylar and 10 copies shall be submitted to the
Township for its records.
4. All specified on-site improvements must be completed,
inspected and approved by the administrative officer prior
to the final approval of construction by the Construction
Official.
5. A plan of existing and proposed towers with their effective
range.
6. A notarized statement indicating that at least two other
carriers (a minimum of three total) will be permitted to colocate
on the proposed or existing structure at a cost that
reflects existing average market rates.
G. Buildings or other equipment storage.
(1) Antennas mounted on structure or rooftops. The equipment cabinet
or structure used in association with antennas shall comply with
the following:
(a) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than three
square feet of gross floor area or be more than eight feet in
height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are less
than 65 feet in height, related unmanned equipment structure
of over two square feet of gross floor area or seven feet in
height shall be located on the ground and shall not be located
on the roof of the structure.
(b) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building,
the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 20% of the roof area.
(c) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
(2) Antennas mounted on utility poles or light poles. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be
located in accordance with the following.
§ 550-140 HAMILTON CODE § 550-140
1:1112
(a) In residential districts, the equipment cabinet or structure may
be located:
1. In a front yard to meet standards of the applicable zone, as
deemed appropriate by the administrative officer, but not
less than 15 feet from all lot lines.220
2. In a side yard to meet standards of the applicable zone, as
deemed appropriate by the administrative officer, provided
the cabinet or structure is no greater than eight feet in
height or three square feet of gross floor area and the
cabinet/structure is located a minimum of 15 feet from all
lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an
evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of at least 42 to
48 inches and a planted height of at least 36 inches.
3. In a rear yard to meet standards of the applicable zone, as
deemed appropriate by the administrative officer, provided
the cabinet or structure is no greater than eight feet in
height or three square feet in gross floor area. The
cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge
with an ultimate height of eight feet and a planted height
of at least 36 inches.
(b) In commercial or industrial districts, the equipment cabinet or
structure shall be no greater than eight feet in height or three
square feet in gross floor area and meet the applicable zone
setbacks. The structure or cabinet shall be screened by an
evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet and a
planted height of at least 36 inches. In all other instances,
structures or cabinets shall be screened from view of all
residential properties which abut or are directly across the
street from the structure or cabinet by solid fence 10 feet in
height or an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight
feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches. See Subsection
G(1).
(3) Antennas located in towers. The related unmanned equipment
structure shall not contain more than three square feet of gross
floor area or be more than eight feet in height and shall be located
in accordance with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning
district in which located.
(4) Modification of building size requirements. The requirements of
Subsection G(1) through (3) may be modified by the administrative
officer in the case of administratively approved uses.
H. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. Any antenna or tower that
is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be
220. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-140
1:1113
§ 550-141. Steep slopes development; purpose. [Added 1-5-2006 by
Ord. No. 05-056]
§ 550-142. Renewable-energy-generating facilities. [Added
12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-043]
considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall
remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from Hamilton
Township notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove
an abandoned antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds to
remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two
or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become
effective until all users cease using the tower.
I. Nonconforming uses.
(1) Not an expansion of nonconforming use. Towers that are
constructed and antennas that are installed in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall not be deemed to constitute the
expansion of a nonconforming use or structure.
(2) Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers or antennas shall be allowed
to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine
maintenance (including replacement with a new tower or antenna
of like construction and height) shall be permitted as long as they
comply with the requirements of this section.
(3) Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or
antennas. This is subject to administrative waiver approval.
A. The provisions contained in this section are designed to protect public
and private property from damage or destruction caused by abnormal
or accelerated ravine and bluff erosion resulting from land development
and construction activities occurring on adjacent or nearby properties
and to protect the fragile ravine and bluff ecosystem from damage or
destruction resulting from land development and construction
activities.
B. No development or improvements shall be permitted on that portion of
a lot having slopes of 15% or higher for a single-family residential
development or slopes of 15% or higher for any other type of land
development permitted pursuant to this chapter. Slope calculations
shall be based on contour intervals of 10 feet in accordance with
standard engineering procedures. The applicant shall be permitted to
calculate the floor area ratio (FAR) on the gross area of the lot to
include that portion of the lot containing steep slopes as defined herein.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to permit solar, photovoltaic and
wind energy facilities in appropriate locations in the Township in a way
that is consistent with duly enacted state legislation to facilitate
alternative forms of energy production and to minimize potential land
§ 550-140 HAMILTON CODE § 550-142
1:1114
use conflicts and impacts associated with such facilities. This section is
intended to accomplish the foregoing while also:
(1) Retaining prime agricultural soils for agricultural use by avoiding
siting such facilities on lands within the Agricultural Development
Area (ADA) and lands with significant areas of prime farmland soils
and soils of statewide importance.
(2) Preserving the industry of agriculture and agricultural character
by avoiding siting such facilities on lands adjacent to or across a
public road from permanently preserved farmland.
(3) Preserving areas with an established rural and/or historic
character by avoiding siting such facilities on land within areas of
rural and/or historic character, particularly on land which is
exposed to public view and where, by reason of topography or other
natural features, the facility cannot be effectively screened from
view.
(4) Protecting the quality of life in residential districts by avoiding
siting ground-mounted facilities in locations where they would be
visible from adjacent residential areas.
(5) Providing standards for buffering and screening of renewable
energy facilities to protect surrounding properties from glare and
to mitigate the negative visual impact of ground-mounted facilities.
(6) Providing for proper decommissioning of the renewable energy
facility after its useful life.
B. Solar and photovoltaic facility requirements.
(1) General requirements. Unless otherwise specified, the following
general requirements apply to all solar and photovoltaic facilities
(hereinafter "facilities"), regardless of whether they are permitted,
conditional or accessory uses.
(a) Concentrated solar and solar-reflecting technology facilities
shall not be a permitted principal, accessory or conditional use
in any zone district.
(b) A solar and/or photovoltaic facility shall mean the aggregate of
all facilities constructed on a lot or assemblage of contiguous
lots or on a farm management unit.
(c) A ground-mounted solar and photovoltaic energy-generating
facility (hereinafter "ground-mounted facility") shall be
deemed to be a principal use when any of the following
conditions are met. A ground-mounted facility which does not
meet one or more of these conditions shall be deemed an
accessory use.
§ 550-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-142
1:1115
1. When the ground-mounted facility exceeds a ratio of one to
five (1:5) for the land area on which the facility is
constructed to the area used for another purpose
(including farming).
2. When the ground-mounted facility comprises an area of 10
acres or greater.
3. When the ground-mounted facility is the only use or
structure on a lot (for purposes of this criterion, farming
does not count as a use).
(d) Any solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility mounted
to a structure above a surface parking area or a roof shall be
deemed an accessory use.
(e) In addition to those items required for an application to be
deemed complete, a site plan application including a solar or
photovoltaic energy-generating facility shall include the
following:
1. Location of proposed and existing underground or
overhead utility or transmission lines.
2. Location of any proposed or existing substation, inverter
or transformer.
3. Description of any necessary upgrades or modifications to
existing substations or the necessity for a new substation.
4. Description of how the energy generated by the facility
will be connected to the electrical distribution or
transmission facility or the electrical facility of the
intended energy user.
5. Location of existing hedgerows and vegetated windbreaks.
Trees on the site that have a caliper of 12 inches (dbh) or
greater shall be identified by species and overall condition.
6. Photographic simulation of the view of the proposed
facility from ground level from all public roads abutting
the property and from adjacent residential uses.
7. Maintenance plan which describes the applicant's
approach to maintaining the facility after construction,
including the panels and associated supporting structures,
as well as the property on which the facility is installed.
(f) Solar and photovoltaic facilities shall not be counted in the
calculation of maximum impervious cover unless the area
under the panels (excluding any footings) consists of an
impervious material. The design of the facilities shall comply
§ 550-142 HAMILTON CODE § 550-142
1:1116
with all NJDEP and Township stormwater, grading and soil
disturbance regulations, whichever is more restrictive.
(g) Ground-mounted facilities shall be located to minimize views of
the facilities from public roadways and from existing
residences not located on site and from neighboring
undeveloped residentially-zoned property by utilizing existing
visual barriers, including but not limited to buildings, trees,
hedgerows and natural topography to the maximum extent
possible, in addition to visual screening described elsewhere in
this section.
(h) Ground-mounted facilities within an area greater than 1,000
square feet shall provide one or more of the following beneath
the structures: lawn, meadow grasses or an agricultural area
for crops or grazing farm animals. Meadow grass plantings
shall include wildflower mixes as well as a mix of appropriate
grass species.
(i) Where the prior use of a facility site consists of agriculture, the
facility shall be installed such that it can be returned to active
agricultural production after the useful life and removal of the
facility. As such, site disturbance, including but not limited to
grading, cut and fill, soil removal, excavation and soil
compaction, shall be minimized; soil removal shall be
prohibited.
(j) The use of concrete asphalt or other impervious surface,
including gravel, is prohibited on the site of such facilities,
except in the following locations:
1. The mounting of inverters, transformers, power
conditioning units, control boxes, pumps and other such
facility components.
2. The mounting of solar photovoltaic panels, films and
arrays when used as ballast.
3. Driveway aprons.
4. Portions of roads and driveways where necessary to
provide stability for vehicles.
(k) The extent of roads and driveways shall be minimized to the
extent possible and shall be constructed so as to minimize soil
compaction.
(l) Applicants are encouraged to enter into solar easements with
neighboring property owners in order to ensure continuing
access to sunlight for a solar or photovoltaic facility. Site plan
approval or the issuance of a zoning permit for a solar or
§ 550-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-142
1:1117
photovoltaic facility does not imply the existence of a solar
easement.
(m) All electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and
secured to prevent unauthorized access.
(n) Transmission wires shall be underground.
(o) The only signs permitted on a solar or photovoltaic facility or
any associated building or structure are those depicting the
manufacturer's or installer's identification, appropriate
warning signs, or owner identification.
(p) Sound levels from the energy facility shall not exceed the
ambient sound level at the property line prior to construction
of the facility.
(q) Due to the limitation on the capacity of the PJM grid to accept
electric energy from renewable energy facilities, a permit
issued pursuant to this section shall expire if the solar or
photovoltaic facility is not installed and functioning within the
approval period established by the Municipal Land Use Law.
(r) Abandonment. A solar energy facility that is out-of-service for a
continuous eighteen-month period will be deemed to have been
abandoned.
1. The Township may issue a notice of abandonment to the
owner of a solar energy facility that is deemed to have
been abandoned. The notice shall be sent return receipt
requested.
2. The owner shall have the right to respond to the notice of
abandonment within 30 days from the notice receipt date.
3. If the owner provides information that demonstrates the
solar energy facility has not been abandoned, the
Township shall withdraw the notice of abandonment and
notify the owner that the notice has been withdrawn.
4. If the Township determines that the solar energy facility
has been abandoned, the owner of the solar energy facility
shall remove the solar energy facility and properly dispose
of the components at the owner's sole expense within six
months after the owner receives the notice of
abandonment.
5. In the event that the owner fails to remove the solar
energy facility, the Township and/or its employees and/or
contractors may enter the property to remove the solar
energy facility (but shall not be obligated to remove same),
and in the event that the Township performs the removal,
all costs of such removal shall be reimbursed to the
§ 550-142 HAMILTON CODE § 550-142
1:1118
Township by the owner. In the event the owner fails to
reimburse the Township, the Township may place a lien on
the property in the amount of the costs of said removal,
and in the event that the Township incurs any additional
costs in enforcing the lien and/or collecting the money
owed, the owner shall be obligated to reimburse the
Township for the additional costs and expenses, including
reasonable attorneys' fees.
(s) All applications for a solar or photovoltaic facility as a principal
use shall be accompanied by a decommissioning plan to be
implemented upon abandonment in conjunction with removal
of solar energy facilities. Before beginning any
decommissioning activities, the applicant must submit a
performance bond in a form and amount satisfactory to the
Township Attorney, which shall be based upon an estimate
approved by the Township Engineer, assuring the availability of
adequate funds to restore the site to a useful nonhazardous
condition in accordance with the decommissioning plan. The
decommissioning plan shall include the following provisions:
1. Restore the surface grade and soil after removal of
aboveground structures and equipment.
2. Restore soil areas with native seed mixes, agricultural
crops and/or plant species suitable to the area and which
do not include any invasive species.
3. The plan may provide for restoration of agricultural crops
or forest resource land.
4. The plan may provide for the retention of access roads,
fences, gates, buildings and buffer plantings at the
discretion of the Township.
5. If the property owner fails to remove the facility and
restore the facility in accordance with the
decommissioning plan, the Township may perform in place
of the owner. All costs incurred by the Township in
connection with same shall be a first priority lien
enforceable pursuant to municipal tax lien statutes.
(t) Any applicant for a solar or photovoltaic facility on a
commercial farm is encouraged to meet the State Agricultural
Development Committee's (SADC) Agricultural Management
Practice (AMP) for the Construction, Installation, Operation or
Maintenance of Solar Energy Generation Facilities, Structures
and Equipment on Commercial Farms. Compliance with this
rule is required in order to continue the property's eligibility
for right-to-farm protection for the on-farm generation of solar
energy.
§ 550-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-142
1:1119
(2) Accessory use requirements. The following requirements shall
apply to solar and photovoltaic facility accessory uses. The
requirements shall be bulk standards where the facility is
permitted and conditions where the facility is a conditional use.
(a) Roof-mounted facilities. Roof-mounted facilities shall be
mounted parallel to the roof angle and shall not exceed a
height of 12 inches above the roof. Notwithstanding, roofmounted
facilities shall not exceed the maximum building
height in the zone district.
(b) Facilities mounted above parking lots.
1. Facilities mounted above parking lots shall be designed to
provide adequate space for access by emergency vehicles
whenever necessary.
2. The maximum permitted height shall be 20 feet.
3. Facilities shall only be located within the rear yard.
4. The minimum side and rear yard setback for any such
facility shall be 50 feet if adjacent to a nonresidential use
or district and 100 feet if adjacent to a residential use or
district.
5. The facility shall be screened from view on all sides by a
twenty-foot-wide planted buffer.
a. The buffer shall consist of an earthen berm and/or
solid fence which completely screens the view of the
facility and any associated glare from adjacent streets
(measured from a height of four feet at the center line
of the street) and adjacent property lines (measured
from a height of five feet at the property line). The
buffer shall also consist of a mix of deciduous and
evergreen trees and shrubs.
b. Existing vegetation shall be retained and utilized to
the extent practical.
c. The buffer shall also meet the standards in § 550-130
unless otherwise specified. Deciduous trees shall have
a minimum caliper size of 3.5 inches and a minimum
height at planting of 14 feet. Evergreen trees shall
have a minimum height at planting of six feet.
d. The buffer requirement shall not apply where the
facility is separated from the public road or property
line by a building of equal or greater height than the
facility.
§ 550-142 HAMILTON CODE § 550-142
1:1120
e. Fencing, with the exception of a wooden or approved
PVC fence, shall not be visible from the property line
in all districts except the MFG and I Districts.
6. Limited encroachments upon preexisting or standard
parking space sizes to accommodate the structure for
solar and photovoltaic parking structures are permitted,
provided that safe and convenient accessibility to and from
all parking spaces is maintained.
7. The facility shall be designed so as to meet the lighting and
landscape standards of this chapter.
8. The facility shall be designed in such a manner that
neither water nor snow accumulates and has concentrated
flow off the structure.
(c) Ground-mounted facilities.
1. The maximum permitted height of ground-mounted
facilities shall be 12 feet.
2. Facilities shall only be located within the rear yard.
3. The minimum side and rear yard setback for any such
facility shall be 50 feet if adjacent to a nonresidential use
or district and 100 feet if adjacent to a residential use or
district.
4. The facility shall be screened from view on all sides by a
twenty-foot-wide planted buffer.
a. The buffer shall consist of an earthen berm and/or
solid fence which completely screens the view of the
facility and any associated glare from adjacent streets
(measured from a height of four feet at the center line
of the street) and adjacent property lines (measured
from a height of five feet at the property line). The
buffer shall also consist of a mix of deciduous and
evergreen trees and shrubs.
b. Existing vegetation shall be retained and utilized to
the extent practical.
c. The buffer shall also meet the standards in § 550-130
unless otherwise specified. Deciduous trees shall have
a minimum caliper size of 3 1/2 inches and a minimum
height at planting of 14 feet. Evergreen trees shall
have a minimum height at planting of six feet.
d. The buffer requirement shall not apply where the
ground-mounted facility is separated from the public
§ 550-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-142
1:1121
road or property line by a building of equal or greater
height than the facility.
e. Fencing, with the exception of a wooden or approved
PVC fence, shall not be visible from the property line
in all districts except the MFG and I Districts.
f. Existing hedgerows or vegetated windbreaks that
provide screening of the subject site from neighboring
properties shall be retained and augmented as
necessary.
5. Clearing of upland hardwood forest shall be prohibited
except to the extent required for site access from a public
road.
6. Any development for a ground-mounted facility shall
comply with § 160-117, Natural features and tree
preservation.
7. Prime farmland soils and soils of statewide significance
shall be avoided to the maximum extent possible.
(3) Principal use requirements.
(a) The maximum permitted height of ground-mounted facilities
shall be 12 feet.
(b) The following setbacks shall apply to ground-mounted
facilities:
1. Front yard: 100 feet or not less than 200 feet where a lot
abuts a residential use or district (including those across a
public road).
2. Side yard: 50 feet or not less than 100 feet where a lot
abuts a residential use or district (including those across a
public road).
3. Rear yard: 50 feet or not less than 100 feet where a lot
abuts a residential use or district (including those across a
public road).
(c) Substations (excluding switchgear stations) shall be set back a
minimum of 150 feet or not less than 200 feet from a
residential use or district.
(d) The following minimum screening requirements shall be met:
1. The facility shall be buffered from view of nonresidential
properties by a twenty-foot-wide planting area and from
view of public roads and residential districts and
properties (including those located across a public road)
by a forty-foot-wide planted buffer area.
§ 550-142 HAMILTON CODE § 550-142
1:1122
2. The buffer shall consist of an earthen berm and/or solid
fence which completely screens the view of the facility and
any associated glare from adjacent streets (measured from
a height of four feet at the center line of the street) and
adjacent property lines (measured from a height of five
feet at the property line). The buffer shall also consist of a
mix of deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs to
provide a year-round visual screen.
3. The buffer shall also meet the standards in § 550-130
unless otherwise specified. Deciduous trees shall have a
minimum caliper size of 3.5 inches and a minimum height
at planting of 14 feet. Evergreen trees shall have a
minimum height at planting of six feet.
4. Fencing, with the exception of a wooden or approved PVC
fence, shall not be visible from the property line in all
districts except the MFG and I Districts.
5. Existing hedgerows or vegetated windbreaks that provide
screening of the subject site from neighboring properties
shall be retained and augmented as necessary.
6. Substations and other associated transmission structures
shall be screened with a double row of evergreen plantings
with a minimum height of eight feet at planting.
(e) Clearing of upland hardwood forest shall be prohibited except
to the extent required for site access from a public road.
(f) Any development of a solar or photovoltaic facility shall comply
with § 550-117, Natural features and tree preservation.
C. Wind energy facilities. The following requirements shall be bulk
standards where wind energy facilities are a permitted principal use:
(1) The towers shall be designed and installed so as not to provide step
bolts, a ladder or other publicly accessible means of climbing the
tower for a minimum height of eight feet above the ground.
(2) All electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to
prevent unauthorized access.
(3) The only signs permitted on a wind energy facility or any associated
building or structure are those depicting the manufacturer's or
installer's identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner
identification.
(4) All wind energy facilities must comply with the applicable Federal
Aviation Administration regulations and must receive any
necessary Federal Aviation Administration permits.
§ 550-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-142
1:1123
(5) All wind energy facilities must comply with the applicable
Department of Environmental Protection regulations and must
receive any necessary permits from the Department of
Environmental Protection.
(6) Due to the limitation on the capacity of the PJM grid to accept
electric energy from renewable energy facilities, a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter shall expire if the wind energy facility is
not installed and functioning within the approval period established
by the Municipal Land Use Law.
(7) In addition to those items required for an application to be deemed
complete, a site plan application shall include the following:
(a) Location of proposed and existing underground or overhead
utility or transmission lines.
(b) Location of any proposed or existing substation, inverter or
transformer.
(c) Description of any necessary upgrades or modifications to
existing substations or the necessity for a new substation.
(d) Description of how the energy generated by the facility will be
connected to the electrical distribution or transmission facility
or the electrical facility of the intended energy user.
(e) Location of existing hedgerows and vegetated windbreaks.
Trees within the site that have a caliper of 12 inches (dbh) or
greater shall be identified by species and overall condition.
(f) Where a principal use is proposed, photographic simulation of
the view of the proposed facility from ground level from all
public roads abutting the property and from adjacent
residential uses.
(g) Maintenance plan which describes the applicant's approach to
maintaining the facility after construction, including the panels
and associated supporting structures, as well as the property
on which the facility is installed.
(8) Abandonment. A wind facility that is out-of-service for a continuous
eighteen-month period will be deemed to have been abandoned.
(a) The Township may issue a notice of abandonment to the owner
of a wind energy facility that is deemed to have been
abandoned. The notice shall be sent return receipt requested.
(b) The owner shall have the right to respond to the notice of
abandonment within 30 days from the notice receipt date.
(c) If the owner provides information that demonstrates the wind
facility has not been abandoned, the Township shall withdraw
§ 550-142 HAMILTON CODE § 550-142
1:1124
the notice of abandonment and notify the owner that the notice
has been withdrawn.
(d) If the Township determines that the wind facility has been
abandoned, the owner of the wind energy facility shall remove
the wind energy facility and properly dispose of the
components at the owner's sole expense within six months
after the owner receives the notice of abandonment.
(e) In the event that the owner fails to remove the wind facility, the
Township and/or its employees and/or contractors may enter
the property to remove the wind energy facility (but shall not
be obligated to remove same) and, in the event that the
Township performs the removal, all costs of such removal shall
be reimbursed to the Township by the owner. In the event the
owner fails to reimburse the Township, the Township may
place a lien on the property in the amount of the costs of said
removal and, in the event that the Township incurs any
additional costs in enforcing the lien and/or collecting the
money owed, the owner shall be obligated to reimburse the
Township for the additional costs and expenses, including
reasonable attorneys' fees.
(9) The maximum height of a wind energy facility shall be 100 feet.
(a) The height of a wind energy facility (hereinafter "facility") shall
be defined as the height above grade of the tower plus the wind
generator.
(10) A wind tower shall be set back from all property lines and utility
lines a distance equal to 150% of the facility height.
(11) Substations (excluding switchgear stations) shall be set back a
minimum of 150 feet or not less than 200 feet from a residential use
or district.
(12)No portion of the wind generator shall extend into any public rightof-
way, unless written permission is granted by the government
entity with jurisdiction over the right-of-way, or any overhead utility
lines, unless written permission is granted by the utility that owns
and/or controls the lines.
(13) The following minimum screening requirements shall be met:
(a) The facility shall be buffered from view of nonresidential
properties by a twenty-foot-wide planted buffer and from view
of public roads and residential districts and properties
(including those located across a public road) by a forty-footwide
planted buffer.
(b) The buffer shall consist of an earthen berm and/or solid fence
which completely screens all ground-mounted equipment and
§ 550-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-142
1:1125
§ 550-143. through § 550-160. (Reserved)
structures from adjacent streets (measured from a height of
four feet at the center line of the street) and adjacent property
lines (measured from a height of five feet at the property
line). The buffer shall also consist of a mix of deciduous and
evergreen trees and shrubs to provide a year-round visual
screen.
(c) The proposed screening shall provide a year-round visual
screen of the facility. If this is not possible, the wind energy
facility shall be revised to mitigate the visual impact upon the
neighboring residential properties and important viewsheds.
Neighboring residential properties shall be defined for this
purpose as those properties which are adjacent to or those
properties which are located across a public road from the site.
(d) The buffer shall also meet the standards in § 550-130 unless
otherwise specified. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum
caliper size of 3.5 inches and a minimum height at planting of
14 feet. Evergreen trees shall have a minimum height at
planting of six feet.
(e) Fencing, with the exception of a wooden or approved PVC
fence, shall not be visible from the property line in all districts
except the MFG and I Districts.
(f) Existing hedgerows or vegetated windbreaks that provide
screening of the subject site from neighboring properties shall
be retained and augmented as necessary.
(g) Substations and other associated transmission structures shall
be screened with a double row of evergreen plantings with a
minimum height of eight feet at planting.
(14) A wind energy facility shall not be artificially lighted unless such
lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
(15) The wind generator and the tower shall be a neutral color that is
appropriate for its location and will allow the tower to be as
unobtrusive as possible, unless otherwise required by the FAA.
(16) Clearing of upland hardwood forest shall be prohibited except to
the extent required for site access from a public road.
(17) Any development of a wind facility shall comply with § 550-117,
Natural features and tree preservation.
§ 550-142 HAMILTON CODE § 550-143
1:1126
ARTICLE V
Exceptions, Modifications and Development Alternatives
§ 550-161. Conditional uses. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord. No.
93-008; 8-16-1995 by Ord. No. 95-047; 12-21-2006 by Ord. No.
06-041; 12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-043]
A. General provisions.
(1) Before a building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued
for any conditional use as permitted by this chapter, application
shall be made to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall
grant or deny said application within 95 days of submission of a
complete application by a developer to the administrative officer or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(2) The review by the Planning Board of a conditional use shall include
any required site plan review pursuant to this chapter. Public
notice and a hearing shall be required as stipulated in this chapter.
(3) In all requests for approval of conditional uses, the burden of proof
shall be on the applicant. In making its decision on an application
for a conditional use, the Board shall take no action which will be
detrimental to the public welfare or which will substantially impair
the intent or purpose of this chapter. The Board may attach terms
and conditions to an approval of such application if, in its judgment,
it will preserve such public welfare or such intent or purpose, and
the Board shall be guided by the following principles:
(a) The proposed use will adequately provide for access facilities
for the estimated traffic from public streets and sidewalks.
(b) The proposed use shall be subject to the off-street parking,
loading and service requirements of this chapter.
(c) Screening or buffer strips, as required, shall be installed.
(d) No outdoor floodlighting or spotlighting shall be permitted to
shine directly or indirectly on any abutting property.
(e) The proposed use shall be reasonable in terms of the logical,
efficient and economical extension of public services and
facilities, such as water, sewers, police and fire protection,
transportation, recreation and public schools.
(f) Each proposed use shall be further subject to specific
conditions as set forth in this chapter.
B. Automobile and gasoline service station.
(1) The minimum lot area shall be 30,000 square feet.
(2) The minimum lot width shall be 150 feet along all rights-of-way.
§ 550-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-161
1:1127
(3) Building setbacks shall respect zone district requirements. That
notwithstanding, gas pump canopies, storage areas and related
facilities shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from front lot lines
and 30 feet from side lot lines.
(4) The minimum setback of pumps shall be 50 feet from side lot lines
and 35 feet from front lot lines.
(5) All driveways shall be at least 24 feet wide, at least 25 feet from all
side lines and at least 50 feet from the intersection of rights-of-way,
and there shall not be more than two driveways on any right-of-way.
(6) No automobile and gasoline service station shall be located within
1,000 feet of any public entrance to a church, school, library,
hospital, charitable institution or place of public assembly. This
distance shall be measured in a straight line from said public
entrance to the nearest boundary of the automobile and gasoline
service station.221
(7) Any repairs shall be performed in a fully enclosed building which is
properly ventilated.
(8) No sale or rental of cars, vehicles, trucks or trailers shall be
permitted.
(9) No outdoor oil drainage pits or outdoor hydraulic lifts shall be
permitted.
(10)No more than three vehicles per bay shall be permitted to be
parked in overnight outdoor storage.
(11) The entire area of a site traversed by motor vehicles shall be
constructed with a dust-free surface and drained onto a public
street or public drainage system.
(12) A twenty-foot-wide strip across the entire frontage shall be
provided and shall be landscaped with grass or ground cover as
well as low-growing buffering shrubbery and plants and shade
trees in accordance with the site plan standards of Article VII.
Additionally, all areas of the lot not deemed necessary for the
circulation or storage of automobiles, as determined by the
Planning Board, must be landscaped.
(13) Outdoor solid waste disposal must be properly screened or
buffered.
C. Automobile sales: new and/or used cars. Automobile rentals as an
accessory use to new and/or used car dealers.
(1) The minimum frontage shall be 150 feet.
221. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 160-161(b)(7), pertaining to the proximity of one service
station to another, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-5-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-004.
§ 550-161 HAMILTON CODE § 550-161
1:1128
(2) All signs shall conform with all provisions and regulations of
§ 550-124 of this chapter.
(3) Direct and indirect glare shall be in accordance with requirements
as set forth under Article IV.
(4) A ten-foot-wide strip across the entire frontage, with the exception
of exit and entrance driveways, shall be landscaped with grass or
ground cover and attractively planted with low-growing shrubbery
and plants.
(5) When a new or used car lot abuts residences, a planted screen, as
defined in Article IV, shall be installed and maintained at all times
in a proper manner.
(6) Driveway opening approval shall be required of the agency having
jurisdiction of the roadway upon which the lot fronts.
(7) All lot areas used by motor vehicles shall be provided with a dustfree
surface and drained onto a public street or public drainage
system with provisions for an oil trap.
(8) Sufficient off-street parking shall be provided, as established in
Article IV.
(9) No new or used cars held for sale shall be parked on a public street
or right-of-way.
D. Camps.
(1) No building, tent, activity area or recreation facility shall be less
than 300 feet from any lot line, and no two buildings intended for
use as sleeping quarters shall be closer than 30 feet to each other,
except that tents shall be not less than 10 feet apart.
(2) Screening and buffering are required between camps and any
other use.
(3) The minimum lot area shall be at least three acres.
(4) All camps shall adhere to the performance standards listed in
Article IV of the chapter as it relates specifically to the glare of
lights and to noise.
E. Car washes.
(1) All mechanical activities must be conducted within a totally
enclosed building.
(2) Drainage from inside the building(s) shall feed into a sanitary
sewer system. No dry well or septic tank will be permitted in
connection with said drainage.
§ 550-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-161
1:1129
(3) This use shall not include a self-service or coin-operated car wash
area in any form.
(4) All of the area, yard, building coverage and height requirements of
the respective zone and other applicable requirements of this
chapter must be met.
(5) Stacking for a minimum of 10 automobiles for the car wash shall be
provided on the same site as the car wash operation.
(6) Water associated with the car wash process shall be recycled to the
greatest extent possible by industry standards.
F. Child-care and infant-care centers.
(1) All child-care center facilities to be used by the children shall be
located on the principal entrance floor and any other level which is
not more than 1/2 story above or below the grade at the location
from which egress is provided to the street.
(2) A minimum of 100 square feet per child of outdoor space shall be
provided and shall be adequately fenced or otherwise protected
from hazards, traffic and driveways.
(3) The minimum site area shall be one acre.
(4) The hours of operation should be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(5) All loading and unloading of children shall take place on site and
not in the public right-of-way.
(6) Infant-care centers are exempt from the minimum outdoor space
provision.
G. Churches and other places of worship, Sunday school buildings and
parish houses.
(1) The minimum lot area shall be two acres.
(2) The property should have primary access to a right-of-way 70 feet
or greater in width.
(3) All buildings shall conform to the maximum height standard for the
zone.
(4) The applicant should submit a list of proposed activities,
anticipated participants and a timetable reflecting the hours in
which each building will be in use so that parking requirements can
be determined.
(5) No building, activity area or parking facility shall be located within
50 feet of any property line. The above-mentioned facilities shall be
buffered from any residential property or zone with a live buffering
of massed evergreens as well as fencing.
§ 550-161 HAMILTON CODE § 550-161
1:1130
(6) No parking shall be permitted between any right-of-way line and
the front yard requirement of the zone in which the structures are
proposed to be located.
(7) Any church existing prior to February 1, 1979, is exempt from the
standards and subject only to site plan review.
H. Clubs, lodges, social buildings and fraternal organizations.
(1) Such uses shall be permitted on lots of not less than five acres.
Such uses which do not rent facilities for social affairs may be
permitted on lots of not less than two acres.
(2) The minimum width of the lot shall be 200 feet.
(3) Eating and drinking facilities shall be accessible only from within
the main structure except for loading and unloading areas, kitchen
and emergency exits. Picnic grounds are permitted, provided that
they are located 100 feet from any residence or residential zone.
(4) Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one paved parking
space per three seats or per three persons of rated capacity.
(5) Minimum front, rear and side yards shall be 100 feet for five-acre
lots and 75 feet for two- to 4.9-acre lots from all property
boundaries as they apply to any structure, principal or accessory, or
improvements such as a tennis court, swimming pool or similar use.
Adequate buffers to protect adjacent uses from nuisance
characteristics shall be provided, as the Planning Board may
require.
I. Conversion of single-family and/or multifamily dwellings to offices and
new office construction in the R-7 and R-10 Zones.
(1) The conversion of single-family and/or multifamily dwelling units to
offices is permitted along the following highways:
(a) Route 206.
(b) Route 33.
(c) Broad Street between Park Avenue and Mapleshade Avenue.
(d) Whitehorse-Mercerville Road from Locust to Whitehorse-
Hamilton Square Road.
(e) Whitehorse-Mercerville Road from Nottingham Way to
Klockner Road.
(2) Minimum area and yard requirements for new office construction,
conversions of existing structures and additions to existing
structures shall adhere to those of the R-15 Zone. The maximum
building floor area ratio is 0.10.
§ 550-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-161
1:1131
(3) Home occupations are permitted along the above-mentioned
highways.
(4) Off-street parking. See § 550-119F of this chapter for standards.
(5) All off-street parking areas must be paved and of sufficient size to
store vehicles of office employees and customers and must adhere
to parking standards established in this chapter.
(6) All off-street parking lots must be adequately buffered from
adjacent residential uses with a buffer strip at least five feet in
width, consisting of a solid or stockade fence six feet in height and
evergreen shrubs of at least five feet to six feet in height.
(7) Existing lots of record which have depths greater than those
minimum requirements of the R-7, R-10 and Community
Commercial Zone Districts may be permitted to be developed for
office purposes up to a depth equal to the average depth of the two
closest commercial zone district boundary lines. Such commercial
districts must be on the same side of the highway as the parcel of
land in question.
(8) One freestanding sign not to exceed eight square feet in area and
four feet in height is permitted. This sign shall not be located within
10 feet of a public street or right-of-way.
(9) No off-street parking area shall be placed within the front or side
yard setback areas.
(10) All new office construction and additions and alterations must
conform architecturally to the predominant residential character of
the area.
(11) Access drives must allow the use of common drives with adjacent
residential or commercial properties through cross easements. The
interconnection of a rear yard parking lot(s) must be provided to
adjacent residential or commercial properties through cross
easements.
J. Joint occupancy buildings. In the Highway Commercial Design District
II, one residential unit and a permitted business or businesses may be
located within the same building, provided that the following conditions
are met:
(1) The residential portion shall have an entrance upon a street, either
directly or via an unobstructed passage at least 10 feet wide, 10
feet in height and with a maximum depth of 35 feet.
(2) No floor may be used for both residential and business use.
(3) The nonresidential portion shall be limited to service and
professional uses.
§ 550-161 HAMILTON CODE § 550-161
1:1132
(4) Parking for the residential portion shall be on site.
K. Factory outlets.
(1) No more than 5% of the total gross floor area of the buildings on
site may be used for commercial retailing space.
(2) Only those products produced by the company may be sold in the
factory outlet retailing facility.
(3) The factory outlet retailing facility shall be located within a
principal building.
(4) An area separated or set aside from the parking area utilized by
employees shall be created for customers of the retail outlet and
shall provide one parking space for every 150 square feet of factory
outlet retailing space.
(5) No advertising signs for the factory outlet retailing facility shall be
located on any building, with the exception of a sign of a maximum
size of two by three feet at the entrance.
(6) Only 5% of the space on a freestanding sign may be used to
advertise the existence of the factory outlet retailing facility.
L. Golf courses and golf clubhouses.
(1) Golf courses and golf clubhouses shall be located and have direct
access to at least a minor collector or similar street of sufficient
traffic capacity to serve the use.
(2) No tee or green shall be located within 75 feet of a residential
property line; tees or greens shall be suitably screened or buffered.
(3) All clubhouses, dining and refreshment facilities, swimming pools,
tennis courts and the like shall be located at least 100 feet from all
property lines adjacent to or abutting a residence or residential
zone.
M. Home occupations. Any person may utilize his home for any lawful
activity which qualifies as a home occupation, provided that:
(1) No nonresident is employed in the home.
(2) There is no external display of goods or any outdoor activity or
advertising on the premises other than a nonilluminated
identification sign not to exceed 150 square inches. No external
light shall be focused on it.
(3) Any advertising shall list only the telephone number and not the
street address of the home.
(4) Such use does not occupy more than 25% of the gross floor area of
the home, excluding the garage area.
§ 550-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-161
1:1133
(5) No noise shall be audible to adjacent property owners or interfere
with the quiet enjoyment of their property.
(6) Such use of the home shall not adversely affect adjacent property
owners or interfere with their quiet enjoyment of their properties
by causing air pollution, including noxious odors, or water pollution
or electrical interference. No equipment or process shall be used in
such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes,
odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off
the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence,
or outside the dwelling unit, if conducted in other than a singlefamily
residence. In the case of electrical interference, no
equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible
interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises.
(7) There shall be no outside storage of any kind related to the home
occupation.
(8) No use shall require internal or external alterations to the dwelling
unit or the site upon which it is located. In no event shall the
appearance of the structure be altered or the occupation within the
residence be conducted in a manner which would cause the
premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of
colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs or the emissions of
sounds, noises and vibrations.
(9) No use shall involve construction features or the use of electrical or
mechanical equipment that would change the fire rating of the
structure.
(10) Any deliveries of materials to or from the residence shall be made
by either car, station wagon or other four-wheel vehicle or van
during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday.
(11)No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater
volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct
of such home occupation shall be met off the street and on the
driveway of the home. Vehicular traffic flow and parking shall not
be increased by more than one additional vehicle at a time.
(12) Hours of home occupation shall be between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m., Monday through Saturday.
(13)No firearms may be used in any form in said business, including
repair of nonfunctioning parts.
(14) Only one home occupation may be permitted on a lot.
N. Hospitals, medical institutions and philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
(1) The minimum lot size for all facilities shall be 10 acres.
§ 550-161 HAMILTON CODE § 550-161
1:1134
(2) Along all residential zoning districts, a buffer 100 feet wide,
consisting of massed evergreens, fencing and lawn, shall be
provided.
(3) The primary access to any facility must be to a right-of-way, 80 feet
or greater in width, and a fifty-foot cartway.
(4) All mechanical equipment which produces noise, vibration,
radiation or any other potentially adverse condition shall be
sheltered and so located on the property as not to create an
unhealthful situation on site or beyond the property lines.
(5) All provisions of Article IV relative to the provision of off-street
parking and loading shall be adhered to.
(6) No parking shall be permitted between any right-of-way line and
the front yard requirement of the zone in which the structures are
proposed to be located.
O. Hotels.
(1) Any hotel must meet the following minimum standards:
(a) A minimum of 150 guest rooms must be provided. Each room
must be a minimum of 350 square feet in area.
(b) A minimum of 20,000 square feet of conference space and
banquet space must be provided.
(c) A minimum of one indoor swimming pool must be provided.
The pool shall contain an area equal to 10 square feet per guest
room.
(d) A minimum of two square feet per guest room for lockers,
showers and toilet area must be provided.
(e) A minimum of two square feet per guest room for health club
space must be provided.
(2) Restaurant space equal to at least 6% of the floor area of the hotel
must be provided.
(3) A minimum of 1,200 square feet of retail space must be provided
within the hotel. Retail space is limited to those businesses which
are commonly found within hotels and provide services to hotel
guests. A maximum of 10% of the floor area of the hotel may be
devoted to such retail uses.
(4) Parking requirements are as follows:
(a) One parking space per guest room.
§ 550-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-161
1:1135
(b) One parking space for each employee. The shift having the
most employees shall be used to calculate employee parking
needs.
(c) One parking space for every three seats in the restaurant(s)
and/or lounge(s) and/or conference/banquet space. Where it
can be proved that shared parking will occur, reductions in the
required number of parking spaces may be permitted.
(5) The main lobby must contain a minimum area of 5,000 square feet,
exclusive of conference, banquet, restaurant, cocktail or lounge
space and retail space. This does not preclude restaurant, cocktail
or lounge space and retail space within the lobby so long as the
space is in addition to the minimum area required in Subsection
O(2) and (3) above. Not more than 50% of the lobby may be used
for commercial purposes such as restaurant, cocktail or lounge
space, and retail space.
(6) The maximum building height permitted is 45 feet. The maximum
building height may be increased to 85 feet if a minimum lobby/
atrium size of 15,000 square feet is provided, exclusive of
conference, banquet, restaurant, cocktail or lounge space, and
retail space mentioned above. This does not preclude restaurant,
cocktail or lounge space, and retail space within the atrium so long
as this space is in addition to the minimum area required in
Subsection O(2) and (3) above. Significant public features such as
gardens, sculptures, ornamental pools, plazas, etc., must be
provided within the lobby and atrium. Not more than 50% of the
atrium may be used for commercial purposes such as restaurant,
cocktail or lounge space, and retail space. A proposed increase of
height may be rejected or modified if found to have a potentially
adverse effect upon a residential zone.
(7) The minimum lot size for a hotel is 10 acres. The maximum FAR
permitted for hotels on individual lots of 10 acres or more is 0.28.
This maximum FAR will not apply when a hotel is part of an office
complex on a single lot. In such an instance, the maximum FAR of
the REO and/or RD Zone shall apply. In both instances, lobbies
(exclusive of conference, banquet, auditoriums, restaurant,
cocktail or lounge space and retail space), indoor and outdoor
swimming pools, health clubs (for guests only), public open space
(such as gardens, plazas, ornamental pools, etc.), any other indoor
and outdoor recreational areas and other nonleasable space shall
not be included in calculating the maximum FAR.
(8) The maximum impervious surface coverage (MIS) is 55%, whether
on an individual lot or on a lot combined with other permitted uses.
Those uses and areas noted in Subsection O(7) above, as excluded
from the FAR calculations, are also excluded from the MIS
calculation.
§ 550-161 HAMILTON CODE § 550-161
1:1136
(9) Decked parking lots are permitted and are excluded from FAR
calculations, but are included in MIS calculations.
(10) All the standards of the RD Zone and this chapter shall apply.
P. Nursing homes.
(1) The minimum lot area for a nursing home shall be five acres.
(2) The minimum lot width at the front building line shall be 300 feet.
(3) The minimum front yard shall be 75 feet.
(4) There shall be two side yards no less than 100 feet in aggregate
width, and neither yard shall be less than 50 feet.
(5) There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than 50 feet.
(6) Not more than 20% of the area of each lot may be occupied by
buildings.
(7) No buildings or structures shall exceed a height of 35 feet or 2 1/2
stories.
(8) Each nursing home shall be served by public water supply and
sanitary sewer facilities.
(9) Along each side or rear property line, an evergreen buffer strip
shall be provided.
(10) No service areas may be on any street frontage.
(11)Off-street loading and parking shall be required as per Article IV of
this chapter.
Q. Pinball and electronic game arcade. Pinball and electronic game
arcades may be permitted within shopping centers which meet the
criteria of this chapter in Highway Commercial Zone Districts, provided
that such establishments meet the following conditions:
(1) At least one adult manager must be present during all hours of
operation.
(2) Noise and vibration noise when measured at the entrance to such
an establishment may not exceed levels as outlined in Article IV of
this chapter.
(3) Indoor seating for customers shall not be permitted in such
establishments.
(4) Street furniture may not be located closer than 50 feet to the
entrance of such establishments.222
222. Editor's Note: Former subsection (q)(5), pertaining to former Ch. 18, Amusement Devices
and Games, of the Code, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 550-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-161
1:1137
R. Public and private schools and colleges.
(1) Public and private schools must meet the New Jersey State Board
of Education design standards as stipulated in Section 300 of "A
Guide for School House Planning and Construction," dated 1969,
and all subsequent revisions.
(2) On-site parking areas, theaters, auditoriums, stadiums,
gymnasiums, cafeterias and dormitories must be located at least
100 feet from any property line adjoining a residential zone and be
heavily buffered with evergreen plantings and fencing.
(3) All colleges and universities must prepare a community impact
analysis, including but not limited to a traffic impact study.
(4) All junior and senior high schools and colleges and universities
must have primary access to an eighty-foot-wide or wider right-ofway
and a fifty-foot-wide cartway.
S. Public utility uses.
(1) For the purposes of this chapter, the term "public utility uses" shall
include such uses as telephone dial equipment centers, power
substations and other public utility services.
(2) The proposed installation in a specific location must be reasonably
necessary for the satisfactory provision of service by the utility to
the neighborhood or area in which the particular use is to be
located.
(3) The design of any building in connection with such facilities must
conform to the general character of the area and not adversely
affect the safe, comfortable enjoyment of property rights in the
zone in which it is located.
(4) Adequate fences and other safety devices must be provided as may
be required. Fences, when used to enclose public utility facilities
such as electrical power substations, shall be built in accordance
with the applicable requirements of the New Jersey Board of Public
Utility Commissioners and the National Electrical Safety Code in
effect at the time of construction.
(5) Sufficient landscaping, including shrubs, trees and lawns, shall be
provided and maintained.
(6) Off-street parking shall be provided as determined by the Planning
Board during site plan review.
(7) All of the area, yard, building coverage and height requirements of
the respective zone and other applicable requirements of this
chapter must be met.
§ 550-161 HAMILTON CODE § 550-161
1:1138
(8) Public utility facilities, such as pumping stations, repeater stations,
electric substations, etc., which require a structure above grade
shall design the structure to harmonize with the character of the
neighborhood and shall have adequate fences and other safety
devices. A site plan shall be furnished to the Planning Board for
review and approval.
T. Raising and housing of swine in excess of 10.
(1) No building, run, exercise pen or other enclosure shall be closer to
any property or street line than 200 feet.
(2) All outside areas used for the enclosure of animals shall be fenced
with a four-foot-high chain-link fence or an equivalent barrier
satisfactory to the reviewing board.
(3) All outside enclosures visible from adjoining properties and rightsof-
way must be additionally screened with heavy evergreen
plantings at least four feet wide with a four-foot height at planting.
U. Raising, breeding and keeping of small animals raised for sale as pets
or for laboratory research purposes.
(1) No building, run, exercise pen or other enclosure shall be closer to
any property or street line than 200 feet.
(2) All outside areas used for the enclosure of animals shall be fenced
with a six-foot-high chain-link fence or an equivalent barrier
satisfactory to the reviewing board.
(3) All outside enclosures visible from adjoining properties and rightsof-
way must be additionally screened with heavy evergreen
plantings at least four feet wide with a four-foot height at planting.
V. Senior citizen housing.
(1) No site shall contain less than five acres.
(2) No building shall exceed five stories or 60 feet in height.
(3) Not more than 25% of the area may be occupied by buildings.
Maximum building coverage may be increased by 5% for any
proposal consisting of buildings with a maximum height of 35 feet.
(4) The minimum front, side and rear yards shall be not less than 50
feet.
(5) The minimum distance between buildings shall be 50 feet, except
for garages and other accessory buildings.
(6) The minimum right-of-way for any street, road or thoroughfare,
whether public or private, shall be 50 feet.
§ 550-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-161
1:1139
(7) The proposed development shall not be divided by a major collector
or arterial road.
(8) The project must be served by adequate utility services, including
storm drains, public water and public sewerage facilities.
(9) The maximum residential density shall not exceed 18 dwelling units
per acre.
(10) No dwelling unit shall contain more than two bedrooms.
(11) Individual dwelling units shall meet or exceed minimum design
requirements specified by the New Jersey Housing Finance Agency.
(12) One parking space per dwelling unit should be provided on site. No
parking space shall be located beyond 150 feet of any dwelling unit.
(13) A ten-foot landscaped and fenced buffer shall be located along all
property lines abutting nonresidential uses. Provision may be made
for a lighted pathway to any adjacent commercial use deemed by
the Township to be advantageous for senior citizen use.
(14) Landscaping and fencing buffering shall be located along all
property lines abutting residential uses where deemed appropriate
by the Township.
W. Motor freight terminals.
(1) The minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
(2) At least the first 50 feet from any street line and the first 25 feet
from any property line shall not be used for the parking, storing or
maneuvering of trucks. This area shall be planted and maintained
in lawn area or ground cover or landscaped with evergreen
shrubbery.
(3) Trucks, including tractor or trailer units, parked or stored on the
lot shall be arranged in an orderly manner in allocated spaces as
shown on an approved site plan.
(4) Trailer units shall be parked or stored only on paved surfaces, and
concrete surfaces shall be required under trailer support devices
(e.g., crank-down wheels or pads).
(5) All repair and service operations shall take place within completely
enclosed buildings in compliance with setback requirements for the
zone.
(6) At least 5% of the area devoted to truck parking and storage shall
be landscaped. The landscaping should be located in protected
areas along walkways, center islands and at the ends of bays.
§ 550-161 HAMILTON CODE § 550-161
1:1140
X. Fast food restaurant. A fast food restaurant may be permitted in
Highway Commercial Zones only, provided that the following conditions
are met:
(1) The minimum lot size is one acre. [Amended 9-16-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-064]
(2) The minimum frontage is 250 feet.
(3) The minimum lot depth is 260 feet.
(4) The minimum front setback is 60 feet.
(5) The minimum side yard requirement is 60 feet.
(6) There is a buffer strip adjacent to the front property line of 20 feet.
(7) Side and rear buffer strips of 15 feet must be provided. Where the
property abuts a residential use or district, these buffers must be
increased to 25 feet. In addition to landscaped buffering, fast food
restaurants shall be screened from abutting properties by a
decorative masonry or wooden fence of acceptable design, six feet
in height. No such wall or fence shall be located so as to obstruct
safe traffic vision. [Amended 9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-064223]
(8) There shall be at least one major means of access and egress,
divided by a median strip. Entrances and exits shall be located at
least 80 feet from a street intersection.
(9) Minimum off-street parking requirements shall be one space per
two seats plus one space per each full-time employee. [Amended
9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-064]
(10) Direct access from the roadway right-of-way line to the nearest
turn or parking space on the lot on which the fast food
establishment is located shall be an unobstructed distance of at
least 20 feet.
(11) All signs shall conform to the requirements of § 550-124 of this
chapter.
(12) All site work shall conform to the general regulations and site
design standards in Article IV of this chapter.
(13) All service, storage and trash areas shall be completely screened
from public view. All outside trash receptacles shall be located
within an enclosure constructed of decorative masonry material, a
minimum of four feet and a maximum of six feet in height, and shall
be provided with opaque gates of the same height.
223. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original subsection (x)(8), regarding
maximum lot coverage, which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 550-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-161
1:1141
(14) A fast food restaurant may not be located within 1,000 feet of a
school, church, synagogue or other place of worship, or a hospital,
nursing home or home for the aged. The distance shall be
measured between the two closest property lines. [Amended
2-5-2013 by Ord. No. 13-004]
(15) The minimum distance between driveways and adjacent property
lines shall be 20 feet measured from the curb return to an
extension of the side property line.
(16) The minimum distance between driveways on the site shall be 65
feet measured between the curb returns.
(17) Drive-in-window lanes shall be physically separated from the traffic
circulation system on the site by means of concrete-curbed and
landscaped islands which allow for a minimum width of two feet for
landscaping. The drive-in-window aisle shall have a minimum width
of 10 feet. The length of the drive-in lane shall be such as to permit
the stacking of a minimum of 10 vehicles. Allowance must be made
to allow customers who have received their orders to bypass
vehicles that are awaiting a special order.
(18) Lighting. In addition to standards in Article IV of this chapter, the
light source shall not be higher than the height of the roof.
(19) All utility lines on the site shall be installed underground.
(20) Sites shall be so designed as to not permit a conflict between
pedestrian and vehicular drive-in traffic in either the stacking lane
or drive-in exit.
Y. Radio or television broadcasting towers or antennas. Radio or television
broadcasting towers or antennas may be permitted in REO and RD
Zones only, provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) The towers and antennas must be associated with radio or
television broadcasting stations, including studios, auditoriums and
other rooms for performances, and including office and other space
incident to and necessary for the principal use, exclusive of
broadcasting towers and antennas.
Z. Single-user warehouse club. With regard to single-user warehouse
clubs, as defined in § 550-82D above, the following schedule shall apply,
notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter:
(1) Minimum lot area: 40 acres.
(2) Floor area ratio: 0.065.
(3) Maximum impervious area: 40%.
(4) Minimum frontage on an arterial road of 900 feet.
§ 550-161 HAMILTON CODE § 550-161
1:1142
§ 550-162. Garden apartments.
No garden apartment dwelling shall be constructed in the Township unless
the dwelling is part of an approved site plan and unless the following
minimum standards are met in addition to § 550-75 of this chapter:
(5) At least the first 300 feet adjacent to any arterial road and 70 feet
adjacent to any street and 50 feet adjacent to any lot line shall not
be used for parking and shall be planted and maintained in lawn
area or ground cover and landscaped with trees and evergreen
shrubbery. Any parking proposed within the front yard shall be
screened by a landscaped berm of at least four feet in height and
having a slope of three to one.
AA. Solar or photovoltaic energy-generating facility, ground-mounted and
mounted over surface parking. See § 550-142, Renewable-energygenerating
facilities, for conditional use standards.
A. Each dwelling unit and combined complex of dwelling units shall have a
compatible architectural theme with variations in design to provide
attractiveness to the development, which shall include consideration of
landscaping techniques, building or orientation to the site and to other
structures, topography, natural features and individual dwelling unit
design, such as varying unit width, staggering unit setbacks, providing
different exterior materials, changing rooflines and roof designs,
altering building heights and changing types of windows, shutters,
doors, porches, colors, and vertical or horizontal orientation of the
facades, singularly or in combination, for each dwelling unit.
B. All dwelling units shall be connected to approved and functioning
public water and sanitary sewer systems. Prior to approval, an
applicant must obtain a certificate from the appropriate agency
allocating capacity in the system to the garden apartment development.
Garden apartment units shall be connected to these systems prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
C. All parking facilities shall be on the same site as the building and
located within 150 feet of the nearest entrance of the building they are
intended to serve. Parking spaces shall be provided in areas designed
specifically for parking, and there shall be no parking along interior
streets. The total area devoted to both parking and interior streets shall
not exceed 35% of the tract.
D. Apartment buildings may consist of any configuration that meets the
prescribed area and yard requirements and does not exceed the
following overall or component building lengths: 200 feet on one plane;
340 feet on any angle; 500 feet along the center line. Building coverage
shall not exceed 20% of the tract area. Buildings shall provide one
opening at ground level at least every 250 feet, measured along the
center line. This opening shall be a minimum of 15 feet in clear width
§ 550-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-162
1:1143
and height and shall be at an elevation enabling emergency vehicle
access through the opening.
E. No portion of any dwelling unit shall be a basement.
F. Each dwelling unit shall have two separate means of egress to the
ground, except that any windowsill which is 12 feet or less above the
ground level below it shall be considered a separate means of egress.
G. In addition to any storage area contained inside individual dwelling
units, there shall be provided for each dwelling unit 200 cubic feet of
storage area, in a convenient, centrally located area in the basement or
ground floor of the dwelling structure, where personal belongings and
effects may be stored without constituting a fire hazard and where said
belongings and effects may be kept locked and separated from the
belongings of other occupants. In addition, there shall be a minimum
common storage area in each building of 50 cubic feet per dwelling unit
located convenient to the outside ground level for bicycles,
perambulators and similar types of equipment.
H. No outside area or equipment shall be provided for the hanging of
laundry or the outside airing of laundry in any manner. A laundry shall
be provided within each building with sufficient area and equipment for
the laundering and artificial drying of the laundry belonging to the
occupants of each building.
I. Each apartment building shall contain a single master television
antenna system, which shall serve all dwelling units within the building.
J. Each garden apartment dwelling unit shall have the following minimum
floor areas:
Type of Unit
Floor Area
(square feet)
Efficiency or studio 500
One-bedroom 700
Two-bedroom 800
(1) Each additional bedroom shall require that a minimum of 200
additional square feet be added to the gross floor area of the
garden apartment dwelling.
K. Trash and garbage. Each garden apartment complex shall provide for
the private removal of trash and garbage and shall provide and locate
steel dumpster containers convenient to the apartment dwelling units
which will be served by such a container. All dumpsters shall be
screened from view by decorative masonry walls, shrubs or fences
satisfactory to the municipal agency. They shall be located on concrete
pads with a pounds-per-square-inch rating sufficient to withstand the
weight of garbage disposal trucks.
§ 550-162 HAMILTON CODE § 550-162
1:1144
§ 550-163. Townhouses.
No townhouse dwelling shall be constructed in the Township unless the
dwelling is part of an approved site plan and unless the following minimum
standards are met, in addition to § 550-75 of this chapter:
L. Maximum size of buildings. No more than 16 dwelling units shall be
contained in any one building, and there shall be no more than four
dwelling units in any unbroken line. A setback of not less than eight feet
shall be deemed a satisfactory offset in the building line.
A. Each dwelling unit and combined complex of dwelling units shall have a
compatible architectural theme with variations in design to provide
attractiveness to the development, which shall include consideration of
landscaping techniques, building orientation to the site and to other
structures, topography, natural features and individual dwelling unit
design, such as varying widths, staggering unit setbacks, providing
different exterior materials, changing rooflines and roof designs,
altering building heights and changing types of windows, shutters,
doors, porches, colors, and vertical or horizontal orientation of the
facades, singularly or in combination, for each dwelling unit.
B. In order to prevent the development of long and monotonous buildings
and ridgelines which serve to increase the sense of density, lack interest
and liken the development to a barracks, overall structures of attached
townhouses shall consist of no more than eight townhouse dwelling
units. There shall be at least three different ridgeline heights in each
overall structure of attached townhouses, which shall vary by at least
three feet. In any overall structure of attached townhouses, no more
than two adjacent dwelling units shall have the same setback. Setbacks
shall vary by at least eight feet.
C. The monotony of long overall structures of attached townhouses is
considerably diminished when such structures are sited on gently
rolling lands. In such instances, the municipal agency may approve the
construction of overall structures of attached townhouses containing
nine or 10 townhouse dwelling units.
D. All dwelling units shall be connected to approved and functioning
public water and sanitary sewer systems. Prior to approval, an
applicant must obtain a certificate from the appropriate agency
allocating capacity in the system to the townhouse development.
Townhouse units shall be connected to these systems prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
E. No townhouse dwelling unit shall be less than 16 feet wide. Building
coverage shall not exceed 20% of the tract area.
F. No outside area or equipment shall be provided for the hanging of
laundry or the outside airing of laundry in any manner. Each townhouse
§ 550-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-163
1:1145
§ 550-164. Planned developments. [Amended 6-16-1993 by Ord. No.
93-031]
unit shall have specific areas allocated with enough floor space to
contain a washing machine and a dryer.
G. Each building shall contain a single master television antenna system,
which shall serve all dwelling units within the building.
H. Each townhouse dwelling unit shall have the following minimum floor
areas:
Type of Unit
Floor Area
(square feet)
One-bedroom 800
Two-bedroom 1,000
Three-bedroom 1,200
(1) Each additional bedroom shall require that a minimum of 250
additional square feet be added to the gross floor area of the
townhouse dwelling. No townhouse unit shall be located above
another townhouse unit.
I. Minimum yard areas shall be measured horizontally in feet and shall be
measured away from the front, side and rear of each building. The total
minimum distance between buildings shall be the sum of two abutting
yard areas. No building, as measured radially from any corner, shall be
closer to any other building corner than the combined distances of the
side yard requirements for each building. The combined distance of two
side yards shall exclude any driveway or vehicular access, such
driveway or vehicular access width being in addition to the combined
side yard width.
J. Trash and garbage. Each townhouse complex shall provide for the
private removal of trash and garbage. Townhouse units shall be
designed to provide for storage of trash and garbage, subject to
municipal agency approval. The use of outside dumpster containers is
prohibited.
A. Planned neighborhoods and planned communities.
(1) Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings.
(a) Detached dwelling units, which shall account for at least 20%
of all residential units.
(b) Garden apartment dwelling units, as per § 550-75A, B, C, E(2),
(4), (5), (6), (7) and (8), F, G and H and § 550-162.
(c) Townhouse dwelling units, as per § 550-75A, B, C, E(2), (4), (5),
(6), (7) and (8), F, G and H and § 550-163.
§ 550-163 HAMILTON CODE § 550-164
1:1146
(d) Uses permitted in the NC District, including supermarkets, in
accordance with standards specified in § 550-76 of this
chapter. No more than 5% of either a planned neighborhood or
a planned community tract may be devoted to such uses.
(e) Uses permitted in the REO District in accordance with the
standards specified for such uses in § 550-81 of this chapter,
provided that such uses are permitted in planned communities
only; and provided, further, that not more than 25% of the total
tract area for the planned community may be devoted to such
uses and not less than 5% of the total tract area for the planned
community shall be devoted to such uses. If an applicant can
demonstrate through a market analysis that this requirement
is impractical, the municipal agency may reconsider this
requirement.
(2) Accessory uses permitted.
(a) Pools.
1. A community swimming pool(s) located within the common
space to service the residents of the planned neighborhood
development or planned community development shall be
permitted.
2. No swimming pool shall be permitted in conjunction with
any dwelling unit, except for a child's wading pool, which
shall be no larger than six feet in diameter and 18 inches in
depth. The wading pool shall be stored when not in use.
(b) Off-street parking and private garages.
(c) Fences. (See § 550-114.)
1. Single-family detached dwelling units.
a. Fences shall be no more than five feet in height.
b. Fences shall complement the structural style, type and
design of the dwelling unit.
c. A construction permit is required for the installation
of fencing.
d. A resolution of approval from the open space
organization is required for the issuance of a permit
for the installation of fencing.
2. Townhouse units.
a. Fences shall be no more than five feet in height.
b. Fences should complement the structural style, type
and design of the townhouse unit.
§ 550-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-164
1:1147
c. A construction permit is required for the installation
of fencing.
d. A resolution of approval from the open space
organization is required for the installation of fencing.
3. Apartments/condominiums. No fences shall be permitted
for any apartment/condominium unit.
4. Any fence which was installed prior to July 1, 1986,
without a construction permit shall be permitted to remain
on the property, provided that:
a. The fence complements the structural style, type and
design of the unit.
b. The owner obtains a resolution of approval for the
fence from the open space organization.
c. The owner obtains a building permit from the
Construction Official.
(d) Signs.
(e) Temporary construction trailers and one sign, not exceeding
100 square feet, advertising the prime contractor,
subcontractor(s), architect, financial institution and similar
data, for the period of construction beginning with the
issuance of a construction permit and concluding with the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy or one year, whichever is
less, provided that said trailer(s) and sign are on the site where
construction is taking place and are set back at least 15 feet
from all street and lot lines.
(f) Decks and patios.
1. Single-family detached dwelling units. Minimum
requirements shall be:
a. Side yard setback, each: 10 feet.
b. Rear yard setback: 18 feet.
c. Maximum lot coverage: The size of the deck shall be
computed in determining the maximum lot coverage,
which shall not exceed 25% of the lot area.
d. Height. Decks shall be no higher than four feet above
grade.
2. Townhouse units. Minimum requirements shall be:
§ 550-164 HAMILTON CODE § 550-164
1:1148
a. Side yard setback, each: one foot. In the case of end
townhouse units, decks and patios shall not extend
beyond the side building line of the townhouse unit.
b. Rear yard setback: Decks and patios shall not extend
more than 10 feet from the rear building line of the
townhouse unit. This distance shall be measured from
a point on the rear building line farthest from the rear
lot line.
c. Maximum lot coverage: not applicable.
d. Height. Decks shall be no higher than four feet above
grade. (This requirement does not apply to
developments whose building elevations were
previously approved and showed decks exceeding this
height.)
e. Decks and patios shall not be included in calculating
the minimum setbacks required between townhouse
buildings or between townhouse buildings and
apartment/condominium buildings or between
townhouse buildings and single-family detached
homes or between townhouse buildings and the site's
property line.
3. Apartment/condominium units. Decks and patios shall not
be permitted accessory uses to apartment/condominium
units.
(g) Sheds.
1. Single-family detached dwelling units.
a. Only one shed may be permitted on a single-family
detached dwelling unit lot.
b. Sheds shall be located in the rear yard.
c. Sheds shall complement the structural style, type and
design of the dwelling unit.
d. The area of a shed shall be considered in calculating
the permitted building coverage in the zone, which is
a maximum of 25% of the lot area.
e. A shed shall not exceed 100 square feet in area and 10
feet in height. The dimension of any side of a shed
shall not exceed 10 feet.
f. A construction permit is required for the construction
of all sheds.
§ 550-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-164
1:1149
g. A resolution of approval from the open space
organization is required for the issuance of a
construction permit for the construction of a shed.
2. Townhouse units.
a. Only one shed may be permitted on a townhouse unit
lot.
b. Sheds shall be located in the rear yard.
c. Sheds shall complement the structural style, type and
design of the townhouse unit.
d. The area of a shed shall be considered in calculating
the permitted building coverage in the zone, which is
a maximum of 25% of the lot area.
e. A shed shall not exceed 64 square feet in area and
eight feet in height. The dimension of any side of a
shed shall not exceed eight feet.
f. A construction permit is required for the construction
of all sheds.
g. A resolution of approval from the open space
organization is required for the issuance of a
construction permit for the construction of a shed.
3. Any shed which was installed prior to July 1, 1986, without
a construction permit shall be permitted to remain on the
property, provided that:
a. The shed complements the structural style, type and
design of the unit.
b. The owner obtains a resolution of approval for the
shed from the open space organization.
c. The owner obtains a building permit from the
Construction Official.
(h) Porches.
1. Single-family detached dwelling units. Minimum
requirements:
a. Side yard setback, each: 10 feet.
b. Rear yard setback: 18 feet.
c. Maximum lot coverage: The size of the porch shall be
computed in determining the maximum lot coverage,
which shall not exceed 25% of the lot area.
§ 550-164 HAMILTON CODE § 550-164
1:1150
d. The porch shall be finished with the same roofing and
siding materials and in the same colors as the
principal building.
e. Not less than 40% of the area of each side shall be
either screened or open. The porch shall not be
heated.
f. Porches are prohibited in front yards and side yards.
g. Heights. The maximum height of a porch shall be 15
feet, except where the rear yard setback and/or side
yard setback as defined in Subsection A(5) of this
section are not met. In those instances, the maximum
height of the porch shall be one story.
2. Townhouse and apartment/condominium units. Porches
are not permitted accessory uses to townhouse and
apartment/condominium units.
(i) Building additions.
1. Single-family detached dwelling units.
a. Building additions shall be permitted as long as they
conform to all bulk and yard requirements
established.
b. All additions shall conform to the architecture, colors
and materials of the original dwelling unit.
2. Townhouse and apartment/condominium units. Building
additions to townhouse and apartment/condominium units
shall not be permitted.
(j) Boats, campers and trailers. No boats, campers or trailers of
any type shall be permitted on the property.
(k) Mopeds, motorcycles. No motorcycles or mopeds shall be
permitted on any lawn or sidewalk area and shall only be
parked in vehicle parking areas or driveways of individual lots.
(3) Maximum building height. No building may exceed 35 feet in
height, except as provided in the following provision: Garden
apartments and townhouses may not exceed 45 feet in height or
three stories.
(4) Maximum residential density.
(a) Planned neighborhoods shall be developed at a gross density of
not more than six dwelling units per acre, excluding any
acreage devoted to the optional neighborhood commercial
uses.
§ 550-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-164
1:1151
(b) Planned communities shall be developed at a gross density of
not more than eight dwelling units per acre, excluding any
acreage devoted to the optional neighborhood commercial
uses and the required research and development uses.
(5) Area and yard requirements (detached dwellings):
Minimum requirements
Principal building:
Lot area (square feet) 7,000
Lot frontage (feet) 70
Lot width (feet) 70
Lot depth (feet) 90
Side yard, each (feet) 10
Front yard (feet) 30
Rear yard (feet) 30
Accessory building:
Distance to side line (feet) 6
Distance to rear line (feet) 6
Distance to other building
(feet)
10
Maximum requirements
Building coverage (percent) 25%
(6) Minimum off-street parking and loading.
(a) Dwelling units shall each provide two parking spaces per unit.
(b) Neighborhood commercial uses shall provide parking spaces
as provided in § 550-76I of this chapter and loading areas as
provided in § 550-76H.
(c) Research, engineering and office uses shall provide parking
spaces as provided in § 550-81I of this chapter and loading
spaces as provided in § 550-81H
(d) See § 550-119 for additional standards.
(7) Permitted signs: see § 550-124.
(8) Open space requirements: see Subsection B below.
(a) Temporary sales office trailer.
1. The trailer shall be located on the same lot as the principal
permitted use and shall meet all setback requirements for
principal buildings in the zone.
§ 550-164 HAMILTON CODE § 550-164
1:1152
2. The trailer shall be used only until the first model building
is suitable for occupancy. The sales office shall then be
relocated to a unit(s) within the building. The trailer, all
related improvements and appurtenances must be
removed and the trailer site restored within 30 days of the
office relocation.
3. The trailer shall be shown on the site plan for the principal
permitted use and shall be reviewed on an individual case
basis in accordance with the performance standards in
§ 550-120.
B. Open space requirements.
(1) A minimum buffer of 100 feet shall be provided where any planned
neighborhood development abuts Veterans' Park. This buffer shall
be left in its natural state where wooded and supplemented with
landscaping where necessary.
(2) Open space shall be optimally related to the overall plan and design
of the development and improved to best suit the purpose(s) for
which it is intended. Land utilized for street rights-of-way shall not
be included as part of the open space percent requirements. Land
to be devoted to public purposes may be offered to the Township or
may be owned and maintained by an open space organization. Any
lands intended to be offered to the Township for public purposes
shall be so declared prior to preliminary approval. All lands not
offered to and/or not accepted by the Township shall be owned and
maintained by an open space organization. All streets within the
development shall be dedicated to the Township.
(3) All bikeways in planned neighborhood developments must connect
with the existing system in Veterans' Park.
(4) Any lands offered to the Township shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) The minimum size of each parcel offered shall be two acres.
(b) Lands offered for recreational purposes shall be improved by
the developer, including equipment, ways and landscaping, in
order to qualify the lands for acceptance by the Township.
(c) Any lands offered to the Township shall be subject to review by
the Planning Board, which in its review and evaluation of the
suitability of such land shall be guided by the Master Plan of
the Township, by the ability to assemble and relate such lands
to an overall plan, and by the accessibility and potential utility
of such lands. The Planning Board may request an opinion from
other public agencies or individuals as to the advisability of the
Township's accepting any lands to be offered to the Township.
§ 550-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-164
1:1153
(d) Every parcel of land offered to and accepted by the Township
shall be conveyed to the Township by deed at the time final
plan approval is granted by the Township. The deed shall
contain such restrictions as may reasonably be required by the
Planning Board to effectuate the provisions of Subsection B(4)
hereinabove pertaining to the use of such areas.
(e) Slopes exceeding 15% may only account for up to 10% of
minimum open space requirements.
(f) Water bodies may only account for up to 10% of minimum open
space requirements.
(g) Both slopes exceeding 15% and water bodies may only account
for up to 12% of minimum open space requirements.
(5) An open space organization established for the purpose of owning
and maintaining common lands and facilities, including
conservation, open space, floodplain, recreation and park areas,
shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 and the following
provisions:
(a) Membership in a created open space organization by all
property owners shall be mandatory. Such required
membership in any created open space organization and the
responsibilities upon the members shall be in writing between
the organization and the individual in the form of a covenant,
with each member agreeing to his liability for his pro rata
share of the organization's cost, and provided that the
Township shall be a party beneficiary to such covenant entitled
to enforce its provisions. The terms and conditions of said
covenant shall be reviewed by both the Township Attorney and
the Planning Board Attorney prior to final approval.
(b) Executed deeds shall be tendered to the Township
simultaneously with the granting of final approval, stating that
the prescribed use(s) of the lands in the common ownership
shall be absolute and not subject to reversion for possible
future development.
(c) The open space organization shall be responsible for liability
insurance, municipal taxes, maintenance of land and any
facilities that may be erected on any land deeded to the open
space organization and shall hold the Township harmless from
any liability. The applicant shall certify to the municipal agency
that all lands and appurtenant facilities dedicated to the open
space organization and/or the municipality shall be free and
clear of any and all liens and encumbrances. Additionally, all
appurtenant facilities shall not be leased to the open space
organization by the applicant.
§ 550-164 HAMILTON CODE § 550-164
1:1154
(d) Any assessment levied by the open space organization may
become a lien on the private properties in the development.
The duly created open space organization shall be allowed to
adjust the assessment to meet changing needs, and any deeded
lands may be sold, donated or in any other way conveyed to the
Township for public purposes only. Until such time as the
applicant relinquishes his interests in an open space
organization, he shall assume a proportionate share of such
assessments. Prior to the granting of final approval, the
applicant shall develop an estimate of what assessments will be
over a three-year period of time. Estimates of assessments and
actual assessments shall include expected annual operating
expenses as well as a reserve for future repairs and
maintenance, as well as an inflationary increment, such as a
cost-of-living index. Such estimates shall be required to be
shown to all prospective purchasers and/or renters of dwelling
units.
(e) The open space organization initially created by the developer
shall clearly describe in its bylaws the rights and obligations of
any homeowner and tenant in the planned development, along
with the covenant and model deeds and the articles of
incorporation of the association, prior to the granting of final
approval by the Township.
(f) Part of the development proposals submitted to and approved
by the Township shall be provisions to ensure that control of
the open space organization will be transferred to the
individual lot owners in the development based on a
percentage of the dwelling units sold and/or occupied,
together with assurances in the bylaws that the open space
organization shall have the maintenance responsibilities for all
lands to which they hold title.
(g) Facilities permitted in neighborhood business, community
commercial and research, engineering and office districts shall
be charged an assessment by the open space organization,
based upon the relative benefits received from the use of
roads, lighting facilities and aesthetic values of the open space
system in the community.
(h) Voting within the open space organization shall be based upon
the degree of economic interest which the owners of singlefamily
houses, townhouses or condominiums and the renters of
apartments have in the community.
(i) Should the development consist of a number of stages,
allowances shall be made in the open space organization's
documents to allow for the enlargement of that organization by
the addition of new sections of the development.
§ 550-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-164
1:1155
(j) There shall be no clause in the open space organization's
documents that would bar it from taking legal action against
the developer.
(k) A mechanism for the disposal of internal disputes shall be
established within the open space organization's documents.
Compulsory arbitration before a third party shall be
established so that a dispute may be internally resolved before
it reaches a legalistic level.
(l) Methods of change shall be provided for the document.
(m) Responsibilities of open space organization and Township.
1. The open space organization shall also be responsible for
the following within all common property (including
parking lots and drives and streets not dedicated to the
Township):
a. Maintenance of all utilities and infrastructure
(including, but not limited to, sanitary sewers, storm
drains, paving, curbs, sidewalks, etc.).
b. Payment for the cost of lighting of streets, parking lots
and/or other outdoor and interior lighting.
c. Provision of trash collection and removal.
d. Provision of snowplowing.
2. On the streets dedicated to the Township, the Township
shall be responsible for the following:
a. Maintenance of all utilities and infrastructure
(including but not limited to sanitary sewers, storm
drains, paving, etc.). Curbs and sidewalks, however,
shall be the responsibility of the owners of detached
single-family homes which front on the dedicated
streets.
b. Provision of streetlighting.
c. Provision of trash collection and removal for those
single-family detached homes which front on the
dedicated streets.
d. Provision of snowplowing.
3. The above provisions which outline the responsibilities of
the Township and the open space organization shall be
made part of each deed, public offering statement, master
deed, unit deeds and other bylaws of the homeowners'
association.
§ 550-164 HAMILTON CODE § 550-164
1:1156
(n) Any changes regarding structures or physical conditions in the
planned neighborhood development or planned community
development by the open space organization or by the
individual unit owner must be in accordance with the
organization's covenants, deeds, restrictions and/or bylaws.
Building or other permits must be obtained for such changes,
and it is the applicant's responsibility to document that what is
proposed is in accordance with the aforementioned
organization documents, and provided that said changes do not
require Planning Board approval. Any changes regarding
structures or physical conditions in the planned neighborhood
development or planned community development not in
accordance with the aforementioned organization documents
require Planning Board approval.
(6) Should the proposed development consist of a number of stages,
the Planning Board may require that open space acreage,
proportionate in size to the stage being considered for final
approval, be set aside simultaneously with the granting of final
approval for that particular stage, even though these lands may be
located in a different section of the overall development.
C. General requirements.
(1) Prior to preliminary approval, the developer shall submit a
preliminary public sewer system plan, which will serve the dwelling
units in the development, together with letters from the
appropriate municipal, county and state officials indicating the
feasibility of such a sewer plan and the fact that the sewer
treatment plant has sufficient capacity to serve the development.
(2) Any proposal for planned development may include provisions for
the phasing of construction over a period of years, provided that
the following terms and conditions, intended to protect the
interests of the public and of the residents, occupants and owners
of the proposed development, are met:
(a) Where the development is intended to be phased over a
number of years, prior to the granting of preliminary approval
for the entire planned development, there shall be an
explanation, including appropriate maps, indicating the
location, number and type of units to be constructed in each
phase and the priority of each phase. Each development phase
shall indicate its relationship to the circulation and utilities
systems completed up to that point in order to assure their
adequacy to serve the total development.
(b) Preliminary approval shall be granted for the complete
planned development proposal before final approval shall be
granted for any phase.
§ 550-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-164
1:1157
(c) Each development phase shall maintain a proportional balance
of residential uses and nonresidential uses, recreational
facilities and open space to serve the residents. For all
development phases subsequent to the first phase, no building
permits may be issued for construction of units in any such
phase until construction of preceding phases is substantially
completed. ("Substantially completed" shall be taken to mean
that, as a minimum, all exterior finish, paving, fine grading,
seeding and landscaping shall have been completed.)
(3) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building or part
thereof until all streets, drainage, parking facilities and sewer
facilities servicing said structure are properly completed and
functioning.
(4) Commercial facilities shall be designed and intended to serve
residents of the planned development.
(5) Recreational areas and facilities shall be readily accessible to all
residents of the planned development via walkways and/or bicycle
paths.
(6) If a development is to be staged over a period of years, a phased
development plan shall be shown prior to preliminary approval. The
net density of the land development in each phased area shall be
shown with a timetable for development.
(7) Open space shall be distributed throughout the development in an
equitable manner.
D. Special requirements for all developments within the planned
neighborhood districts adjacent to Hamilton Veterans' Park. The
following clause shall be included in all public offering statements for
these properties:
§ 550-164 HAMILTON CODE § 550-164
1:1158
§ 550-165. Evaluation standards and criteria for planned
developments.224 [Added 9-18-1996 by Ord. No. 96-042]
The physical appearance of a planned development shall be of the highest
quality. It is necessary that planned developments adhere to a set of
standards and criteria that addresses a variety of site plan considerations,
including layout, building massing and form, and landscaping. This will
result in an overall coordinated appearance for a particular development.
The standards and criteria listed below must be incorporated into a general
development plan submission for a planned development. Design covenants
shall incorporate, complement and expand upon these standards and
criteria. Such design covenants may be required by the Planning Board
as part of the general development plan application, review and approval
process.
"Please be advised that your development is located adjacent to
Veterans' Park, which contains lighted ball fields and tennis courts,
a soccer field, court games (croquet, bocce, shuffleboard, etc.) with
equipment available. In addition, there are playgrounds, walking,
biking and jogging trails and the historic Abbott Farm complex. The
athletic fields are used for both league play and special regional sports
tournaments. You should expect that there will be increased noise
and traffic when the fields and courts are in use. You should also
expect to see the fields and courts lighted in the evenings, with some
lighting spillover onto your development. The Township of Hamilton
also sponsors events in the park. Among these, the Fourth of July
is celebrated with an evening fireworks display and, in the Fall, the
Township sponsors Septemberfest, when the park is transformed into
a day-long festival with various contests, displays, demonstrations,
musicians, clowns, hayrides and food booths. A certain amount of
inconvenience may also be expected from such festivals and special
events."
A. Site layout.
(1) Passive solar design and orientation of buildings is encouraged.
(2) Through the on-site circulation and building layout there shall be
minimum conflict between service vehicles, private automobiles
and pedestrians.
(3) Visitor building entrances and vehicular entrance driveways shall
be readily identifiable and accessible to the first-time visitor.
(4) The visual impact of large parking lots in front of buildings and
along street frontages shall be minimized with landscaping,
earthen berms and pedestrian systems and by making parking lots
smaller.
224. Editor’s Note: This section, formerly § 550-167, was renumbered 4-2-2019 by Ord. No.
96-042.
§ 550-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-165
1:1159
(5) Building entries shall be highlighted by such features, including:
(a) Outdoor patios;
(b) Display windows;
(c) Ceremonial entry porte cocheres;
(d) Plazas, paver block or brick crosswalks or other landscape
features;
(e) Overhangs and peaked roof forms;
(f) Specially treated architectural walls;
(g) Covered walkways;
(h) Awnings and arcades;
(i) Raised corniced parapets over the door;
(j) Recesses and projections;
(k) Arches;
(l) Architectural details, such as tile work and molding;
(m) Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped
areas and/or places for sitting.
(6) Structures and uses shall be arranged and clustered to maximize
opportunities for shared circulation, parking, loading, pedestrian
walkways and plazas, recreation areas, transit-related facilities,
and day-and-night security surveillance.
B. Building massing and form.
(1) The architectural character of each proposed building or structure
shall be of contemporary design and style.
(2) Buildings shall generally have a horizontal appearance brought
about by the use of horizontal bands and fascia to minimize the
verticality of the structure. Materials, colors and finishes shall be
coordinated on all exterior elevations of each building to achieve
symphony of expression.
(3) No commercial statements of the occupant's products or services
shall be allowed as part of the building facade or elevation.
(4) Architectural designs shall be evaluated in terms of the sensitive
integration of form, textures and colors with the particular
landscape and topographic characteristics of each individual site.
(5) Groups of related buildings shall be designed to present a
harmonious appearance in terms of style and use of exterior
materials, fenestration and roof type.
§ 550-165 HAMILTON CODE § 550-165
1:1160
(6) Accessory buildings shall be architecturally treated in the same
manner as principal structures.
(7) Building exterior walls shall be articulated to reduce the scale and
the uniform appearance of buildings and to provide visual interest
that will be consistent with the community's identity, character and
scale. The intent is to encourage a more human scale that residents
and workers will be able to identify with their community. As such,
one or a combination of the following shall be utilized in a planned
development:
(a) Roofline variation.
(b) Arcades, display windows and entry areas.
(c) Grouping into smaller or multiple structures.
(d) Mature landscaping and land form manipulation.
(e) Wall texture placement and change.
(f) Clustering small-scale elements such as planter walls around
the major form.
(g) Creation of a horizontal and vertical shadow line.
(h) Offsets and/or breaks in the building line.
(i) Patterned walls.
(j) Fenestration.
(k) Color change.
(8) Radical theme structures or signage, building and roof forms which
draw unnecessary attention from streets to the building shall not
be permitted.
(9) The primary building objective is to maintain an architecturally
harmonious development. Each building shall be sensitive to the
immediate neighboring structure. Drastic variations in scale,
texture or colors shall not be permitted. Opportunities to provide
walkway systems to adjoining buildings, including common plazas
or courtyards, are encouraged.
(10) Each building shall be required to limit the consumption of energy
through adherence to New Jersey State Energy Code requirements.
(11) All facades of a building which are visible from adjoining properties
and/or public streets should contribute to the pleasing scale
features of the building and encourage community integration by
featuring characteristic similar to the front facade.
C. Building appearance.
§ 550-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-165
1:1161
(1) To maintain a high standard of construction and appearance and to
provide interesting and tasteful exteriors, the exterior walls of each
building shall be constructed of durable permanent architectural
materials compatible with campus-like standards, tastefully
handled, i.e., carefully selected brick; stone with a weathered face
or polished, fluted or broken-faced. Predominant exterior building
materials shall not include smooth-faced concrete block, tilt-up
concrete panels or prefabricated steel panels.
(2) Pre-engineered metal buildings, industrial-type structures
featuring predominantly painted exteriors, and corrugated metalsided
or clapboard aluminum-sided "Butler" type buildings shall
not be permitted.
(3) All facade materials must be maintenance-free. There shall be no
exposed common concrete block on the exterior of any building,
and painted concrete block shall not be permitted.
(4) Window treatment shall be required along the front and sides of all
noncommercial buildings.
(5) Drainage pipes on building surfaces must be on the interior and not
exposed.
(6) Building roofs are to be uncluttered. Vertical roof projections such
as towers, vents, stacks or roof-mounted equipment shall be
integrated into the architecture. All penetrations through the roof
(i.e., mechanical equipment or skylights) must be organized in a
manner that is integral to the architectural form of the building or
completely screened from view by parapet walls or approved
enclosures. Screens shall be attractive in appearance and reflect or
complement the architecture of the building to which they belong.
(7) Design of canopies shall be in keeping with the design of the
building.
(8) Rear loading areas shall be screened using architectural walls.
D. Building color and texture.
(1) Simple and uniform texture patterns are encouraged to create
shadow patterns which will reduce the high visibility of the
building.
(2) Variations in color shall be kept to a minimum.
(3) Colors shall be subdued in tone.
(4) Accent colors may be used to express corporate identity.
E. Parking and circulation.
(1) Each building site must include adequate off-street automobile
parking and loading facilities, and no parking or loading facilities
§ 550-165 HAMILTON CODE § 550-165
1:1162
shall be permitted on any street, entrance drive, or any place
other than in an approved space. Off-street parking and loading
design shall conform to those identified in § 550-119, although
actual design may be based on site experiences at other locations.
It may not be necessary to pave the entire parking area established
by these ratios where it can be demonstrated that the minimum
chapter requirements are in excess of need. In such cases, the land
shall be reserved for future parking and set aside as open space, to
be installed if occupancy changes require additional parking.
(2) The Urban Land Institute's "Shared Parking Analysis" shall be used
by the applicant when it is deemed appropriate by the Planning
Board.
(3) Parking areas should provide safe, convenient and efficient access.
They should be placed next to large buildings in order to shorten
the distance to other buildings and sidewalks and to reduce the
overall scale of the paved surface. If buildings are located closer to
streets, the scale of the complex is reduced, pedestrian traffic is
encouraged, and architectural details take on added importance.
(4) All parking areas shall be screened from streets and adjacent
parcels by earth berms and landscaping to assure that the visual
effect of large paved areas and standing automobiles is minimized.
The natural landscape and building views should predominate.
Parking areas shall also be subdivided by islands containing trees
and other landscape materials. Planting islands shall be located at
selected intervals where they will aid in reducing the visual
expanse of parking areas.
(5) Parking areas shall be located to maximize the potential for shared
parking between on- and off-site complementary uses. Parking
areas shall be designed and located so as to facilitate transit,
bicycle and pedestrian access. Parking spaces closest to the
building entrances, in order, shall be reserved for:
(a) People with disabilities (all types of parking);
(b) Employee vanpool vehicles; and
(c) Employee carpool vehicles.
(6) Bicycle lockers and/or stands shall be provided as close to building
entrances as possible and may be located in front of a building. If
the building is served by a public bus line or if a private company
bus is expected to transport employees, a bus pullout or parking
area and a bus shelter shall be provided as close to a building
entrance as possible, either within the street right-of-way or on the
site. Private bus service shall be encouraged to carry employees to
nearby commercial areas at lunchtime.
§ 550-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-165
1:1163
(7) The number of vehicular access driveways per lot shall be subject
to Planning Board review to ensure landscape continuity within the
setbacks while allowing the necessary flexibility for development of
individual lots. As a general planning guide, lot access shall be
limited and appropriately spaced. Consolidation of access drives on
adjacent lots shall be encouraged in conjunction with cross
easements, particularly when adjacent parcels are developed
simultaneously. This consolidation will reduce the number and area
of driveway openings on a given length of roadway, as well as
provide applicants greater latitude in developing their sites.
(8) Provide continuous pedestrian and bicycle access to all uses within
and between developments and provide on-site directional signage
identifying the location of all uses within the planned development.
Barriers to handicapped and elderly persons shall be minimized.
(9) Textured crosswalks are to be used where pedestrians come in
contact with vehicular traffic. All walks must be well-lighted with
bollards. On-site pedestrian linkages must connect buildings to
external perimeter pedestrian systems.
F. Landscaping.
(1) Landscaping shall be required in those areas that are designated as
setback areas, areas within parking lots, areas not used for ingress,
egress, parking or storage, and areas subject to grading and
recontouring. Although each site could have a different building
configuration and use and, in some cases, individual owners, an
overall landscape theme dealing with major design elements must
be established. These elements shall include:
(a) Setback and buffer areas along roadways as well as adjacent
residentially zoned properties;
(b) Retention and detention basin areas;
(c) Parking lots and areas around buildings; and
(d) Natural vista corridors such as woodlots and floodplains.
(2) On individual sites, a flexibility in design and choice of landscape
materials is permitted, provided such designs utilize and/or
augment suggested plant materials and plant sizes. Rear and side
yards shall be landscaped as to provide an effective screen, at the
time of planting, to obscure from view at ground level the
permitted use from adjoining uses of a dissimilar nature.
(3) The design and development of landscaping shall:
(a) Enhance the appearance of the site internally and from a
distance;
(b) Include street trees and streetside landscaping;
§ 550-165 HAMILTON CODE § 550-165
1:1164
(c) Provide an integrated open space and pedestrianway system
within the development with appropriate connections to
surrounding properties;
(d) Include, as appropriate, a bike path, bike lane, sidewalk,
pedestrian walkway or jogging trail;
(e) Provide buffering or transitions between uses;
(f) Provide conveniently located outdoor eating areas; and
(g) Provide outdoor recreation areas appropriate to serve all the
uses within the development.
(4) Landscaping shall be designed and installed in accordance with
professional standards, and all landscape plans shall be subject to
Planning Board review and approval. All landscaping, including
lawn areas, trees and shrubbery, shall be maintained in excellent
condition by the property owners' or development association by
cutting, trimming, feeding, watering and weeding. Plants shall be
replaced as may be required. Landscaping shall be installed upon
the substantial completion of the building, weather permitting, and
an underground irrigation system may be required by the Planning
Board in some landscaped areas.
(5) Existing vegetation to be preserved on each site must be
designated on each plan. Techniques to be employed to preserve
such vegetated areas shall be submitted to the Planning Board for
review and approval. Such techniques should address the following
elements of tree structure so as to avoid damaging effects during
and after construction to these elements: crown; branch system;
dripline; existing grade, drainage and soil character; root system
and feeder root system.
G. Reforestation and forest management.
(1) Reforestation shall be required as mitigation if development of a
site results in the removal of trees from an existing woodlot.
Reforestation shall be in addition to a normal required landscape
plan and may either take place on site, off site within a Township
park, or within a Township-designated open space area.
(2) A forest management plan may be required. It shall be prepared by
a professional forester and may include a timber harvesting
element. The plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Board.
(3) The management of a woodlot shall be conducted in a manner that
recognizes the possibility for a public access pathway on the site,
as well as its role as a watershed, green space and wildlife habitat,
while at the same time providing for some limited harvesting of the
resource without damage to the natural health of the forest.
§ 550-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-165
1:1165
Removal of timber shall be used to release desirable understory
trees and/or create conditions favorable for the regeneration of
new trees.
H. Drainage.
(1) Each parcel's stormwater drainage must be collected on site and
released at an approved location or locations. After being
temporarily detained in basins, the stormwater must be released at
a controlled rate into the channel systems which become part of the
natural drainage watershed. In cases where water drains onto the
parcel from adjacent parcels, the drainage system must provide for
the inflow, unless special arrangements are made to the contrary.
(2) Stormwater detention areas may be necessary to ensure recharge
of sensitive groundwater systems at a rate equivalent to the natural
site conditions before development. Determination of this need
must be made by the Township Engineer on the basis of
topography, subsoil characteristics, aquifer characteristics, and
ground coverage. The requirement of a detention basin shall be
established after review of the plan at the concept design stage, at
which time the coverage and grading can be properly determined.
Engineering design standards shall be based on those governing
Township stormwater management.
(3) Individual detention basins on each parcel shall not be required.
However, each site's individual drainage collection system must be
designed to collect and direct all surface runoff to an overall
comprehensive drainage system.
(4) Detention basins must be sensitively designed to provide both
practical stormwater control and to develop into attractive and
ecologically stable landscapes. The following design guidelines
shall be adhered to:
(a) Basin design should be site-specific. Avoid using standard
"cookie-cutter" shapes and angular designs; keep lines and
contours free-flowing and natural in appearance.
(b) Vary basin shape and slopes to produce basins that blend into
the surrounding topography and existing natural conditions.
(c) Where appropriate, basin design should incorporate
recreational amenities such as ball fields and/or open play
areas integrated with plantings in a parklike and safe manner.
(5) When required by the Planning Board and indicated on an
approved development plan, detention basins shall be landscaped.
The following planting design guidelines must be adhered to:
(a) Plant species should be tolerant of both wet and dry soil
conditions.
§ 550-165 HAMILTON CODE § 550-165
1:1166
(b) Trees and shrubs should be planted in masses and groves to
mimic naturally occurring patterns.
(c) Plantings should be allowed to go on and over side slopes.
(d) Plantings should not be permitted on any dikes associated with
the detention basin unless approved by the Township Engineer.
(e) Provision for emergency access as well as general
maintenance of the basin should be reviewed and approved by
the Township Engineer. Plantings should be designed to
disguise, yet not hinder, vehicular access.
(f) Plantings should not be located too close to low-flow channels
to allow for maintenance of the basin.
(g) Vary plant spacing; allow for openings and gaps and more
closely planted areas.
(h) Tree plantings should be a mixture of species and sizes to be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Board.
(i) Shrubs should be planted in masses. Groups of single species
should be allowed to overlap a group of another species to form
large continuous beds.
(j) Grass mixtures should be specified that remain attractive while
being cut only three to four times per year, e.g., tall fescue
varieties. Avoid using high maintenance fine lawn grasses.
Where appropriate, basins may be seeded with meadow grass
or wildflower mixtures that require only one mowing per year.
(k) Open areas, from the basin to existing woodlands, should be
planted with indigenous species of shade trees and
naturalizing meadow grass and/or wildflower mixture to help
blend the two areas together.
(l) Reforestation is a landscape treatment appropriate for
detention basins that are not highly visible or are located
adjacent to areas of native woodlots. Where reforestation is
determined to be appropriate by the Planning Board, tree sizes
should vary. Trees should be planted in groves.
I. Lighting.
(1) Well-designed soft lighting of the building exterior shall be
permitted, provided that the lighting complements the
architecture. The lighting shall not draw inordinate attention to the
building.
(2) Parking lot, service area, and roadway lighting shall be provided by
freestanding fixtures designed to minimize glare to the street and
adjacent parcels. The type of fixture and color of lamping will be
§ 550-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-165
1:1167
evaluated for their compatibility with existing streetlighting, the
architecture and natural site characteristics.
(3) The lighting for pedestrian walkways may include either cutoff or
exposed sources, but the height and intensity of the light must be
subdued. All lighting designs and installation are subject to
Planning Board review and approval.
J. Signage.
(1) All signs shall be required to satisfy all of the requirements as set
forth in § 550-124. The Planning Board shall have the right to
modify the requirements whenever such modifications are
necessary to achieve a planned mixed-use research and
development park.
(2) An overall graphic signage plan must be developed to complement
the overall site layout and individual development lots.
(3) One identification sign shall be erected at each principal entrance
from a public road to each planned development in an area
approved by the Planning Board. The design, format and materials
of the sign must be consistent with the site architecture in the
development. No flashing, neon or moving elements shall be
permitted. Such signs may indicate the street address, the
development's name and logo.
(4) Identification signage of a smaller scale shall be permitted on the
exterior of a building at a location related to the principal entrance,
carrying the occupant's logo or symbol, and such other locations as
the Planning Board shall permit. It may be placed on the building
surface or in a freestanding position, provided that the latter is
clearly integrated with the architecture. It shall not project above
any roof or canopy elevations.
(5) Any directional, traffic or parking control signs on the site shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Board, with the intent that
these signs will be restricted to the minimum necessary, will be
visually unobtrusive, and will be consistent in format, lettering and
coloring.
(6) As the need may arise during construction of a planned
development, directory-type signs identifying groups of building
locations may be established.
(7) Advertising signs commonly known as "billboards," including those
promoting the sale of goods or services not available on the
premises, are prohibited.
K. Utilities. All utilities and related appurtenances on the site shall be
underground or in the main building or structure.
L. Street furniture, plazas and community spaces.
§ 550-165 HAMILTON CODE § 550-165
1:1168
(1) The design of a building's related entrance areas, plazas or
terraces may vary, based on the intentions and needs of individual
building owners. At a minimum, however, building entrances shall
be highlighted with plant materials and paved surfaces.
(2) In time, the need for varied forms of street furniture beyond
signage may arise. For example, introduction of a public or private
transit system may necessitate bus shelters. As such needs become
formalized, the developer must prepare a basic design vocabulary
to cover such individualized needs consistent with the overall
design program.
(3) Every development shall include some or all of these community
spaces: patio/seating areas, pedestrian plazas with benches,
window shopping walkways, outdoor playground areas, kiosk
areas, water feature, clock tower or other such deliberately shaped
area and/or a focal feature or amenity that, in the judgment of the
Planning Board, adequately enhances such community and public
spaces. Any such areas shall have direct access to a sidewalk
network, and such features shall not be constructed of materials
that are inferior to the principal materials of the building and
landscape.
M. Screening of loading and service areas. All loading docks and service
areas must be sufficient to serve the business being conducted on the
parcel without using adjacent streets. No loading and service areas
shall be visible from any neighboring property or adjacent street.
Provision must be made for handling all freight on those sides of the
buildings which do not face a street. The recommended method of
screening should consist of walls and gates compatible in color and
texture with the building material, buffered by deciduous and
evergreen shrubs and trees, so as not to be visible from neighboring
properties and streets. Maximize the joint use of truck loading and
maneuvering areas between on-site and adjacent off-site
complementary uses. Delivery and loading operations shall not disturb
adjoining neighborhoods or other uses.
N. Refuse collection and recycling.
(1) Collection areas.
(a) All outdoor containers shall be visually screened within a
durable, noncombustible enclosure so as not to be visible from
adjacent lots or sites, neighboring properties or streets. No
collection areas shall be permitted between a street and the
front of a building. Appropriate landscaping shall be installed
to form a year-round effective visual screen at time of planting.
(b) Collection areas shall be designed to contain all material
generated on site and deposited between collections.
Deposited material shall not be visible from outside the
enclosure.
§ 550-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-165
1:1169
(c) Collection enclosures shall be designed of durable materials
with finishes and colors which are unified and harmonious with
the overall architectural theme.
(d) Collection areas shall be so located upon the lot as to provide
clear and convenient access to collection vehicles and thereby
minimize wear and tear on on-site and off-site developments.
Refuse collection and recycling areas shall not be located
within parking areas or required landscaped buffers.
(e) Collection areas shall be designed and located upon the lot as
to be convenient for the deposition of material generated on
site.
(2) An option to reduce the visual impact of the collection containers is
to store and compact material inside the building at the service
area, thus eliminating the need to screen containers.
(3) Delivery, loading, trash removal or compaction, or other such
operations may be limited by the Planning Board between certain
hours where noise impacts at the lot line of any adjoining
residential property or district or otherwise exceeds Township and
state requirements.
O. Storage.
(1) No open storage shall be permitted on any lot. No articles,
merchandise, products, goods, materials, incinerator, storage tanks
or like equipment shall be kept in the open or exposed to public
view, and no accessory use should be constructed to permit open
storage of materials or goods on a lot. These requirements are not
meant to prohibit the outdoor sale of merchandise if designed
appropriately in the form of a garden center.
(2) Nonenclosed areas for the storage and sale of seasonal inventory
shall be permanently defined and screened with walls and/or
fences. Materials, colors and design of screening walls and/or
fences shall conform to those used as predominant materials and
colors on the building. If such areas are to be covered, then the
covering shall conform to those used as predominant materials and
colors on the building.
P. Fences and walls. Fences are not desirable and should be approved only
for limited situations. Chain-link and/or periphery fencing shall not be
permitted. Decorative fences or walls may be used to screen service
and loading areas, private patios or courts. Fences may be used to
enclose playgrounds, recreational areas, or to secure sensitive areas to
uses, such as vehicle storage areas. Fences shall not be located where
they impede pedestrian or bicycle circulation through or between site
areas. If approved, all fences and walls shall be designed as integrated
parts of the overall architectural and site design. All materials shall be
§ 550-165 HAMILTON CODE § 550-165
1:1170
durable and finished in textures and colors complementary to the
overall architectural design.
Q. Maintenance. All site improvements, including, but not limited to,
streets, drives, parking lots, drainage areas, culverts, curbing,
buildings and lighting must be maintained in good condition and repair
by either the Township, owner or other designated entity.
R. Sidewalks and/or pathways.
(1) Sidewalks and/or pathways shall be installed by the developer
within perimeter landscape areas and along streets.
(2) On-site pedestrian circulation systems shall be provided to meet
the circulation needs of on-site users. Such systems shall provide
safe, all-weather-efficient, and aesthetically pleasing means of onsite
movement and shall be an integrated part of the overall
architectural and site design concept. At a minimum, sidewalks
and/or pathways shall connect focal points of pedestrian activity,
such as but not limited to transit stops, street crossings, building
and entry points, and shall feature adjoining landscaped areas that
includes trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds, ground covers or
other such materials.
(3) Sidewalks shall be provided along the full length of the building
along any facade featuring a customer entrance and along any
facade abutting public parking areas. Such sidewalks shall be
located from the facade of the building to provide planting beds for
foundation landscaping, except where features such as arcades or
entryways are part of the facade. Pedestrian sidewalks shall
provide weather-protection features, such as awnings or arcades,
when located close to customer entrances.
(4) Where appropriate, connections shall be made between on-site and
perimeter sidewalk and/or pathway circulation systems.
(5) Pedestrian crosswalks shall be clearly delineated by a material
different from the surrounding road surface through the use of
durable, low-maintenance surface materials, such as pavers, bricks
or scored concrete, to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort as
well as the attractiveness of the sidewalk and/or pathway.
S. Electrical and mechanical equipment. All exterior electrical and
mechanical equipment at ground level, such as transformers, shall be
screened and located at the side or rear of the building and away from
entrances. Recommended screening methods include walls compatible
with the building material and a plant material buffer utilizing a layered
installation of shrubs, flowering trees and ground cover.
T. Common open space. An adequate amount of open space, exclusive of
detention and retention basins, shall be provided and developed for onsite
conservation and recreation facilities to service the needs of all
§ 550-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-165
1:1171
§ 550-166. Mandatory affordable housing set-aside. [Amended
8-18-1993 by Ord. No. 93-040; 9-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-031;
8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 16-032; 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-025;
7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029; 4-2-2019 by Ord. No. 19-013225]
employees and their visitors. The applicant shall submit an open space
plan, showing the proposed land area and general location of parks and
any other land area to be set aside for conservation and recreational
purposes and a general description of improvements to be made
thereon, including a plan for the operation and maintenance of parks
and recreational facilities.
U. Public safety.
(1) The developer and/or owners' association shall employ private
security services. A planned commercial development shall provide
foot patrols and vehicle patrols during its hours of operation. The
developer may also be required to dedicate building space and/or
on-site facilities to the Township Police Department.
(2) All buildings shall be fully sprinklered. Fire lanes and signage shall
be provided as well as access to both the front and rear of buildings
designed to meet the Township's fire code.
(3) Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes (moving violations)
shall apply so that enforcement of such motor vehicle laws will be
available to the Township Police Department.
V. Historic preservation. Historic uses, buildings and sites shall be
permanently protected, preserved and used as approved by the
Planning Board.
A. Mandatory set-aside of units.
(1) All residential inclusionary developments in R-7, R-10, R-15, R-25,
RRC and A/T Districts shall be required to set aside a mandatory
20% of the dwelling units for the construction of low- and
moderate-income housing in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
(2) A mandatory affordable housing set-aside requirement of 20% shall
be imposed on any multifamily development created through any
Township or Land Use Board action involving a rezoning, use
variance, density variance, redevelopment plan or rehabilitation
plan permitting redevelopment, which density is at or above six
dwelling units per acre and results in the construction of five or
more units.
225. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 550-166, Affordable Housing
Development Fees, added 8-3-1994 by Ord. No. 94-035, as amended, and redesignated
former § 550-165 as § 550-166.
§ 550-165 HAMILTON CODE § 550-166
1:1172
§ 550-167. Affordable housing development fees. [Added 4-2-2019
by Ord. No. 19-013]
(3) The developer shall provide that half of the low- and moderateincome
units constructed be affordable by low-income households
and that the remaining half be affordable by moderate-income
households. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be verylow-
income units (affordable to a household earning 30% or less of
median income). The very-low -income units shall be counted as
part of the required number of low-income units within the
development.
(4) Subdivision and site plan approval shall be denied by the board
unless the developer complies with the requirements to provide
low- and moderate-income housing pursuant to the provisions of
this section. A property shall not be permitted to be subdivided so
as to avoid meeting this requirement. The Board may impose any
reasonable conditions to ensure such compliance.
(5) The mandatory affordable housing set-aside requirement shall not
give any developer the right to any such rezoning, variance, or
other relief as set forth above or establish any obligation on the
part of the Township to grant such rezoning, variance or other
relief.
A. Purpose.
(1) In Holmdel Builder's Association V. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985
(the Act). N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution,
subject to the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption
of rules.
(2) Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, § 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8.1 through 8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and
promulgate regulations necessary for the establishment,
implementation, review, monitoring and enforcement of municipal
affordable Housing Trust Funds and corresponding spending plans.
Municipalities that are under the jurisdiction of COAH or court of
competent jurisdiction and have an approved spending plan may
retain fees collected from nonresidential development.
(3) This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance,
and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's
regulations and in accordance P.L. 2008, c. 46, §§ 8 and 32-38. Fees
collected pursuant to this section shall be used for the sole purpose
of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This section shall
be interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on
development fees, codified at N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.
§ 550-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-167
1:1173
B. Basic requirements.
(1) This section shall not be effective until approved by the Superior
Court of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.2.226
(2) Hamilton Township shall not spend development fees until the
Superior Court of New Jersey has approved a plan for spending
such fees in conformance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.1(c).227
C. Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the
following meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is
not limited to an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a 100% affordable development.
COAH or the "COUNCIL" — The New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing established under the Act which has primary jurisdiction for
the administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound
regional planning consideration in the state.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.228
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for
the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with §§ 1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a
through 54:35c).
D. Residential development fees.
(1) Imposed fees.
(a) Within all district(s), residential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value
for residential development provided no increased density is
permitted.
(b) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70D(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6.0%
of the equalized assessed value for each additional unit that
226. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
227. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
228. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
§ 550-167 HAMILTON CODE § 550-167
1:1174
may be realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed
during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a
variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest
density permitted by right during the two-year period
preceding the filing of the variance application.
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
residential development.
(a) Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is proving for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(b) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a
site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building
permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan
approval for this purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested
on the date that the building permit is issued.
E. Nonresidential development fees.
(1) Imposed fees.
(a) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except
for developers of the types of development specifically
exempted, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized
assessed value of the land and improvements, for all new
nonresidential construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
(b) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types
of development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee
equal to 2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value
resulting from any additions to existing structures to be used
for nonresidential purposes.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure is demolished and replaced. The
development fee of 2.5% shall be calculated on the difference
between the equalized assessed value of the pre-existing land
and improvement and the equalized assessed value of the
newly improved structure, i.e. land and improvement, at the
time final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation
required under this section results in a negative number, the
nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
§ 550-167 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-167
1:1175
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(a) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or
market rate development shall be subject to the 2.5%
development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
(b) The 2.5% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized
assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use within
existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(c) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the
payment of nonresidential development fees in accordance
with the exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as
specified in the Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption" form.
Any exemption claimed by a developer shall be substantiated
by that developer.
(d) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from
the nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46
shall be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption
no longer applies, and shall make the payment of the
nonresidential development fee, in that event, within three
years after that event or after the issuance of the final
certificate of occupancy of the nonresidential development,
whichever is later.
(e) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit
the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
nonresidential development fees under these circumstances
may be enforceable by Hamilton Township as a lien against the
real property of the owner.
F. Collection procedures.
(1) Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval, for a development, the applicable approving authority
shall direct its staff to notify the construction official responsible
for the issuance of a building permit.
(2) For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption" to be
completed as per the instructions provided. The developer of a
nonresidential development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the
instructions provided. The construction official shall verify the
information submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the
instructions provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax assessor shall
§ 550-167 HAMILTON CODE § 550-167
1:1176
verify exemptions and prepare estimated and final assessments as
per the instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
(3) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local tax assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a
development fee.
(4) Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal tax assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
(5) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which
is subject to a development fee.
(6) Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements
of the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter
notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
(7) Should Hamilton Township fail to determine or notify the developer
of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the
request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount
due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in Subsection b. of § 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8.6).
(8) Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time
of issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between
the fee calculated at building permit and that determined at
issuance of certificate of occupancy.
(9) Appeal of development fees.
(a) A developer may challenge residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the County Board of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Board,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow
account by Hamilton Township. Appeals from a determination
of the Board may be made to the tax court in accordance with
the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A.
54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the date of such
determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be
credited to the prevailing party.
(b) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division
§ 550-167 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-167
1:1177
of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the
Director, which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of
the challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interestbearing
escrow account by Hamilton Township. Appeals from
a determination of the Director may be made to the tax court
in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
G. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
(1) There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing Housing Trust
Fund to be maintained by the chief financial officer for the purpose
of depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
(2) The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source
and amount:
(a) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units:
(b) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible:
(c) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(d) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(e) Recapture funds;
(f) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(g) Any other funds collected in connection with Hamilton
Township's affordable housing program.
(3) All interest accrued in the Housing Trust Fund shall only be used
on eligible affordable housing activities as per a spending plan
approved by the Superior Court of New Jersey.
H. Use of funds.
(1) The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan
approved by the Superior Court of New Jersey. Funds deposited in
the Housing Trust Fund may be used for any activity approved by
the court to address the Hamilton Township's fair share obligation
and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such
activities include, but are not limited to: preservation or purchase
of housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing
affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable
§ 550-167 HAMILTON CODE § 550-167
1:1178
housing units and related costs, accessory apartment, market-toaffordable,
or regional housing partnership programs, conversion
of existing nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units,
green building strategies designed to be cost saving and in
accordance with accepted national or state standards, purchase
of land for affordable housing, improvement of land to be used
for affordable housing, extensions or improvements of roads and
infrastructure to affordable housing sites, financial assistance
designed to increase affordability, administration necessary for
implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any
other activity as permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.16229 and
specified in the approved spending plan.
(2) Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Hamilton Township for
past housing activities.
(3) At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned
shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance
portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide
affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or less of
median income by region.
(a) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans,
rental assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance
with emergency repairs.
(b) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low-or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to
make them affordable to households earning 30% or less of
median income.
(c) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be
exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
(4) Hamilton Township may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.16(d).230
(5) No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
229. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
230. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
§ 550-167 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-167
1:1179
§ 550-168. Affordable housing. [Added 1-19-2005 by Ord. No.
05-001; amended 4-2-2019 by Ord. No. 19-013]
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative
marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no
more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
shall be expended for such administrative expenses. Administrative
funds may be used for income qualification of households,
monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance
with COAH's or the court's monitoring requirements. Legal or
other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or
objecting to the COAH's regulations and/or action are not eligible
uses of the affordable Housing Trust Fund.
I. Monitoring.
(1) Hamilton Township shall complete and return to the Superior Court
of New Jersey all monitoring forms included in monitoring
requirements related to the collection of development fees from
residential and nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of
constructing affordable units on site, funds from the sale of units
with extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental
income, repayments from affordable housing program loans, and
any other funds collected in connection with Hamilton Township's
housing program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and
implementation of the plan that has been approved by the court. All
monitoring reports shall be completed on forms designed by COAH
or the special master.
J. Ongoing collection of fees.
(1) The ability for Hamilton Township to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with its substantive certification or
judgment of compliance from the court unless Hamilton Township
has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with
COAH, has petitioned for substantive certification, and has
received COAH's or the court's approval of its development fee
ordinance. If Hamilton Township fails to renew its ability to impose
and collect development fees prior to the expiration of the
judgment of compliance, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all
funds remaining within its municipal trust fund. Any funds so
forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey Affordable
Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to § 20 of P.L. 1985, c.
222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). Hamilton Township shall not impose a
residential development fee on a development that receives
preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration of its
judgment of compliance, nor shall Hamilton Township retroactively
impose a development fee on such a development. Hamilton
Township shall not expend development fees after the expiration of
its judgment of compliance.
§ 550-167 HAMILTON CODE § 550-168
1:1180
A. Affordable housing obligation.
(1) This section of the Township Code sets forth regulations regarding
the low- and moderate-income housing units in the Township
consistent with the provisions known as the "Substantive Rules of
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing, N.J.A.C. 5:93 et
seq.,231 the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls ("UHAC"),
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., and the Township's constitutional
obligation to provide the opportunity for provision of its fair share
of affordable housing for low- and moderate-income households. In
addition, this section applies requirements for very-low-income
housing as established in P.L. 2008, c.46 (the "Roberts Bill").
(2) This section is intended to assure that very-low, low- and moderateincome
units ("affordable units") are created with controls on
affordability over time and that very-low, low- and moderateincome
households shall occupy these units. This section shall
apply except where inconsistent with applicable law.
(3) The Hamilton Township Planning Board has adopted a Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The Plan has also been endorsed
by the Township Council of the Township of Hamilton. The Fair
Share Plan describes the ways the Township shall address its fair
share for low- and moderate-income housing as determined by the
Superior Court and documented in the Housing Element.
(4) This section implements and incorporates the Fair Share Plan and
addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93,232 as may be amended
and supplemented.
(5) On the first anniversary of the execution of the Township's
settlement agreement with Fair Share Housing Center and every
anniversary thereafter through the end of the term of this
agreement, the Township agrees to provide annual reporting of the
status of all affordable housing activity within the municipality
through posting on the municipal website with a copy of such
posting provided to Fair Share Housing Center, using forms
previously developed for this purpose by the Council on Affordable
Housing or any other forms endorsed by the Special Master and
FSHC.
(6) For the midpoint realistic opportunity review due on July 1, 2020,
as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the Township will post
on its municipal website, with a copy provided to Fair Share
Housing Center, a status report as to its implementation of its Plan
and an analysis of whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled
mechanisms continue to present a realistic opportunity and
231. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
232. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
§ 550-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-168
1:1181
whether any mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised
or supplemented. Such posting shall invite any interested party to
submit comments to the municipality, with a copy to Fair Share
Housing Center, regarding whether any sites no longer present
a realistic opportunity and should be replaced and whether any
mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or
supplemented. Any interested party may by motion request a
hearing before the court regarding these issues.
(7) For the review of very-low-income housing requirements required
by N.J.S.A. 52:270-329.1, within 30 days of the third anniversary of
the Township's settlement agreement with Fair Share Housing
Center, and every third year thereafter, the Township will post on
its municipal website, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing
Center, a status report as to its satisfaction of its very-low-income
requirements, including the family very-low-income requirements
referenced herein. Such posting shall invite any interested party to
submit comments to the municipality and Fair Share Housing
Center on the issue of whether the municipality has complied with
its very-low-income housing obligation under the terms of this
settlement.
B. Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the
following meanings:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential dwelling unit
with a kitchen, sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters and a private
entrance, which is created within an existing home, or through the
conversion of an existing accessory structure on the same site, or
by an addition to an existing home or accessory building, or by the
construction of a new accessory structure on the same site.
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-
301 et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for the
administration of affordable units in accordance with this section.
N.J.A.C. 5:91,233 N.J.A.C. 5:93234 and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median
income at which restricted units in an affordable housing development
are affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
233. Editor's Note: Chapter 91 of Title 5 of the New Jersey Administrative Code is reserved.
234. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
§ 550-168 HAMILTON CODE § 550-168
1:1182
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4;235 in the
case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms to
the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may
be amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE DEVELOPMENT — A housing development all or a
portion of which consists of restricted units.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is
not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a 100% affordable development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a
municipal Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a
municipality's fair share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act, credited pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93,236 and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of
the population such that: 1) all the residents of the development where
the unit is situated are 62 years or older; or 2) at least 80% of the
units are occupied by one person that is 55 years or older; or 3)
the development has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older
persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42
U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1, et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which
households live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing
facilities, central heat and common areas. "Alternative living
arrangement" includes, but is not limited to; transitional facilities for
the homeless, Class A, B, C, D, and E boarding homes as regulated by
the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs; residential health
care facilities as regulated by the New Jersey Department of Health;
group homes for the developmentally disabled and mentally ill as
licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey Department of Human
Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living
235. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
236. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
§ 550-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-168
1:1183
services are available when needed for four or more adult persons
unrelated to the proprietor and that offers units containing, at a
minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and
a lockable door on the unit entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, which is in, but not
of, the Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey,
that was established under the New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety
code violations that require the repair or replacement of a major
system. A major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including
septic systems), lead paint abatement and/or load-bearing structural
systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development including
the holder of an option to contract or purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill,
and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or
land or extension of use of land, for which permission may be required
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
FAIR SHARE PLAN — The plan that describes the mechanisms,
strategies and the funding sources, if any, by which the Township
proposes to address its affordable housing obligation as established
in the Housing Element, including the draft ordinances necessary to
implement that plan, and addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C.
5:93-5.237
HOUSING ELEMENT — The portion of the Township's Master Plan,
required by the Municipal Land Use Law ("MLUL"). N.J.S.A.
40:55D-28b(3) and the Act, that includes the information required by
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.1238 and establishes the Township's fair share obligation.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market-rate units. This term includes, but is not
237. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
238. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
§ 550-168 HAMILTON CODE § 550-168
1:1184
necessarily limited to: new construction, the conversion of a
nonresidential structure to residential and the creation of new
affordable units through the reconstruction of a vacant residential
structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the regional median
household income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a lowincome
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include, but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including
septic systems), lead paint abatement or load-bearing structural
systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable county, as adopted annually by COAH or approved by the NJ
Superior Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the
regional median household income.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than
the transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of
ownership between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial
decree of divorce or judicial separation, but not including sales to third
parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a result
of inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's deed to
a class A beneficiary and the transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently
income-eligible households are selected for placement in affordable
housing units such that no preference is given to one applicant over
another except for purposes of matching household income and size
with an appropriately priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each
housing region affordable to a four-person household with an income
at 80% of the regional median as defined by adopted/approved regional
income limits.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or
reconstruction of any building or structure, pursuant to the
Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-6.
§ 550-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-168
1:1185
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including
the rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid
utilities computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for
its Section 8 program. In assisted living residences, "rent" does not
include charges for food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, but does not include
a market-rate unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
SPECIAL MASTER — An expert appointed by a judge to make sure
that judicial orders are followed. A master's function is essentially
investigative, compiling evidence or documents to inform some future
action by the court.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income equal to 30% or less of the regional median
household income.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
very-low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and
crawl space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm
windows, replacement storm doors, replacement windows and
replacement doors, and is considered a major system for rehabilitation.
C. New construction. The following requirements shall apply to all new or
planned developments that contain low- and moderate-income housing
units.
(1) Phasing. Final site plan or subdivision approval shall be contingent
upon the affordable housing development meeting the following
phasing schedule for low- and moderate-income units whether
developed in a single phase development or in a multiphase
development:
Maximum Percentage of
Market-Rate Units
Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
§ 550-168 HAMILTON CODE § 550-168
1:1186
(2) Design. In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, lowand
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market
units.
(3) Payments-in-lieu and off-site construction. The standards for the
collection of payments-in-lieu of constructing affordable units or
standards for constructing affordable units off-site, shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.10(c).239
(4) Utilities. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of HVAC
system as market units within the affordable development.
(5) Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units.
(a) At least 50% of the affordable units shall be low-income units.
If the fair share obligation is divided equally, it shall be divided
equally between low- and moderate-income units, except that
where there is an odd number of affordable housing units, the
extra unit shall be a low-income unit.
(b) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted
units within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income
units.
(c) Within rental developments, of the total number of affordable
rental units, at least 13% shall be affordable to very-lowincome
households.
(d) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such
that:
1. The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and
moderate-income units;
2. At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
3. At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
4. The remaining units may be allocated among two- and
three-bedroom units at the discretion of the developer.
(e) In accordance with the Uniform Housing Affordability
Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(c), for low- and moderate-income
age-restricted units, at a minimum, the number of bedrooms
shall equal the number of age-restricted low- and moderateincome
units within the affordable development. This standard
239. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
§ 550-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-168
1:1187
may be met by having all one-bedroom units or by having a
two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit. The Township shall
not be permitted to claim credit to satisfy its obligations for
age-restricted units that exceed 25% of all units developed.
(6) Accessibility requirements.
(a) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be
subject to the technical design standards of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
(b) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units
in other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit
is attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the
following features:
1. An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
2. An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
3. An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor;
4. An interior accessible route of travel shall not be required
between stories within an individual unit;
5. An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a
door or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first
floor; and
6. An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005. c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that the Township
has collected funds from the developer sufficient to make
10% of the adaptable entrances in the development
accessible;
a. Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
b. To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Township of Hamilton's affordable
housing trust fund sufficient to install accessible
entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have
been constructed with adaptable entrances.
c. The funds deposited under Subsection C(6)(b)6.b.
herein shall be used by the Township for the sole
purpose of making the adaptable entrance of any
affordable unit accessible when requested to do so by
§ 550-168 HAMILTON CODE § 550-168
1:1188
a person with a disability who occupies or intends to
occupy the unit and requires an accessible entrance.
d. The developer of the restricted units shall submit a
design plan and cost estimate for the conversion from
adaptable to accessible entrances to the Construction
Official of the Township of Hamilton.
e. Once the Construction Official has determined that
the design plan to convert the unit entrances from
adaptable to accessible meet the requirements of the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the
cost estimate of such conversion is reasonable,
payment shall be made to the Township of Hamilton's
affordable housing trust fund in care of the Municipal
Treasurer who shall ensure that the funds are
deposited into the affordable housing trust fund and
appropriately earmarked.
f. Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall
not be required where an entity can demonstrate that
it is site impracticable to meet the requirements.
Determinations of site impracticability shall be in
compliance with the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-7.
(7) Maximum rents and sales prices.
(a) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing
units, the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set
forth in UHAC, utilizing the most recently published regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits
published by HUD and the calculation procedures set forth by
the Superior Court.
(b) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 60% of median income, and the average
rent for restricted low- and moderate-income units shall be
affordable to households earning no more than 52% of median
income.
(c) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental
units shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for
both low-income and moderate-income units.
1. At least 13% of all low- and moderate-income rental units
shall be affordable to households earning no more than
30% of median income.
(d) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within
each affordable development shall be affordable to households
§ 550-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-168
1:1189
earning no more than 70% of median income, and each
affordable development must achieve an affordability average
of 55% for restricted ownership units; in achieving this
affordability average, moderate-income ownership units must
be available for at least three different prices for each bedroom
type, and low-income ownership units must be available for at
least two different prices for each bedroom type.
(e) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance
with the affordability average requirements for restricted units
other than assisted living facilities, the following standards
shall be met:
1. A studio or efficiency unit shall be affordable to a oneperson
household;
2. A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-onehalf-
person household;
3. A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
4. A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-onehalf-
person household; and
5. A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(f) In determining the initial rents for compliance with the
affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities, the following standards shall be met:
1. A studio or efficiency unit shall be affordable to a oneperson
household;
2. A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-onehalf-
person household; and
3. A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(g) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units
shall be calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the
unit, including principal and interest (based on a mortgage
loan equal to 95% of the purchase price and the Federal
Reserve H.15 rate of interest), taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner
association fees do not exceed 28% of the eligible monthly
income of the appropriate size household as determined under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented;
provided, however, that the price shall be subject to the
affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
§ 550-168 HAMILTON CODE § 550-168
1:1190
(h) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so
as not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the
appropriate household size as determined under N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented; provided,
however, that the rent shall be subject to the affordability
average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may be amended
and supplemented.
(i) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units
may increase annually based on the percentage increase in the
regional median income limit for each housing region. In no
event shall the maximum resale price established by the
administrative agent be lower than the last recorded purchase
price.
(j) The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the percentage increase in the Housing
Consumer Price Index for the United States. This increase shall
not exceed 9% in any one year, Rents for units constructed
pursuant to low- income housing tax credit regulations shall be
indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low- income
housing tax credits.
(k) Tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility allowance
shall be so stated in the lease and shall be consistent with the
utility allowance approved by DCA for its Section 8 program.
(8) Condominium and homeowners' association fees. For any
affordable housing unit that is part of a condominium association
and/or homeowners' association, the master deed shall reflect that
the association fee assessed for each affordable housing unit shall
be established at 100% of the market rate fee.
D. Occupancy standards.
(1) In referring certified households to specific restricted units, to the
extent feasible, and without causing an undue delay in occupying
the unit, the administrative agent shall strive to:
(a) Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
(b) Provide children of different sex with separate bedrooms; and
(c) Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single
bedroom.
(2) Additional provisions related to occupancy standards (if any) shall
be provided in the municipal Operating Manual.
E. Selection of occupants of affordable housing units.
(1) The administrative agent shall use a random selection process to
select occupants of low- and moderate-income housing.
§ 550-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-168
1:1191
(2) A waiting list of all eligible candidates will be maintained in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
F. Control periods for restricted ownership units and enforcement
mechanisms.
(1) Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, and each restricted ownership
unit shall remain subject to the controls on affordability for a period
of at least 30 years and thereafter until terminated by Hamilton
Township.
(2) Rehabilitated owner-occupied single family housing units that are
improved to code standards shall be subject to affordability
controls for a period of 10 years.
(3) The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to
the unit.
(4) The affordability controls set forth in this section shall remain in
effect despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of
foreclosure with respect to restricted ownership units.
(5) A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the
Construction Official stating that the unit meets all code standards
upon the first transfer of title that follows the expiration of the
applicable minimum control period provided under N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
G. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units, homeowner
association fees and resale prices.
(1) Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, including:
(a) The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall
be approved by the administrative agent.
(b) The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in
writing and in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with
the foregoing standards.
(c) The method used to determine the condominium association
fee amounts and special assessments shall be indistinguishable
between the low- and moderate-income unit owners and the
market unit owners.
(d) The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for
the unit on the basis of capital improvements. Eligible capital
§ 550-168 HAMILTON CODE § 550-168
1:1192
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a
larger household or the addition of a bathroom.
H. Buyer income eligibility.
(1) Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1. as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than or
equal to 50% of median income and moderate-income ownership
units shall be reserved for households with a gross household
income less than 80% of median income.
(2) The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate- income household, as applicable to the
unit, and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner association
fees, as applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's
certified monthly income.
I. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit; subordination.
(1) Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the administrative agent shall determine in writing
that the proposed indebtedness complies with the provisions of this
section.
(2) With the exception of original purchase money mortgages, during a
control period neither an owner nor a lender shall at any time
cause or permit the total indebtedness secured by a restricted
ownership unit to exceed 95% of the maximum allowable resale
price of that unit, as such price is determined by the administrative
agent in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
J. Control periods for restricted rental units.
(1) Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, and each restricted rental unit shall
remain subject to the controls on affordability for a period of at
least 30 years and thereafter until terminated by Hamilton
Township.
(2) Rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are improved to
code standards shall be subject to affordability controls for a period
of 10 years.
(3) Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed
restriction shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records
§ 550-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-168
1:1193
office of the County of Mercer. A copy of the filed document shall be
provided to the administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt
of a certificate of occupancy.
(4) A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability
controls of this section, despite the occurrence of any of the
following events:
(a) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(b) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit;
or
(c) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure.
K. Price restrictions for rental units; leases.
(1) A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units,
except for units in an assisted living residence, and tenants shall be
responsible for security deposits and the full amount of the rent as
stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each restricted
rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
(2) No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover
the customary charges for food and services) without the express
written approval of the administrative agent.
(3) Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall
not exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit
and shall be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to
the costs of administering the controls applicable to the unit as set
forth in this section.
L. Tenant income eligibility.
(1) Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(a) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of
median income.
(b) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
(c) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than 80% of median
income.
(2) The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income,
§ 550-168 HAMILTON CODE § 550-168
1:1194
low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does
not exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's
eligible monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.16, as may be amended and supplemented; provided,
however, that this limit may be exceeded if one or more of the
following circumstances exists:
(a) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross
household income for rent, and the proposed rent will reduce
its housing costs:
(b) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(c) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded
living conditions;
(d) The household documents the existence of assets with which
the household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(e) The household documents proposed third-party assistance
from an outside source such as a family member In a form
acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of the
unit.
(3) The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsection L(2)(a) through (e)
above with the administrative agent, who shall counsel the
household on budgeting.
M. Conversions. Each housing unit created through the conversion of a
nonresidential structure shall be considered a new housing unit and
shall be subject to the affordability controls for a new housing unit.
N. Municipal Housing Liaison.
(1) The position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the Township of
Hamilton is hereby established. The Municipal Housing Liaison
shall be appointed by duly adopted resolution of the Township
Council and be subject to the approval by the Superior Court.
(2) The Municipal Housing Liaison must be either a full-time or parttime
employee of the Township of Hamilton.
(3) The Municipal Housing Liaison must meet the requirements for
qualifications, including initial and periodic training found in
N.J.A.C. 5:93240
240. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
§ 550-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-168
1:1195
(4) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight
and administration of the affordable housing program for the
Township of Hamilton, including the following responsibilities
which may not be contracted out to the administrative agent.
(a) Serving as the municipality's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the State, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents and interested households;
(b) When applicable, supervising any contracting administrative
agent.
(c) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Township of
Hamilton's Fair Share Plan:
(d) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual reports as required
by the Superior Court;
(e) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable; and
(f) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by the Superior Court.
O. Administrative agent.
(1) The Township shall designate by resolution of the Township
Council, one or more administrative agents to administer newly
constructed affordable units in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93241
and UHAC with one administrative agent responsible for all
inclusionary developments.
(2) An Operating Manual shall be provided by the administrative
agent(s) to be adopted by resolution of the governing body. The
Operating Manuals shall be available for public inspection in the
Office of the Municipal Clerk and in the office(s) of the
administrative agent(s).
(3) The administrative agent shall perform the duties and
responsibilities of an administrative agent as are set forth in UHAC
and which are described in full detail in the Operating Manual,
including those set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14, 16 and 18 thereof,
which includes:
(a) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by the Superior Court;
(b) Affirmative marketing;
241. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
§ 550-168 HAMILTON CODE § 550-168
1:1196
(c) Household certification;
(d) Affordability controls;
(e) Records retention;
(f) Resale and re-rental;
(g) Processing requests from unit owners; and
(h) Enforcement, although the ultimate responsibility for retaining
controls on the units rests with the municipality.
(i) The administrative agent shall, as delegated by the Township
Council, have the authority to take all actions necessary and
appropriate to carry out its responsibilities hereunder.
P. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
(1) Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations
governing the affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the
municipality shall have all remedies provided at law or equity,
including but not limited to foreclosure, tenant eviction, municipal
fines, a requirement for household recertification, acceleration of
all sums due under a mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a
sale in the violation of the regulations, injunctive relief to prevent
further violation of the regulations, entry on the premises, and
specific performance.
(2) After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer
or tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the
municipality may take the following action against the owner,
developer or tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a
period of 60 days after service of the written notice:
(a) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation, or violations, of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer
or tenant is found by the court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the
following penalties, at the discretion of the court;
1. A fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day that the
violation continues or exists shall be considered a separate
and specific violation of these provisions and not as a
continuing offense;
2. In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment into the
§ 550-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-168
1:1197
Township of Hamilton Affordable Housing Trust Fund of
the gross amount of rent illegally collected;
3. In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment of an
innocent tenant's reasonable relocation costs, as
determined by the court.
(b) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment, which would result in the termination of
the owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of
a mortgage foreclosure. Any judgment shall be enforceable as
if the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase
money mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the lowand
moderate-income unit.
(3) Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which
time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating owner shall
be sold at a sale price which is not less than the amount necessary
to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase money mortgage and
prior liens and the costs of the enforcement proceedings incurred
by the municipality, including attorney's fees. The violating owner
shall have the right to possession terminated as well as the title
conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(4) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the
first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the
low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied
to reimburse the municipality for any and all costs and expenses
incurred in connection with either the court action resulting in the
judgment of violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that the
proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are insufficient to reimburse the
municipality in full as aforesaid, the violating owner shall be
personally responsible for and to the extent of such deficiency, in
addition to any and all costs incurred by the municipality in
connection with collecting such deficiency. In the event that a
surplus remains after satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if
any, shall be placed in Hamilton Township's Affordable Housing
Trust Fund. Failure of the owner to claim such balance within the
two-year period shall automatically result in a forfeiture of such
balance to the municipality. Any interest accrued or earned on such
balance while being held in escrow shall belong to and shall be paid
to the municipality, whether such balance shall be paid to the
owner or forfeited to the municipality.
(5) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units shall not extinguish the
restrictions of the regulations governing affordable housing units
as the same apply to the low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall
§ 550-168 HAMILTON CODE § 550-168
1:1198
§ 550-169. Affirmative marketing plan. [Added 1-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-001]
be conveyed to the purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the
restrictions and provisions of the regulations governing the
affordable housing unit. The owner determined to be in violation
of the provisions of this plan and from whom title and possession
were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to
any right of redemption.
(6) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage and
any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the low- and
moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase money
mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating owner with
an amount equal to the difference between the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the enforcement
proceedings, including legal fees and the maximum resale price for
which the low- and moderate-income unit could have been sold
under the terms of the regulations governing affordable housing
units. This excess shall be treated in the same manner as the excess
which would have been realized from an actual sale as previously
described.
(7) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold at
the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall obligate the
owner to accept an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser
which may be referred to the owner by the municipality, with such
offer to purchase being equal to the maximum resale price of the
low- and moderate-income unit as permitted by the regulations
governing affordable housing units.
(8) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions of governing affordable
housing units until such time as title is conveyed from the owner.
Q. Appeals. Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent
designated pursuant to this section shall be filed in writing with the
Township.
A. Purpose. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing
strategy designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and
minority groups, regardless of sex, age or number of children, to
housing units which are being marketed by a developer/sponsor,
municipality and/or designated administrative agency of affordable
housing. The Township's plan will address the requirements of N.J.A.C.
5:93-11.1 et seq. In addition, the plan prohibits discrimination in the
sale, rental, financing or other services related to housing on the basis
of race, color, sex, religion, disability, age, familial status/size, sexual
orientation or national origin.
§ 550-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-169
1:1199
B. Affirmative marketing plan. The Township of Hamilton is in the housing
region consisting of Mercer, Monmouth and Ocean Counties. The
affirmative marketing program is a continuing program and will meet
the following requirements:
(1) Advertising and posting information.
(a) All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for
applications for low- and moderate-income units will appear in
the following daily and/or weekly regional newspapers/
publications:
1. Trenton Times.
2. Trentonian.
(b) The primary marketing will take the form of at least one press
release sent to the above publications and a paid display
advertisement in each of the above newspapers. Additional
advertising and publicity will be on an "as needed" basis.
(c) The advertisement will include a description of the:
1. Street address of units;
2. Direction to housing units;
3. Number of bedrooms per unit;
4. Range of prices/rents;
5. Size of units;
6. Income information; and
7. Location of applications, including business hours and
where/how applications may be obtained.
(d) All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for
applications for low- and moderate-income housing will appear
in the following neighborhood-oriented weekly newspapers. In
addition local religious publications and organizational
newsletters within the region will also be requested to assist in
the effort.
1. Township website (www.hamiltonnj.com).
2. Packet Publications.
(e) The following is the location of where applications,
brochure(s), sign(s) and/or poster(s) used as part of the
affirmative marketing program, including specific employment
centers within the region, will be displayed:
1. Hamilton Municipal Building.
§ 550-169 HAMILTON CODE § 550-169
1:1200
2. Hamilton Public Library.
3. Developer's sales office.
4. Major employers in the region.
5. Workforce Investment Board offices.
(f) The following is a listing of community organizations in
Mercer, Monmouth and Ocean Counties as well as statewide
housing advocacy organizations that will aid in the affirmative
marketing program, with particular emphasis on contacts that
will reach out to groups that are least likely to apply for
housing within the region, and to which the Township will
provide notice of all available affordable housing units:
[Amended 4-2-2019 by Ord. No. 19-013]
1. Catholic Charities (Lakewood, Ocean Counties).
2. YWCA (Trenton, Mercer County).
3. Long Branch Housing Authority (Long Branch, Monmouth
County).
4. Crisis Ministry of Princeton and Trenton (Trenton, Mercer
County).
5. Hispanic Affairs and Resource Center of Monmouth
County (Freehold, Monmouth County).
6. Love, Inc. (Red Bank, Monmouth County).
7. Rainbow Foundation (New Monmouth, Monmouth
County).
8. American Red Cross (Toms River, Ocean County).
9. Fair Share Housing Center (state).
10. NAACP New Jersey Conference (Trenton, state).
11. Latino Action Network (Freehold, state).
12. The Supportive Housing Association of New Jersey (state).
13. The Trenton Branch of the NAACP (Trenton, Mercer
County).
(g) Quarterly flyers and applications will be sent to each of the
following agencies for publication in their journals and for
circulation among their members:
1. Boards of realtors in Mercer, Monmouth and Ocean
Counties;
§ 550-169 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-169
1:1201
(2) Mailing applications. Applications will be mailed to prospective
applicants upon request. Additionally, while openings or waiting
lists are being developed, and potential applicants solicited,
quarterly informational circulars and applications will be sent to
the chief administrative employees of each of the following
agencies in the counties of Mercer, Monmouth and Ocean:
(a) Welfare or social services board;
(b) Rental Assistance Office (local office of DCA);
(c) Office on Aging;
(d) Housing agency or authority;
(e) Library;
(f) Area community action agencies, such as the Hightstown,
Ewing, Lawrence and Hamilton community action programs.
(3) Selection process.
(a) The Township, through an agent to be appointed ("the
Township's housing agent"), shall be responsible for
implementing and conducting the selection process that will be
used to select occupants of the low- and moderate-income
housing. Following is a description of the random selection
method that will be used to select occupants of low- and
moderate-income housing.
(b) The Township is ultimately responsible for administering the
affirmative marketing program. The Township's housing agent,
in administering the affirmative marketing program, shall have
the responsibility to:
1. Income qualify low- and moderate-income households;
2. Place income-eligible households in low- and moderateincome
units upon initial occupancy;
3. Provide for the initial occupancy of low- and moderateincome
units with income-qualified households;
4. Continue to qualify households for reoccupancy of units as
they become vacant during the period of affordability
controls;
5. Assist with advertising and outreach to low- and moderateincome
households; and
6. Enforce the terms of the deed restriction and mortgage
loan as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1 et seq.
§ 550-169 HAMILTON CODE § 550-169
1:1202
§ 550-170. through § 550-190. (Reserved)
(c) The Township's housing agent will also coordinate and provide
linkage to low- and moderate-income applicants to receive
counseling on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, responsibilities of homeownership,
rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law. The
Township's housing agent will develop the waiting list and
select applicants for the qualification process on a first-come
first-served basis. The Superintendent of Planning within the
Township is the designated housing officer to act as liaison to
the responsible developer(s) and the Township's housing
agent.
(d) Households who live or work in the COAH-established housing
region may be given preference for sales and rental units
constructed within that housing region. Applicants living
outside the housing region will have an equal opportunity for
units after regional applicants have been initially serviced. The
Township of Hamilton intends to comply with N.J.A.C.
5:93-11.7.
(e) All developers of low- and moderate-income housing units will
be required to assist the Township's housing agent in the
marketing of the affordable units in their respective
developments.
C. Commencement of marketing plan. The marketing program will
commence at least 120 days before the issuance of either temporary or
permanent certificates of occupancy. The marketing program will
continue until all low- and moderate-income housing units are initially
occupied and for as long as affordable units are deed-restricted and
occupancy or reoccupancy of units continues to be necessary.
D. Reporting requirements. The responsible developer(s) will assist the
Township's housing agent in complying with monitoring and reporting
requirements as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.6 and 5:93-12.1.242
242. Editor’s Note: Former § 550-170, Growth share payment, added 9-7-2005 by Ord. No.
05-030, as amended, was repealed 4-2-2019 by Ord. No. 19-013.
§ 550-169 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-170
1:1203

ARTICLE VI
Zoning Board of Adjustment; Planning Board
§ 550-191. Establishment of Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment heretofore created is continued and is
hereby established pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law as the
Board of Adjustment for the municipality. It shall consist of seven
members, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the governing body, for terms of four years, each computed
from January 1 of the year of their appointment, except full terms filled
for the first time under this section shall be so fixed for four or less
years and so arranged that, to the greatest practicable extent, the
expiration of all terms will be distributed evenly over the first four years
after the initial appointment.
B. There may be appointed two alternate members in addition to the seven
regular members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Alternate
members shall be designated by the Mayor as Alternate No. 1 and
Alternate No. 2. The term of each alternate member shall be two years.
Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote.
C. Any vacancy on said Board occurring other than by expiration of term
shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor, with the advice and consent
of the governing body, to serve for the unexpired term of the member
whose term shall become vacant. A member may be removed by the
governing body for cause but only after public hearing and other
requested procedural due process protections.
D. Yearly, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall organize by selecting from
among its regular members a Chairman and Vice Chairman. The Board
shall also select a Secretary, who may or may not be a member of the
Board or a municipal employee. The Board may employ or contract for
and fix the compensation of legal counsel, other than the municipal
Attorney, and experts and other staff and services as it shall deem
necessary, not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount
appropriated by the governing body for its use.
E. If the Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum because any of its regular or
alternate members is prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 from acting on a
matter due to the member's personal or financial interest therein, Class
IV members of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve, for that
matter only, as temporary members of the Board of Adjustment. The
Class IV members of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve in
order of seniority of continuous service to the Planning Board until
there are the minimum number of members necessary to constitute a
§ 550-191 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-191
1:1205
§ 550-192. Powers and duties of Zoning Board of Adjustment.
quorum to act upon the matter without any personal or financial
interest therein, whether direct or indirect. If a choice has to be made
between Class IV members of equal seniority, the Chair of the Planning
Board shall make the choice.243
A. General powers. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
(1) Error or refusal. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellant that there is error in any order, requirement or decision
or refusal made by an administrative officer based on or made in
the enforcement of the zoning provisions of this chapter.
(2) Interpretations and special questions. Hear and decide requests for
interpretation of the Zoning Map or this chapter or for decisions
upon other special questions upon which the Board is authorized to
pass by any zoning or official map ordinance.
(3) Variance of area and yard requirements.
(a) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property, or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions or physical features
uniquely affecting a specific piece of property, or by reason of
an extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely affecting a
specific piece of property or the structures lawfully existing
thereon, the strict application of any regulation of this chapter
would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to
or exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of such
property, grant upon an application or an appeal relating to
such property a variance from such strict application of such
regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship.
(b) Where in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of
property the purposes of this chapter would be advanced by a
deviation from zoning ordinance requirements, and the
benefits of the deviation would substantially outweigh any
detriment, grant a variance to allow departure from
regulations of this chapter; provided, however, that no
variance from those departures enumerated in Subsection A(4)
of this section shall be granted under this subsection; and
provided, further, that the proposed development does not
require approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site
plan or conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning
Board has power to review a request for a variance pursuant to
this chapter.
(4) Variance of use regulations.
243. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 550-191 HAMILTON CODE § 550-192
1:1206
(a) In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to
allow departure from regulations pursuant to this chapter to
permit:
1. A use or principal structure in a district restricted against
such use or principal structure.
2. An expansion of a nonconforming use.
3. Deviation from a specification or standard pursuant to this
chapter pertaining solely to a conditional use.
4. An increase in the permitted density, except as applied to
the required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one- or
two-dwelling unit buildings, which lot or lots are either an
isolated undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor
subdivision.
(b) A variance under this subsection shall be granted only by
affirmative vote of at least five members of the Board.
B. General provisions. No variance or other relief may be granted under
the terms of this section unless such variance or other relief can be
granted without substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan and
zoning ordinances. In respect to any airport hazard areas delineated
under the Air Safety and Zoning Act of 1983, N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq., no
variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this section
permitting the creation or establishment of a nonconforming use which
would be prohibited under the standards promulgated pursuant to that
act except upon issuance of a permit by the Commissioner of
Transportation. An application under this section may be referred to
any appropriate person or agency for its report, provided that such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall act.
C. Other powers. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have such other
powers as described by law, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Direct issuance of a building permit for the construction of a
building or structure within the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area as shown on a duly
adopted Official Map of the municipality whenever one or more
parcels of land within said bed cannot yield a reasonable return to
the owner unless a building permit is granted. The Board may grant
such relief only by an affirmative vote of a majority of the full
authorized membership of the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
ensuring that such relief will tend to cause a minimum change of
the Official Map and will not significantly add to the cost of opening
any proposed street. The Board shall impose reasonable
requirements as a condition of granting the building permit so as to
§ 550-192 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-192
1:1207
§ 550-193. Appeals and applications to Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
promote the health, morals, safety and general welfare of the
public.
(2) Direct issuance of a building permit for the construction of a
building or structure on a lot not abutting a street which is shown
on a duly adopted Official Map of the municipality or which is an
existing state, county or municipal street or highway; or a street
shown upon a plat approved by the municipal Planning Board; or a
street on a plat duly filed in the office of the County Recording
Officer. The Board may grant such relief only where the
enforcement of the statute requirement that a building lot abut a
street would entail practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship or
where the circumstances of the case do not require the building or
structure to abut a street. The Board shall impose requirements or
conditions that will provide adequate access for firefighting
equipment, ambulances and other emergency vehicles necessary
for the protection of the health and safety and will protect any
future street layout shown on the Official Map or on the general
circulation plan element of the municipal Master Plan.
(3) The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or site plan approval or conditional use approval
whenever the proposed development requires approval by the
Board of Adjustment of a variance pursuant to Subsection A(4)
above. The developer may elect to submit a separate application
requesting approval of the variance and a subsequent application
for any required approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional
use. The separate approval of the variance shall be conditioned
upon grant of all required subsequent approvals by the Board of
Adjustment. No such subsequent approvals shall be granted unless
such approvals can be granted without substantial detriment to the
public good and without substantial impairment of the intent and
purpose of the zone plan and zoning provisions of this chapter. The
number of votes of Board members required to grant any such
subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this chapter
for the approval and question, and the special vote pursuant to
Subsection A(4) above shall not be required.
A. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by an
interested party affected by any decision of an officer of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of this chapter or the
Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a
notice of appeal with the officer from whom the appeal is taken,
specifying the ground of such appeal. The officer from whom the appeal
is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all papers constituting
§ 550-192 HAMILTON CODE § 550-193
1:1208
§ 550-194. Establishment of Planning Board.
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Public
notice shall be given as required in § 550-196E.
B. A developer may file an application for development with the Zoning
Board of Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior
application to an officer of the municipality.
C. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than
120 days after the date that either an appeal is taken from the decision
of an administrative officer or a complete application for development is
submitted to the Board by a developer. Failure of the Board to render a
decision within such one-hundred-twenty-day period or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant shall constitute a
decision favorable to the applicant. In the event that the developer
elects to submit separate, consecutive applications, the aforesaid
provision shall apply to the application for approval of the variance. The
period for granting or denying any subsequent approval shall be as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
A. A Planning Board is hereby established, consisting of nine members of
the following four classes:
(1) Class I: the Mayor or the Mayor’s designee.244
(2) Class II: one of the officials of the municipality other than a member
of the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that,
if there is an environmental commission, the member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning
Board, as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be deemed the Class
II Planning Board member if there is both a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education
among the Class IV members or alternate members.
(3) Class III: a member of the governing body, to be appointed by it.
(4) Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality, to be appointed by
the Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal
office, except that one member may be a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and one may be a member of the Board of
Education. A member of the Environmental Commission who is also
a member of the Planning Board, as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1,
shall be a Class IV Planning Board member unless there is among
the Class IV members of the Planning Board both a member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of
Education, in which case the member of the Environmental
Commission shall be deemed to be the Class II member of the
Planning Board.
244. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-194
1:1209
B. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his
official tenure or, if the member is the Mayor's designee in the absence
of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor
during the Mayor's official tenure. The terms of the members
composing Class II and Class III shall be for one year or shall terminate
at the completion of their respective terms of office, whichever occurs
first, except for a Class II member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission. The term of a Class II or Class IV member
who is also a member of the Environmental Commission shall be for
three years or shall terminate at the completion of his term of office as a
member of the Environmental Commission, whichever comes first.245
C. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever he is no
longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his Class IV
term, whichever comes first.
D. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that, to the greatest practicable extent,
the expiration of such term shall be evenly distributed over the first four
years after their appointments, as determined by resolution of the
governing body; provided, however, that no term of any member shall
exceed four years, and further provided that nothing herein shall affect
the term of any present member of the Planning Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of their terms of four years
except as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall run from January 1
of the year in which the appointment was made.
E. If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of
term, it shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the
unexpired term.
F. There may be appointed by the Mayor two alternate members, who
shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members of the Planning Board.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment by
the Mayor as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2. The terms of the
alternate members shall be for two years, except that the terms of the
alternate members shall be such that the term of not more than one
alternate member shall expire in any one year; provided, however, that
in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members first appointed
exceed two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of
term shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term only. No
alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he
has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. An
alternate member may, after public hearing, if he requests one, be
removed by the governing body for cause. Alternate members may
participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in
the absence or disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote
245. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-194 HAMILTON CODE § 550-194
1:1210
§ 550-195. Powers and duties of Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall have the powers listed below in addition to other
powers established by law:
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead
of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
G. The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary, who may be either a
member of the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by
it.
H. The Board may employ or contract for and fix the compensation of legal
counsel, other than the municipal Attorney, and experts and other staff
and services as it shall deem necessary, not exceeding, exclusive of gifts
or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body for its use.
I. If the Planning Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular or
alternate members is prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 or 40:55D-23.1
from acting on a matter due to the member's personal or financial
interests therein, regular members of the Board of Adjustment shall be
called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the
Planning Board in order of seniority of continuous service to the Board
of Adjustment until there are the minimum number of members
necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the matter without any
personal or financial interest therein, whether direct or indirect. If a
choice has to be made between regular members of equal seniority, the
Chair of the Board of Adjustment shall make the choice.246
A. Make, adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the Township, including any areas outside its
boundaries which, in the Board's judgment, bear essential relation to
the Master Plan of the Township.
B. Administer the provisions of this chapter.
C. Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans required
by state or federal law or regulation.
D. Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
E. Annually assist in the preparation of a program, and amendments
thereto, of municipal capital improvement projects projected over a
term of six years, and recommend same to the governing body.
F. Consider and make report to the governing body within 35 days after
referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it, and
246. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 550-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-195
1:1211
also pass upon other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board
by the governing body.
G. The Planning Board shall have such other powers as are prescribed by
law, including, but not limited to, the power to grant the following
variances, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, when the Planning Board is reviewing
applications for approval of subdivision plans, site plans or conditional
uses:
(1) Variances pursuant to § 550-192A(3) of this chapter.
(2) Direction, pursuant to § 550-192C(1) of this chapter, for issuance of
a permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or
public drainageway, flood control basin or public area.
(3) Direction, pursuant to § 550-192C(2) of this chapter, for issuance of
a permit for a building or structure on a lot not abutting a street.
H. Exception in application of subdivision or site plan regulation and
simultaneous review and approval.
(1) The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary
or minor subdivision approval, shall have the power to grant such
exceptions from the requirements for subdivision approval as may
be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the
provisions for subdivision review and approval of this chapter if the
literal enforcement of one or more of such provisions is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question.
(2) The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary
site plan approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions
from the requirements for site plan approval as may be reasonable
and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions for site
plan review and approval of this chapter if the literal enforcement
of one or more of such provisions is impracticable or will exact
undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question.
(3) The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or
deny conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for
subdivision approval without the developer being required to make
further application to the Planning Board or the Planning Board
being required to hold further hearings. The longest time period for
action by the Planning Board, whether it be for subdivision,
conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply. Whenever
approval of a conditional use is requested by the developer
pursuant to this subsection, notice of the hearing on the plat shall
include reference to the request for such conditional use.
§ 550-195 HAMILTON CODE § 550-196
1:1212
§ 550-196. Provisions applicable to both Planning Board and Board
of Adjustment. [Amended 10-20-2004 by Ord. No. 04-041; 3-16-2005
by Ord. No. 05-007]
A. Conflicts of interest. No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall act on any matter in which he has, either directly or
indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Whenever any such
member shall disqualify himself from acting on a particular matter, he
shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter
nor participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
B. Meetings.
(1) Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and
any meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless
canceled for lack of applications for development to process.
(2) Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or
on the request of any two Board members, which meeting shall be
held on notice to its members and the public in accordance with all
applicable legal requirements.
(3) No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present, said quorum to be the majority of the full authorized
membership of the Board.
(4) All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of members of the
municipal agency present at the meeting, except as otherwise
required by a provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(5) All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance
with municipal regulations. Any executive session for the purpose
of discussing and studying any matters to come before the agency
shall not be deemed a regular or special meeting within the
meaning of this chapter.
C. Records.
(1) Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Planning or
Zoning Board, the findings, if any, made by it and the reasons
therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made available for public
inspection during the normal business hours at the office of the
administrative officer. Any interested party shall have the right to
compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceedings concerning the subject matter of such minutes.
§ 550-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-196
1:1213
(2) A verbatim recording shall be made of every hearing. The
recording of the proceedings shall be made by either stenographic,
mechanical or electronic means. The municipality shall furnish a
transcript or duplicate recording in lieu thereof on request to any
interested party at his expense. The municipality, in furnishing a
transcript of the proceedings to an interested party at his expense,
shall not charge such interested party more than the maximum
permitted in N.J.S.A. 2B:7-4. Such transcript shall be certified in
writing by the transcriber to be accurate.247
D. Public hearings.
(1) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, shall hold a hearing on each application for development.
Each Board shall make the rules governing such hearings.
(2) Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing
shall be on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days
before the date of the hearing during normal business hours in the
office of the administrative officer. The applicant may produce
other documents, records or testimony at the hearing to
substantiate or clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and
documents.
(3) The officer presiding at the hearing, or such person as he may
designate, shall have power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and
documents presented by the parties, and the provisions of the
County and Municipal Investigation Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.,
shall apply.
(4) The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the
presiding officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be
permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if
represented, or directly, if not represented, subject to the
discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as
to time and number of witnesses.
(5) Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing,
but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
(6) All actions shall be taken by majority vote of the members of the
Board present at the meeting, except as otherwise required by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
247. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-196 HAMILTON CODE § 550-196
1:1214
(7) A member of a Board who is absent from one or more of the
meetings at which a hearing was held shall be eligible to vote on
the matter upon which the hearing was conducted,
notwithstanding his absence from one or more of the meetings;
provided, however, that such Board member has available to him
the transcript or recording of all of the hearings from which he was
absent and certifies in writing to the Board that he has read such
transcript or listened to such recording.
E. Public notice of a hearing.
(1) Public notice of a hearing shall be given for the following
applications for development:
(a) Any request for a variance.
(b) Any request for conditional use approval.
(c) Any request for the issuance of a permit to build within the bed
of a mapped street or public drainageway or on a lot not
abutting a street. [See § 550-192C(1) and (2).]
(d) Any request for preliminary site plan approval.
(e) Any request for preliminary subdivision approval.
(f) For relief from Article III of Chapter 536, Flood Damage
Prevention, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton, relative
to development in areas of special flood hazard.
(g) A request for interpretation of any zoning provision of this
chapter.
(h) Appeals from action by the administrative officer.
(i) Any request for a waiver of subdivision, site plan or any other
design standards.
(2) The Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, shall notify the applicant at least
two weeks prior to the public hearing at which the application will
be discussed. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice shall be
given by the applicant at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearing in the following manner:
(a) By publication in the official newspaper of the municipality, if
there is one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality.
(b) To all owners of real property, as shown on the current tax
duplicate, located in the state and within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such
hearings; provided, however, that this requirement shall be
deemed satisfied by notice to the condominium association, in
§ 550-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-196
1:1215
the case of any unit owner whose unit has a unit above or
below it, or horizontal property regime, in the case of any
co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above or below
it. Notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the
property owner, as shown on said tax duplicate, or his agent in
charge of the property, or by mailing a copy thereof by certified
mail to the property owner at his address, as shown on said
current tax duplicate. It is not required that a return receipt be
obtained. Notice is deemed complete upon mailing.
(c) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon
any partner; notice to a corporate owner may be made by
service upon its president, a vice president, secretary or other
person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service
on behalf of the corporation; notice to a condominium
association, horizontal property regime, community trust or
homeowners' association, because of its ownership of common
elements or areas located within 200 feet of the property which
is the subject of the hearing, shall be sufficient without further
notice to unit owners, co-owners or homeowners on account of
such common elements or areas.
(d) To the clerk of any adjoining municipality or municipalities
when the property involved is located within 200 feet of said
adjoining municipality or municipalities, which notice shall be
given by personal service or certified mail.
(e) To the Mercer County Planning Board when the application for
development involves property adjacent to an existing county
road or proposed road shown on the Mercer County Official
Map or the Mercer County Master Plan or adjoins other county
land.
(f) To the Commissioner of Transportation of the State of New
Jersey when the property abuts a state highway.
(g) To the State Planning Commission when the hearing involves
an application for development of property which exceeds 150
acres or 500 dwelling units, in which case the notice shall
include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file
with the administrative officer.248
(3) Upon written request of the applicant, the administrative officer
shall, within seven days, make and certify a list from the current tax
duplicates of the names and addresses of owners within the
Township to whom the applicant is required to give notice. The
applicant shall be charged a sum not to exceed $0.25 per name or
$10, whichever is greater, for said list and shall be entitled to rely
upon the information contained in such list, and failure to give
248. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-196 HAMILTON CODE § 550-196
1:1216
notice to any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding. Additionally, the applicant shall be responsible for
giving proper notice to all property owners concerned pursuant to
Subsection E(2)(b) above that do not reside within the Township.
(4) The applicant shall file an affidavit or proof of service with the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
(5) The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and
the nature of the matters to be considered, and an identification of
the property proposed for development by street address, if any, or
by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax
duplicate in the municipal Tax Assessor's office, and the location
and times at which any maps or documents for which approval is
sought are available for inspection.249
F. Resolutions of memorialization. The Planning Board or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall include findings of fact
and conclusions based thereon in each decision on any application for
development and shall reduce the decision in writing. The Board shall
provide the findings and conclusions through:
(1) A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., for action by the Board on the
application for development; or
(2) A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the Board voted
to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the Board who
voted for the action taken may vote on the memorializing
resolution, and the vote of a majority of such members present at
the meeting at which the resolution is presented for adoption shall
be sufficient to adopt the resolution. An action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-9 (resulting from the failure of a motion to approve an
application) shall be memorialized by a resolution as provided
above, with those members voting against the motion for approval
being the members eligible to vote on the memorializing resolution.
The vote on any such resolution shall be deemed to be a
memorialization of the action of the Board and not to be an action
of the Board; however, the date of the adoption of the resolution
shall constitute the date of the decision for purposes of the
mailings, filings and publications required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10. If
the Board fails to adopt a resolution or memorializing resolution as
hereinabove specified, any interested party may apply to the
Superior Court in a summary manner for an order compelling the
Board to reduce its findings and conclusions to writing within a
stated time, and the cost of the application, including attorneys'
fees, shall be assessed against the municipality.
249. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 160-196(e)(6), regarding posting of a sign on property which is
the subject of an application, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
9-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-031.
§ 550-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-197
1:1217
§ 550-197. Appeals to governing body. [Amended 1-18-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-001]
There shall be no appeals to the governing body of any decision of the
Planning Board.
A. Any interested party may appeal to the governing body any final
decision of the Board of Adjustment approving an application for a use
variance.
B. Such appeal shall be made within 10 days after the date of publication
of the final decision by serving upon the Municipal Clerk personally, or
by certified mail, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and
the name and address of the appellant and, if represented, his attorney.
A copy of such notice shall also be filed by the appellant with the Board
of Adjustment. The notice served upon the Municipal Clerk shall be
accompanied by a payment to the municipality of a fee of $50.250
C. An appeal to the governing body shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
was made, unless the Board of Adjustment certifies to the governing
body, after the notice of appeal has been filed with such Board, that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the Board's
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property; and in such a case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by order of the Superior
Court on application upon notice to such Board and on good cause
shown.
D. An appeal shall be decided by the governing body only upon the record
established before the Board of Adjustment.
E. The appellant shall, within five days of service of the notice of appeal,
arrange for a transcript for use by the governing body and pay a deposit
of $50 or the estimated costs of such transcript, whichever is less, or
within 35 days of service of the notice of appeal, submit a transcript as
otherwise arranged to the municipal Clerk; otherwise the governing
body, on its own motion or on motion of any person entitled to notice of
the Board of Adjustment's decision, after hearing upon at least 10 days'
written notice to the appellant by the moving party, may dismiss the
appeal.
F. Written notice of the meeting to review the record shall be given by the
governing body by personal service or certified mail to the appellant; to
those entitled to notice of the Board of Adjustment's decision pursuant
to § 550-196; and to the Board of Adjustment, at least 10 days prior to
the date of the meeting.
G. The governing body may affirm, with or without the imposition of
conditions, reverse or remand the final decision appealed from. The
affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of the
250. Editor's Note: See also § 215-1.
§ 550-197 HAMILTON CODE § 550-197
1:1218
§ 550-198. Notice of decisions.
Any decision of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, when
acting upon an application for development, any decisions of the governing
body, when acting upon an appeal, and any decision of the administrative
officer, when acting upon a waiver, shall be noticed in the following manner:
§ 550-199. through § 550-220. (Reserved)
governing body shall be necessary to reverse, remand or affirm, with or
without conditions, the decision on appeal.
A. A copy of the decision shall be mailed within 10 days of the date of
decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his attorney, without
separate charge, and to all who request a copy of the decision for a
reasonable fee.
B. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality, if there is one, or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality. Such publication shall be paid
for by the applicant at the time of application and shall be published
within two weeks from the date of the decision. The action of the
administrative officer will not become effective until 10 days after the
date of the publication of the notice of decision.
C. A copy of the decision and all submitted documents of record shall be
filed with the administrative officer.
§ 550-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-199
1:1219

ARTICLE VII
Development Application Review Procedures
§ 550-221. Jurisdiction during review. [Amended 11-2-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-048; 5-18-2011 by Ord. No. 11-019]
The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment have the powers
specified in Article VI of this chapter. Certain of the respective powers of
the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment overlap in order to
expedite the review of development applications. The overlapping powers
are as follows:
A. Planning Board. The Planning Board shall have the power to act in lieu
of the Board of Adjustment and subject to the same extent and
restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment on the following
matters. Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this section, the
public notice shall include reference to the request for a variance or
direction for issuance of a permit, as the case may be.
(1) Grant variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60a.
(2) Direct, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34, issuance of a permit for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
(3) Direct, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35, issuance of a permit for a
building or structure not related to a street.
B. Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
have the power to grant, to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Planning Board, site plan, subdivision or conditional
use approval when reviewing an application for approval of a use
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, only for those lots which
were subject to said variance.
C. Administrative officer. The administrative officer may waive the site
plan review requirements of this chapter if the application for site plan
development:
(1) Has secured previous approvals.
(2) Involves normal maintenance or repair, such as a new roof,
painting, new siding or similar activity.
(3) Does not affect existing circulation, drainage, building
arrangements, landscaping, buffering, lighting and/or similar
conditions.
(4) Involves minor changes, alterations or revisions to a final site plan,
if these changes do not involve the relocation or reorientation of
parking spaces and driveways, the location of new structures or
relocation of existing buildings, does not involve increased
§ 550-221 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-221
1:1221
§ 550-222. (Reserved)251
impervious surface areas, floor areas or sign areas, or decrease the
amount of landscaping and does not involve the intensification of
the utility of the land or utilization of existing floor space.
D. Complete application to be submitted.
(1) An application for development shall be complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by a municipal
agency when so certified by the municipal agency or the
administrative officer. In the event that the agency or the
administrative officer does not certify the application to be
complete within 45 days of the date of its submission, the
application shall be deemed complete upon the expiration of the
forty-five-day period for purpose of commencing the applicable
time period, unless the application lacks information indicated on
the appropriate checklist adopted herein and provided to the
applicant and the municipal agency or the administrative officer
has notified the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the
application within 45 days of submission of the application.
(2) The applicant may request that one or more of the submission
requirements be waived, in which event the agency shall grant or
deny the request within 45 days. Nothing herein shall be construed
as diminishing the applicant's obligation to prove in the application
process that he is entitled to approval of the application. The
municipal agency may subsequently require correction of any
information found to be in error and submission of additional
information not specified in the ordinance or any revisions in the
accompanying documents as are reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application for development have been met. The
application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such
additional information or any revisions in the accompanying
documents so required by the municipal agency.
(3) An application shall not be deemed complete unless all of the
information within the applicable checklist (per §§ 550-223 through
550-231) has been submitted or a waiver for submitting such
information has been granted by the Board having jurisdiction.
(4) Documents submitted in support of an application for development
shall not be considered to be "those required for approval" unless
such application has been deemed complete by the Board having
jurisdiction pursuant to this section.
251. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 160-222, previously codified herein, pertaining to the
Development Review Advisory Board, was repealed 11-2-1994 by Ord. No. 94-048.
§ 550-221 HAMILTON CODE § 550-223
1:1222
§ 550-223. General requirements. [Amended 11-2-1994 by Ord. No.
94-048; 4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 04-012; 10-20-2004 by Ord. No.
04-041; 1-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-002]
A. Subdivision review. All subdivisions, as defined under § 550-7, are
subject to the review procedures specified herein.
B. Site plan review. Except as hereinafter provided, no building permit
shall be issued for any structure or additional parking spaces to
residential, business and industrial properties and the addition of
parking and driveways and/or paving of same on commercial, business
and industrial properties or an intensification of the utilization of a
commercial, business and industrial property until a site plan has been
reviewed and approved by the Township of Hamilton. The approval of a
site plan for a detached dwelling unit used solely for residential
purposes and its accessory buildings on a lot, including customary
accessory buildings incidental to farms, shall not be necessary unless
made as a part of an application for a planned community, planned
neighborhood or a conditional use permit. Additionally, any use of land
in the Township for commercial, business or industrial purposes which
alters the natural or existing condition of the land, exclusive of farming,
shall require site plan review.
C. Development application checklist.
(1) All applications to the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall
be submitted to the administrative officer in accordance with the
development process calendar adopted annually by the
administrative officer.
(2) Each application shall be accompanied by the required items and
information indicated on the following checklist:
(a) Ten completed copies of the development application master
form.
(b) Ten completed copies of the applicable supplementary
development application forms: specifically, Form No. 1 for
subdivisions; Form No. 2 for site plans, conditional uses and
addition of parking spaces; Form No. 3 for variance requests;
Form No. 4 for proposals located in a floodplain.
(c) Three completed copies of the required development
application checklist.
(d) The application fee in accordance with § 550-254 of this
chapter.
(e) Certification from the Tax Collector that all taxes and local
assessments are paid to date.
(f) Photographs of the site indicating areas that are the subject of
the application.
§ 550-223 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-223
1:1223
(g) Ten copies of all plans required by ordinance in support of the
application.
1. Submission of sketch plans, concept site plan review and
concept subdivision review must be in accordance with the
procedures and plan details set forth in § 550-224A and B.
2. Submission of minor subdivision plats must be in
accordance with the procedures and plan details as set
forth in § 550-224A and C.
3. Submission of preliminary major subdivision plats must be
in accordance with the procedures and plan details set
forth in § 550-225A and B.
4. Submission of preliminary site plans must be in
accordance with the procedures and plan details set forth
in § 550-225A and C
5. Submission of final subdivision plats must be in
accordance with the procedures and plan details set forth
in § 550-226A and B.
6. Submission of final site plans must be in accordance with
the procedures and plan details set forth in § 550-226A
and C.
7. Submission of use variance applications not related to site
plans or subdivisions must be in accordance with the
procedures and plan details set forth in § 550-224A, B and
C.
8. Submission of other variance applications not related to
site plans or subdivisions must be in accordance with the
procedures and plan details set forth in § 550-224A, B and
C.
9. Conditional use not related to site plans or subdivisions
must be in accordance with the procedures and plan
details set forth in § 550-224A, B and C.
(h) Proof that an application has been submitted to the Mercer
County Planning Board and any other governmental agency as
required by law for appropriate review and action.
(i) If a corporation or partnership is applying for permission to
subdivide a parcel of land into six or more lots or applying for a
variance to construct a multiple dwelling of 25 or more family
units or for approval of a site to be used for commercial
purposes, a list of names of its stock of any class of at least 10%
and addresses of all stockholders or individual partners owning
at least 10% of the interest in the partnership, as the case may
be. If a corporation or partnership owns 10% or more of the
§ 550-223 HAMILTON CODE § 550-223
1:1224
stock of a corporation or 10% or greater interest in a
partnership above, that corporation or partnership shall list
the names and addresses of its stockholders holding 10% or
more of its stock or of 10% or greater interest in the
partnership, as the case may be, and this requirement shall
be followed in every corporate stockholder or partner in a
partnership, until the names and addresses of the
noncorporate stockholders and individual partners exceeding
the ten-percent ownership criterion established have been
listed. No Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
approve the application of any corporation or partnership
which does not comply with this requirement. Any corporation
or partnership which conceals the names of the stockholders
owning 10% or more of its stock or of the individual partners
owning a 10% or greater interest in the partnership, as the
case may be, shall be subject to a fine of $1,000 to $10,000,
which shall be recovered in the name of the municipality in any
court of record in the state in a summary manner pursuant to
the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.).
(j) Certification that the applicant is the owner of the land or the
properly authorized agent of the owner or that the owner has
given consent under an option agreement.252
(k) Applicant will submit a compact disk containing CADgenerated
data and information with regard to preliminary and
final major and minor subdivisions, site plans and as-built
plans. The information on the compact disk shall be compatible
with the Township's GIS system, as same may be modified.
(3) If the application is for a final subdivision or site plan approval:
(a) A statement from the applicant's professional engineer that the
plans show all utilities in exact location and elevation, that he
has examined the drainage plan and found that the interests of
the Township and of neighboring properties are adequately
protected and that he has identified those portions of any
utilities already installed and those to be installed. The
applicant shall certify in writing that he has installed all
improvements in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and/or posted a performance guaranty in accordance
with § 550-255 of this chapter.
(b) A statement from the Township Engineer that all
improvements installed prior to application have been
inspected as provided in § 550-255 of this chapter and that
such improvements meet the requirements of the Township.
Any improvements installed prior to application for final
252. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 160-223(c)(2)(k), regarding the completion of notice/sign
requirements, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 9-17-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-031.
§ 550-223 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-223
1:1225
§ 550-224. Submission of sketch plats, sketch plans, concept site
plans and concept subdivisions. [Amended 11-2-1994 by Ord. No.
94-048; 3-16-2005 by Ord. No. 05-007; 4-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05-011;
11-4-2005 by Ord. No. 05-033]
A conceptual sketch of the proposed subdivision or site plan is not required
but is strongly recommended. The submission of a conceptual sketch affords
the applicant opportunity to discuss the proposal in its formative stages
and receive the advice of either the Planning Board or the Zoning Board
of Adjustment. It is urged that an applicant have a pre-review session with
the Divisions of Planning and Engineering prior to forwarding a sketch plat,
sketch plan, conceptual site plan or conceptual subdivision to either the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
approval that do not meet or exceed Township standards shall
be factored into the required performance guaranty.
(c) A certification that fully executed preliminary plans (Mylar)
and 10 sets of prints are on file with the division of
engineering.
(4) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment may waive
submission requirements upon written request of an applicant
stated in the application with reference to the specific section(s)
requested to be waived with reasons for the request. The above
Boards may waive the requirement only where not reasonably
necessary to make an informed decision on the application.
D. Contribution disclosure statement requirement. Any land use
application shall satisfy the requirements of the Township's Land Use
Code, § 550-229, concerning the submission of a contribution
disclosure statement.
A. Procedure for submitting sketch plats, sketch plans, concept site plans
and concept subdivisions.
(1) The application must be filed with the administrative officer at least
10 days prior to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment
meeting at which it will be presented. This ten-day period will give
the staff ample time to review the plan for presentation to the
appropriate board.
(2) The administrative officer shall, upon a determination that the
requirements of the development application checklist(s) have
been fulfilled, process the application and shall issue an application
number which thereafter shall appear on all papers, maps, plats
and other documents submitted for processing in conjunction with
the application. The administrative officer shall schedule the
application for the next applicable Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment meeting.
§ 550-223 HAMILTON CODE § 550-224
1:1226
(3) The administrative officer shall retain one copy each of the sketch
and the application form and shall distribute the remaining copies
in the following manner:
(a) Township Planning Division: one copy each of the sketch and
application.
(b) Township Engineering Division: one copy each of the sketch
and application.
(c) Township Inspection Division: one copy each of the sketch and
application.
(d) Environmental Commission: one copy of the sketch and
application.
(4) At the direction of the administrative officer, additional copies of
the sketch may be forwarded to other individuals, offices and
agencies for review and comment. In those instances where an
application for site plan, subdivision or conditional use approval is
being reviewed by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the
administrative officer shall forward a copy of same to the Planning
Board for its information.
B. Details required for sketch site plans, concept site plans and concept
subdivision. The submitted sketch shall be based on Tax Map
information or some other similarly accurate base and shall be neatly
and accurately drawn. The following information shall be included:
(1) A key map, at a scale of not less than one inch equals 800 feet,
showing the location of the subject property in relation to
significant facilities such as schools, parks, major streets, zoning
boundaries, major shopping or employment centers within 2,000
feet of any part of the property.
(2) Title block.
(a) Name of the subdivision or development, municipality and
county.
(b) Date of original preparation of the plan and of each subsequent
revision thereof.
(c) Name, address, signature and title and license number (if any)
of the person who prepared the plan.
(d) If the plans are prepared by a licensed professional (engineer,
land surveyor, architect, planner, etc.), title blocks shall also be
in conformance with the rules and regulations of their
respective state boards.
(3) Names and addresses and signatures of applicant(s) and owner(s)
of record.
§ 550-224 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-224
1:1227
(4) The zone district, Tax Map sheet, section and lot number of the site
to be developed, as well as that for all contiguous land and of the
property directly across the street.
(5) A graphic and numerical scale.
(6) North arrow.
(7) The subdivision or development boundary line (heavy solid line)
and the location of that portion which is to be subdivided or
developed in relation to the entire tract.
(8) The location of all existing and proposed property lines, streets,
buildings and structures (with an indication as to whether they will
be removed or retained), bridges, culverts, drainpipes, driveways,
parking or loading areas, rights-of-way and all easements on the
property.
(9) The location of all existing significant natural features on the
property, including streams, watercourses, ponds, drainage
ditches, rock outcrops, wooded areas, wetlands, etc.
(10) Approximate dimensions and area of the entire tract and each lot
proposed, including lands remaining.
(11) Proposed buffer and landscaped areas.
(12) Delineation of the five-hundred-year floodplain and the National
Flood Insurance Program floodway and flood hazard areas.
(13) The sketch shall be drawn at a scale of not more than 100 feet to
the inch on one of three standard size sheets as follows: 8 1/2 by 13
inches, 15 by 21 inches or 24 by 36 inches. If one sheet is not
sufficient to contain the entire tract, it may be shown on separate
sheets of equal sizes, with reference on each sheet to the adjoining
sheets.
C. Details required for sketches prior to minor subdivision classification.
(1) A key map, at a scale of not less than one inch equals 800 feet,
showing the location of the subject property in relation to
significant facilities such as schools, parks, major streets, zoning
boundaries, major shopping or employment centers within 2,000
feet of any part of the property.
(2) Title block.
(a) Name of the subdivision or development, municipality and
county.
(b) Date of original preparation of the plan and of each subsequent
revision thereof.
§ 550-224 HAMILTON CODE § 550-224
1:1228
(c) Name, address, signature, title and license number and
embossed seal of the person who prepared the plan.
(d) If the plans are prepared by a licensed professional (engineer,
land surveyor, architect, planner, etc.), title blocks shall also be
in conformance with the rules and regulations of their
respective state boards.
(3) Names, addresses and signatures of the applicant(s) and owner(s)
of record.
(4) The zone district, Tax Map sheet, section and lot number of the site
to be developed as well as that for all contiguous land and of the
property directly across the street.
(5) The name(s) and address(es) of all property owners within 200 feet
of the site.
(6) A graphic and numerical scale.
(7) North arrow.
(8) The subdivision or development boundary lines (heavy solid line)
and the location of that portion which is to be subdivided or
developed in relation to the entire sheet.
(9) The location of all existing and proposed property lines, streets,
buildings and structures (with an indication as to whether they will
be removed or retained), bridges, culverts, drainpipes, driveways,
parking or loading areas, rights-of-way and all easements on and
within 150 feet of the property.
(10) The location of all existing significant natural features on and
within 150 feet of the property, including streams, watercourses,
ponds, drainage ditches, rock outcrops, wooded areas, wetlands,
etc.
(11) The full plan of development, including street and alley lines and
widths, and areas to be dedicated to or reserved for public
purposes.
(12)Widths of easements or rights-of-way, if any, for public services and
utilities with notations of any limitation on such easements or
rights-of-way.
(13) Dimensions of sight triangles, tangents, radii, arcs and chords and
central angles for all center-line curves on streets and at all street
corners.
(14) All bearings and boundary line dimensions and areas for the entire
tract and each lot proposed, including lands remaining, and for any
area proposed to be dedicated to or reserved for a public purpose.
(15) Proposed buffer and landscaped areas, if any.
§ 550-224 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-224
1:1229
(16) Location of all monuments, designating the monuments referenced
and showing at least two permanent coordinated monuments
within a reasonable distance of the site, as approved by the
Township Engineer.
(17) Delineation of the five-hundred-year floodplain and the National
Flood Insurance Program floodway and flood hazard areas.
(18) The names of adjoining subdivisions, if any, and the book and page
where recorded.
(19) All setbacks (front yard, side yard, rear yard) of existing and/or
proposed principal buildings and all necessary structures.
(20) A certification by the licensed engineer and surveyor stating the
plat is correct and a statement duly acknowledged before some
officer authorized to take acknowledgement of deeds, signed by the
owner or owners of the property, stating the subdivision is made
with his (their) free consent and is in accordance with his (their)
desires.
(21) If the proposed lot(s) is (are) not serviced by a sanitary sewer,
certification by a licensed professional engineer that the proposed
lot(s) can adequately accommodate a septic system. The location(s)
of the soil log(s) and percolation test hole(s), test results and
compliance with the Individual Sewage Disposal Code of New
Jersey shall be shown on the plat and certified by a licensed
professional engineer. This shall be shown for each lot proposed,
including lands remaining.
(22) The minor subdivision plan shall be drawn at a scale of not more
than 100 feet to the inch on one of three standard size sheets as
follows: 8 1/2 by 13 inches, 15 by 21 inches or 24 by 36 inches. If
one sheet is not sufficient to contain the entire tract, it may be
shown on separate sheets of equal sizes, with reference on each
sheet to the adjoining sheets.
(23) Compliance with Chapter 565, Site Investigation and Soil
Sampling.
(24) Compliance with Chapter 583, Stream Buffer Conservation Zone.
D. Action by the Township.
(1) Any proposed subdivision or development determined by the
administrative officer to be creating, imposing, aggravating or
leading to the possibility of an adverse effect upon either the
property in question or upon any adjacent properties may be
required to be revised to remove such adverse effect(s) prior to
further review, classification or approval or, where the remaining
portion of the original tract is of sufficient size to be subdivided or
developed further, the applicant may be required to submit a
§ 550-224 HAMILTON CODE § 550-224
1:1230
§ 550-225. Submission of preliminary plats and plans. [Amended
1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-008; 11-2-1994 by Ord. No. 94-048;
sketch of the entire remaining portion of the tract to indicate a
feasible plan whereby the applied for subdivision or development,
together with subsequent subdivision(s) or development(s), may be
submitted so as not to create, impose or aggravate or lead to any
such adverse effect.
(2) If the sketch plat is considered for classification as a minor
subdivision, the Planning Board shall act on the proposed plat
within 45 days of its complete and proper submission to the
administrative officer or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure to act within the prescribed
time period shall constitute minor subdivision approval. If classified
as a minor subdivision by the Planning Board, a notation to that
effect, including the date of classification, shall be made on the
master copy. All prints of the plat shall be signed by the Chairman
or Secretary of the Planning Board, or the acting Chairman or
Secretary, where either or both may be absent, and returned to the
subdivider within one week thereof. No further approval of the
subdivision shall be required. In the event that the same is
disapproved by the Planning Board, the Secretary of the Planning
Board shall, within 10 days of such action, notify the subdivider of
such disapproval and the reason therefor. In acting on the
application, the Township shall consider a report received, in
writing, from the County Planning Board within 30 days after its
receipt of the plat. If a reply is not received from the County
Planning Board within 30 days, the sketch plat shall be deemed to
have been approved by it.
(3) Within 190 days from the date of approval of a minor subdivision
sketch plat, a plat map drawn in compliance with the Map Filing
Act, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., or a deed description shall be filed by
the subdivider with the County Recording Officer. Unless filed
within the 190 days, the approval shall expire and require
municipal approval as in the first instance. The zoning
requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval
was granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after the
date of minor subdivision approval by the municipality, provided
that the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded
as provided in this section.
(4) In the case of a minor subdivision, and based upon an approval by
the Planning Board or the Minor Subdivision Committee, the
Township Engineer shall designate on the Tax Maps and other
records that no further subdivisions of these properties shall be
done unless application is made for a major subdivision.
§ 550-224 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-225
1:1231
3-16-2005 by Ord. No. 05-007; 4-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05-011;
11-4-2005 by Ord. No. 05-033; 1-5-2006 by Ord. No. 05-038]
A preliminary submission is required of all subdivisions classified as major
subdivisions and of all development proposals requiring site plan review.
A. Procedure for submitting preliminary plats and preliminary plans.
(1) The application must be filed with the administrative officer in
accordance with the development process calendar.
(2) The administrative officer shall, upon a determination that the
requirements of the development application checklist have been
fulfilled, process the application and shall issue an application
number. Once an application has been assigned a number, such
number shall appear on all papers, maps, plats and other
documents submitted for processing in conjunction with the
application. The administrative officer shall schedule the
application for the next Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment meeting.
(3) The administrative officer shall retain one copy each of the
preliminary plat or plan, any protective covenants or deed
restrictions and the application form and shall distribute the
remaining copies in the following manner:
(a) Township Planning Division: one copy each of the preliminary
plat or plan, any protective covenants or deed restrictions and
the application.
(b) Township Engineering Division: one copy each of the
preliminary plat or plan, any protective covenants or deed
restrictions and the application.
(c) Township Inspection Division: one copy each of the preliminary
plat or plan, any protective covenants or deed restrictions and
the application.
(d) Environmental Commission: one copy each of the preliminary
plat or plan, any protective covenants or deed restrictions and
the application.
(4) At the direction of the administrative officer, additional copies of
the preliminary plat or plan may be forwarded to other individuals,
offices and agencies for review and comment. In those instances
where an application for site plan, subdivision or conditional use
approval is being reviewed by the Board of Adjustment, the
administrative officer shall forward a copy of same to the Planning
Board for its information.
B. Details required for preliminary subdivision plats.
§ 550-225 HAMILTON CODE § 550-225
1:1232
(1) A key map, at a scale of not less than one inch equals 800 feet,
showing the location of the subject property in relation to
significant facilities such as schools, parks, major streets, zoning
boundaries, major shopping or employment centers within 2,000
feet of any part of the property.
(2) Title block.
(a) Name of the subdivision or development, municipality and
county.
(b) Date of original preparation of the plan and of each subsequent
revision thereof.
(c) Name(s), address(es), signature(s) and title(s) and license
number(s) and embossed seal of person(s) who prepared the
plan.
(d) If the plans are prepared by a licensed professional (engineer,
land surveyor, architect, planner, etc.), title blocks shall also be
in conformance with the rules and regulations of their
respective state boards.
(3) Names, addresses and signatures of applicant(s) and owner(s) of
record.
(4) The zone district, Tax Map sheet, section and lot number of the site
to be developed as well as that for all contiguous land and of the
property directly across the street.
(5) The name(s) and address(es) of all property owners within 200 feet
of the site.
(6) A graphic and numerical scale.
(7) North arrow.
(8) The subdivision or development boundary line (heavy solid line)
and the location of that portion which is to be subdivided or
developed in relation to the entire tract.
(9) The property lines of the land to be subdivided or developed, the
location and rights-of-way widths of all streets and roads within 400
feet of the property and the distance to the nearest intersection.
(10) The location of all existing and proposed property lines, location
and outside dimensions of buildings and structures (with an
indication as to whether they will be removed or retained), bridges,
culverts, drainpipes, driveways, parking or loading areas and all
easements on and within 150 feet of the property.
(11) The location of all existing and significant natural features on and
within 150 feet of the property, including streams, watercourses,
§ 550-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-225
1:1233
ponds, drainage ditches, rock outcrops, wooded areas, wetlands,
etc.
(12) The location of existing on-site tree masses and species
identification of all existing trees greater than 10 inches in caliper
measured from four feet above ground level.
(13) The full plan of development, including street and alley lines and
widths and areas to be dedicated to or reserved for public
purposes.
(14)Widths of easements or rights-of-way, if any, for public services and
utilities, with notations of any limitation on such easements or
rights-of-way.
(15) Dimensions of sight triangles, tangents, radii, arcs and chords and
central angles for all center-line curves on streets and at all street
corners.
(16) All bearings and boundary line dimensions and areas to the nearest
10th of an acre for the entire tract and for each lot proposed,
including lands remaining, and for any area proposed to be
dedicated to or reserved for a public purpose.
(17) Proposed buffers and landscape areas, if any.
(18) Location of all monuments, designating the monuments referenced
and showing at least two permanent coordinated monuments
within a reasonable distance of the site, as approved by the
Township Engineer.
(19) Delineation of the five-hundred-year floodplain and the National
Flood Insurance Program floodway and flood hazard areas.
(20) The names of adjoining subdivisions, if any, and the book and page
where recorded.
(21) All setbacks (front yard, side yard, rear yard) of existing and/or
proposed principal buildings and all necessary structures.
(22) If the proposed lot(s) is (are) not served by a sanitary sewer,
certification by a licensed professional engineer that the proposed
lot(s) can adequately accommodate a septic system. The location(s)
of the soil log(s) and percolation test hole(s), test results and
compliance with the Individual Sewage Disposal Code of New
Jersey shall be shown on the plat and certified by a licensed
professional engineer. This shall be shown for each lot proposed,
including lands remaining.
(23) Contours at contour intervals of five feet or less for a site with an
average slope of 10% or greater, or at contour intervals of two feet
or less for land at a lesser average slope. However, contours need
not be shown for subdivisions with gross area of less than three
§ 550-225 HAMILTON CODE § 550-225
1:1234
areas and involving no new streets or roads, unless specifically
requested by Hamilton Township.
(24) Proposed center-line profiles for all new streets or roads shown on
the plat.
(25) A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to
the land being subdivided.
(26) Plans and profiles of all proposed gradings, paving, roads,
sidewalks, curbs, storm and sanitary sewers and appurtenances,
water mains, gas mains, bridges and connections to existing or
proposed utilities, all of which shall meet the requirements of the
Department of Community Planning and Compliance. The plans
shall be drawn at a scale of not more than 50 feet to the inch.
(27) A plan and calculations for surface drainage of the land proposed to
be subdivided. A stormwater management plan shall be prepared
and submitted per § 550-113 of this chapter.
(28) Location of all existing and proposed utility lines, above and below
ground, within and immediately adjacent to the subject site.
(29) Each submission shall be at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet for a
tract of up to 150 acres and one inch equals 200 feet for a tract of
150 acres or more. All plans submitted shall be on one of three of
the following standard sheet sizes: 8 1/2 by 13 inches, 15 by 21
inches or 24 by 36 inches. If one sheet is not sufficient to contain
the entire tract, it may be shown on separate sheets of equal sizes,
with reference on each sheet to the adjoining sheets.
(30) Signature block as follows:
1. Application _____ Number _____ Map _____ Section _____
Lot _____ Zone _____
2. I consent to the filing of this plan (or plat) with the Planning
Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment (only include appropriate
board) of the Township of Hamilton.
(Applicant)
(Owner)
(Date)
3. I hereby certify that I have prepared this plan (or plat) and
that all dimensions and information are correct.
(Name)
(Title and License
No.)
§ 550-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-225
1:1235
4. I have reviewed this plan (or plat) and certify that it meets all
codes and ordinances under my jurisdiction.
(Township Engineer)
(Date)
5. I have reviewed this plan (or plat) and certify that it meets all
codes and ordinances under my jurisdiction.
(Township Planner)
(Date)
6. Approved by the Planning Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment
(only include appropriate board) Preliminary
(Chairman)
(Date)
(Secretary)
(Date)
(31) Certification from the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
(32) Proof that a source-separation plan (recycling plan) has been
submitted to the Mercer County Improvement Authority or related
county agency for approval.
(33) Applicant must demonstrate in its plans compliance with the
Barrier Free Subcode of the Uniform Construction Code and/or the
American Disabilities Act, whichever is applicable.
(34) Compliance with Chapter 565, Site Investigation and Soil
Sampling.
(35) Compliance with Chapter 583, Stream Buffer Conservation Zone.
(36) Compliance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 and 40:55D-48.2, disclosure
of ownership by corporation or partnership.
C. Details required for preliminary site plans.
(1) A key map, at a scale of not less than one inch equals 800 feet,
showing the location of the subject property in relation to
significant facilities such as schools, parks, major streets, zoning
boundaries, major shopping or employment centers within 2,000
feet of any part of the property.
(2) Title block.
(a) Name of the development, municipality and county.
(b) Date of original preparation of the plan and of each subsequent
revision thereof.
§ 550-225 HAMILTON CODE § 550-225
1:1236
(c) Name(s), address(es), signature(s) and title(s) and license
number(s) and embossed seal(s) of the person(s) who prepared
the plan.
(d) If the plans are prepared by a licensed professional (engineer,
land surveyor, architect, planner, etc.), title blocks shall also be
in conformance with the rules and regulations of their
respective state boards.
(3) Names, addresses and signatures of applicant(s) and owner(s) of
record.
(4) The zone district, Tax Map sheet, section and lot number of the site
to be developed as well as that for all contiguous land and of the
property directly across the street.
(5) The name(s) and address(es) of all property owners within 200 feet
of the site.
(6) A graphic and numerical scale.
(7) North arrow.
(8) The development boundary line (heavy solid line) and the location
of that portion which is to be developed in relation to the entire
tract.
(9) The property zones of the land to be developed, the location and
right-of-way widths of all streets and roads within 400 feet of the
property and the distance to the nearest intersection.
(10) The location of all existing and proposed property lines, location
and outside dimensions of buildings and structures (with an
indication as to whether they will be removed or retained), bridges,
culverts, drainpipe, driveways, parking or loading areas and all
easements on and within 150 feet of the property.
(11) The location of all existing significant natural features on and
within 150 feet of the property, including streams, watercourses,
ponds, drainage ditches, rock outcrops, wooded areas, wetlands,
etc.
(12) The location of existing on-site tree masses and species
identification of all existing trees greater than 10 inches in caliper
measured from four feet above ground level.
(13) The full plan of development, including street and alley lines and
widths and areas to be dedicated to or reserved for public
purposes.
(14)Widths of easements or rights-of-way, if any, for public services and
utilities, with notations of any limitation on such easements or
rights-of-way.
§ 550-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-225
1:1237
(15) Dimensions of sight triangles, tangents, radii, arcs and chords and
central angles for all center-line curves on streets and at all street
corners.
(16) All bearings and boundary line dimensions and areas to the nearest
1/10 of an acre for the entire tract and for each lot proposed,
including lands remaining, and for any area proposed to be
dedicated to or reserved for a public purpose.
(17) Delineation of the five-hundred-year floodplain and the National
Flood Insurance Program floodway and flood hazard areas.
(18) All setbacks (front yard, side yard, rear yard) of existing and/or
proposed principal buildings and all necessary structures.
(19) If the proposed lot(s) is (are) not served by a sanitary sewer,
certification by a licensed professional engineer that the proposed
lot(s) can adequately accommodate a septic system. The location(s)
of the soil log(s) and percolation test hole(s), test results and
compliance with the Individual Sewage Disposal Code of New
Jersey shall be shown on the plat and certified by a licensed
professional engineer. This shall be shown for each lot proposed,
including lands remaining.
(20) Contours at contour intervals of five feet or less for a site with an
average slope of 10% or greater or at contour intervals of two feet
or less for land at lesser average slope. However, contours need not
be shown for subdivisions with gross area of less than three acres
and involving no new streets or roads, unless specifically requested
by Hamilton Township.
(21) Proposed center-line profiles for all new streets or roads shown on
the plat.
(22) A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to
the land being subdivided.
(23) Plans and profiles of all proposed gradings, paving, roads,
sidewalks, curbs, storm and sanitary sewers and appurtenances,
water mains, gas mains, bridges and connections to existing or
proposed utilities, all of which shall meet the requirements of the
Department of Community Planning and Compliance. The plans
shall be drawn at a scale of not more than 50 feet to the inch.
(24) A plan and calculations for surface drainage of the land proposed to
be developed, including design and details of the existing and
proposed stormwater management system, showing the location
and elevation of inlets, pipes, swales, berms, low-flow channels,
outlets and all other storm drainage facilities. The stormwater
management plan shall be prepared and submitted per § 550-113
of this chapter.
§ 550-225 HAMILTON CODE § 550-225
1:1238
(25) Invert and rim elevations, showing the location, size and grade of
all pipes for the transportation and/or treatment of on-site and offsite
disposal of wastewater with location and details concerning the
existing and proposed sanitary sewage disposal system.
(26) The design and details of any retaining walls, manholes and
headwalls.
(27) All details of the on-site and supplying water supply system.
(28) Location of all existing and proposed utility lines, above and below
ground, within and immediately adjacent to the subject site.
(29) The location and width of existing and proposed traffic circulation
elements on and adjoining the site, such as streets, entrances and
exits, acceleration or deceleration lanes, channelization, etc., with
type of pavement and specifications noted.
(30) The location of all off-street parking and loading areas showing the
number and dimensions of the parking spaces and loading areas
and showing traffic aisles and patterns and curbing, with radii and
specifications noted for curbs and pavement.
(31) The existing and proposed spot elevations based on the United
States Coastal Geodetic datum at all building corners, all flood
levels, center lines of abutting roads, top and bottom curbs,
property corners and other locations as designated during review.
(32) Provision for solid waste storage and disposal.
(33) A landscaping and buffering plan, showing what will be removed
and be planted, including an itemized list of all species of plants
and trees to be installed, noting size, approximate time of planting,
method of planting (bare-rooted, ball and burlap, etc.) and
maintenance plans, seeding schedule, slope stabilization, and
proposed soil erosion and sedimentation controls.
(34) Lighting details indicating location, type and height of light
standards, radius of light, type of light and intensity in footcandles.
(35) Location, size and material of existing and proposed signs.
(36) An elevation drawing or rendering, sealed by a licensed architect
or engineer, showing for each building or typical building the front,
sides and rear facade, with dimensions and type and color of
material to be used. The drawing shall also contain a signature
block:
§ 550-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-225
1:1239
1. I consent to the filing of this plan (or plat) with the Planning
Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment (only include appropriate
board) of the Township of Hamilton.
(Applicant)
(Date)
(Owner)
(Date)
2. I hereby certify that I have prepared this plan (or plat) and
that all dimensions and information are correct.
(Name)
(Title and License
No.)
3. I have reviewed this plan (or plat) and certify that it meets all
codes and ordinances under my jurisdiction.
(Township Engineer)
(Date)
(Township Planner)
(Date)
(37) Preliminary floor plans sealed by a licensed architect or engineer.
(38) Cross sections of streets, aisles, lanes and driveways which shall
adhere to applicable requirements of this chapter and applicable
design standards in the subdivision provisions of this chapter and
those on file in the office of the Township Engineer.
(39) Each submission shall be at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet for a
tract of up to 150 acres and one inch equals 200 feet for a tract of
150 acres or more. All plans submitted shall be on one of three of
the following standard sheet sizes: 8 1/2 by 13 inches, 15 by 21
inches or 24 by 36 inches. If one sheet is not sufficient to contain
the entire tract, it may be shown on separate sheets of equal sizes
with references on each sheet to the adjoining sheets.
(40) Signature block as follows:
1. Application _____ Number _____ Map _____ Section _____
Lot _____ Zone _____
2. I consent to the filing of this plan (or plat) with the Planning
Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment (only include appropriate
board) of the Township of Hamilton.
(Applicant)
(Date)
§ 550-225 HAMILTON CODE § 550-225
1:1240
(Owner)
(Date)
3. I hereby certify that I have prepared this plan (or plat) and
that all dimensions and information are correct.
(Name)
(Title and License
No.)
4. I have reviewed this plan (or plat) and certify that it meets all
codes and ordinances under my jurisdiction.
(Township Engineer)
(Date)
5. I have reviewed this plan and certify that it meets all codes
and ordinances under my jurisdiction.
(Township Planner)
(Date)
6. Approved by the Planning Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment
(only include appropriate board) Preliminary
(Chairman)
(Date)
(Secretary)
(Date)
(41) Certification from the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
(42) Proof that a source-separation plan (recycling plan) has been
submitted to the Mercer County Improvement Authority or related
county agency for approval.
(43) Applicant must demonstrate in its plans compliance with the
Barrier Free Subcode of the Uniform Construction Code and/or the
American Disabilities Act, whichever is applicable.
(44) Compliance with Chapter 565, Site Investigation and Soil
Sampling.
(45) Compliance with Chapter 583, Stream Buffer Conservation Zone.
(46) Compliance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 and 40:55D-48.2, disclosure
of ownership by corporation or partnership.
D. Environmental impact statement.
(1) General provisions. The impact on the environment generated by
land development projects necessitates a comprehensive analysis
§ 550-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-225
1:1241
of the variety of problems that may result and the actions that can
be taken to minimize those problems. It is further recognized that
the level of detail required for various types of applications will
vary depending on the size of the proposal, the nature of the site
and the location of the project. Therefore, having determined that
some flexibility is needed in preparing the environmental impact
statement, the requirements for such a document are listed as
follows:
(a) All agricultural operations conducted in accordance with a
plan approved by the Soil Conservation District and all
silviculture operations conducted in accordance with a plan
prepared by a professional forester are specifically exempt
from the environmental impact statement requirements.
(b) It is strongly advised that a preapplication conference be held
with the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment to
determine the level of detail required in the environmental
impact statement.
(c) In preparing an environmental impact statement, the applicant
shall retain one or more competent professionals to perform
the necessary work. All applicable material on file in the
Hamilton Township Department of Community Planning and
Compliance pertinent to local conditions shall be consulted.
Any additional material pertinent to evaluation of potential
regional impacts shall also be considered. Furthermore, as
much original research as is necessary shall be conducted to
develop a comprehensive environmental impact statement.
(d) The environmental impact statement shall consist of written
and graphic materials which will clearly present the
information that is required.
(2) General application requirements.
(a) All minor subdivision applications, preliminary and final site
plan applications consisting of less than 10 acres, and
conditional use applications consisting of less than 10 acres
may be required to be accompanied by an environmental
impact statement. The information required shall be presented
in a concise descriptive report. The descriptive report shall be
supplemented with additional graphic and explanatory
material when environmentally sensitive areas are involved.
Environmentally sensitive areas include but are not limited to
stream corridors and floodplains, streams and water bodies,
wetlands, slopes greater than 20%, highly acid or erodible
soils, mature stands of native vegetation, aquifer recharge
areas, aquifer discharge areas and unique natural features and
habitats.
§ 550-225 HAMILTON CODE § 550-225
1:1242
(b) All preliminary and final major subdivision applications,
preliminary and final site plan applications consisting of 10
acres or more, and conditional use applications consisting of
10 acres or more, may be required to be accompanied by an
environmental impact statement. The information required
shall be presented in a detailed descriptive report, which shall
include written, graphic or other explanatory material. Certain
requirements may be waived by the Board if the applicant can
prove, conclusively, that specific requirements are
unwarranted.
(c) Any variance application not involving a site plan, subdivision
or conditional use application may be required, at the
discretion of the Board of Adjustment, to be accompanied by an
environmental impact statement. The information required
shall be determined by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(3) Format and contents. When an environmental impact statement is
required, the following format shall be utilized and the information
requested shall be provided:
(a) Project description. Indicate the purpose and scope of the
proposed project. Enumerate the benefits to the public which
will result from the proposed project and describe the
suitability of the site for the intended use. A description of the
proposed project shall be presented to indicate the extent to
which the site must be altered, the kinds of facilities to be
constructed, how they are to be constructed and the uses
intended. The resident population, working population and
visitor population shall be estimated. The compatibility or
incompatibility of the proposed project shall be described in
relation to the following:253
1. Township Master Plan, especially the land use and open
space elements.
2. The master plans of adjacent municipalities.
3. The Mercer County Master Plan.
4. Regional and state planning guides.
5. Other pertinent planning documents.
(b) Site description and inventory. Provide a description of
environmental conditions on the site, which shall include but
not be limited to the following items:
1. Types of soil. List and describe each soil type located on
the site. If applicable, provide percolation data. Where the
253. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-225
1:1243
proposed area of land disturbance will involve soils with
moderate or severe limitations, as per the Soil Survey of
Mercer County – Natural Resources Conservation Service,
relative to the type of project proposed, a complete
mapping of all soil types on the site shall be required
indicating where those moderate and severe limitations
exist.
2. Topography. Describe the topographic conditions of the
site.
3. Geology. Describe the geologic formations and features
associated with the site as well as depth-to-bedrock
conditions. Delineate those areas where bedrock is in
close proximity to the surface (within two feet of the
surface) as well as major rock outcroppings.
4. Vegetation. Describe the existing vegetation on the site.
When required, prepare a map showing the location of
major vegetation groupings, such as woodland, open field
and wetland. Where woodlands are delineated, indicate
the forest type.
5. Wildlife. Identify unique habitats. Where applicable, other
data assembled regarding wildlife activity on the site shall
also be mapped and/or described.
6. Surface water. Describe existing watercourses and water
bodies that are partially or totally on the site and their
relationship to the area of land disturbance. Calculate
existing surface runoff from the site. When the natural
drainage pattern will be significantly altered or sewage
effluent is to be added to a watercourse or water body, an
analysis shall be conducted which will investigate flow,
depth, capacity and water quality of the receiving waters.
When required, floodplain areas will be mapped in
consultation with the Department of Environmental
Protection. Existing drainage structures shall be mapped
and the capacity of drainage network shall be determined.
7. Subsurface water. Describe the subsurface water
conditions on the site, in terms both of depth to
groundwater and of water supply capabilities of the site.
Where existing conditions warrant, provide detailed
information regarding existing wells within 500 feet of the
site relative to depth, capacity and water quality. Discuss
the water supply capabilities of the adjacent areas and the
recharge capabilities of the site.
8. Unique, scenic and/or historic features. Describe and map
those portions of the site that can be considered to have
unique, scenic and/or historic qualities.
§ 550-225 HAMILTON CODE § 550-225
1:1244
9. Existing development features. Describe any existing
features on the site that are not considered to be part of
the natural environment. This may include, but not
necessarily be limited to roads, housing units, accessory
structures, utility lines, etc.
10. Miscellaneous. When warranted, an analysis shall be
conducted of existing air quality and noise levels as
prescribed by the Department of Environmental
Protection.
(c) Area and regional description. Provide a description of the
surrounding environs. Describe the existing land use pattern.
When required, describe in detail the existing infrastructure
with respect to the drainage and transportation network as
well as any central sewerage and water supply facilities.
Include an appropriate regional analysis relative to the
proposed project.
(d) Environmental performance controls. Describe in detail what
measures will be employed during the planning, construction
and operation phases which will minimize or eliminate
negative impacts on- and off-site that could result from the
proposed project. Of specific interest are:
1. Drainage plans, which shall include but not be limited to
soil erosion and sedimentation controls. Every effort
should be made to limit off-site surface runoff to
predevelopment levels.
2. Sewage disposal techniques.
3. Water supply and water conservation proposals.
4. Site design techniques sensitive to the natural
environment, which should include innovative landscape,
building and circulation design.
5. Energy conservation measures.
6. Noise reduction techniques.
7. Miscellaneous on-site and off-site public improvements.
(e) Impact. Discuss both the negative and positive on-tract and offtract
impacts. Indicate those negative impacts that are
unavoidable. The specific concerns that shall be considered
include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from surface
runoff.
2. Flooding and floodplain disruption.
§ 550-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-225
1:1245
3. Degradation of surface water quality.
4. Groundwater pollution.
5. Reduction of groundwater capabilities.
6. Sewage disposal.
7. Solid waste disposal.
8. Vegetation destruction.
9. Disruption of wildlife habitats.
10. Destruction of scenic and historic features.
11. Air quality degradation.
12. Noise levels.
13. Energy utilization.
14. Neighborhood deterioration.
15. Effect on public services (i.e., schools, fire, police, etc.).
16. Traffic congestion.
17. Health, safety and welfare of existing residents.
18. Regional development policies.
(f) Alternatives. Discuss what alternatives were considered, both
in terms of site design and project location. Indicate why an
alternative was rejected if it would have resulted in less of a
negative impact than the subject proposal.
(g) Licenses, permits and other approvals required by law. The
applicant shall list all known licenses, permits and other forms
of approval required by law for the construction and operation
of the proposed project. This list shall include, but will not be
limited to, approvals required by the Township, as well as
agencies of the county, state and federal governments. Where
approvals have been granted, copies of said approvals shall be
attached. Where approvals are pending, a note shall be made
to that effect.
(h) Documentation. All publications, file reports, manuscripts or
other written sources of information related to the project, the
project site and the Township, which were consulted and
employed in compilation of the environmental impact
statement, shall be listed. A list of all agencies and individuals
from whom pertinent information was obtained orally or by
letter shall be listed separately. Dates and locations of all
meetings shall be specified.
§ 550-225 HAMILTON CODE § 550-225
1:1246
(4) Disposition. The Board shall not approve any submission unless it
determines and finds that the proposed development:
(a) Will not result in appreciable harmful effects to the
environment.
(b) Has been designed and conceived with a view toward the
protection of regional sources.
(c) Will not place a disproportionate or excessive demand upon the
total resources available for such proposal and for any future
proposals.
E. Effect of preliminary approval. Preliminary approval shall confer upon
the applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date
of the preliminary approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval, on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval, the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary plat or plan.
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year, but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that, if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
(4) That the applicant may, at his own risk, request the administrative
officer to authorize commencement of site construction and/or the
issuance of a footing and/or foundation construction permit,
provided that the applicant:
(a) Has secured all necessary approvals and permits from other
agencies (e.g., Mercer County Planning Board, Mercer County
Soil Conservation District, New Jersey Department of
Transportation, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, etc.) having jurisdiction over the construction.
(b) Has fulfilled all conditions of preliminary approval from the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(c) Has submitted a Mylar copy of the approved preliminary plan
for signatures of appropriate municipal officials and
subsequently provided a copy of the signed Mylar and 10 prints
of the signed Mylar to the Land Use Coordinator.
(d) Has paid the required public works inspection fees.
§ 550-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-225
1:1247
§ 550-226. Submission of final plats and plans. [Amended 11-2-1994
by Ord. No. 94-048]
A final submission is required of all subdivisions and site plans which have
received preliminary approval.
(e) Has submitted the required application forms, plans and
construction permit fees to the Division of Inspections.
(f) Has held a preconstruction meeting with the appropriate
municipal officials and has submitted at the meeting a
schedule of work to be completed and a plan indicating all
trees to be preserved.
(g) Has obtained a sewer connection permit or, if applicable, a
septic system permit from the appropriate agencies prior to
any construction.
(5) No site construction shall commence without specific authorization
from the administrative officer, and all work performed on the basis
of a preliminary plan shall be at the applicant's risk.
A. Procedure for submitting final plats and final plans.
(1) The application for final approval must be submitted within three
years after the date of preliminary approval to the administrative
officer in accordance with the current development process
calendar.
(2) The administrative officer shall, upon a determination that the
requirements of the development application checklist(s) have
been fulfilled, process the application and shall issue an application
number, which thereafter shall appear on all papers, maps, plats
and other documents submitted for processing in conjunction with
the application. The administrative officer shall schedule the
application for the next Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment meeting, as the case may be.
(3) The administrative officer shall retain one copy of the final plat or
plan, any protective covenants or deed restrictions and the
application form and shall distribute the remaining copies in the
following manner:
(a) Township Planning Division: one copy each of the final plat or
plan, any protective covenants or deed restrictions and the
application.
(b) Township Engineering division: one copy each of the final plat
or plan, any protective covenants or deed restrictions and the
application.
§ 550-225 HAMILTON CODE § 550-226
1:1248
(c) Township Inspection Division: one copy each of the final plat or
plan, any protective covenants or deed restrictions and the
application.
(d) Environmental Commission: one copy of the sketch and
application.
(4) At the direction of the administrative officer, additional copies of
the final plat or plan may be forwarded to other individuals, offices
and agencies for review and comment. In those instances where an
application for site plan, subdivision or conditional use approval is
being reviewed by the Board of Adjustment, the administrative
officer shall forward a copy of same to the Planning Board for its
information.
B. Details required for final subdivision plats.
(1) All details stipulated in § 550-225B(1) through (28).
(2) Each submission shall be at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet for a
tract up to 150 acres and one inch equals 200 feet for a tract of 150
acres or more. Each submission shall be on a sheet sized 24 by 36
inches. If one sheet is not sufficient to contain the entire tract, it
may be shown on separate sheets of equal sizes with reference on
each sheet to the adjoining sheets.
(3) Signature block as follows:
1. Application _____ Number _____ Map _____ Section _____ Lot
_____ Zone _____
2. I consent to the filing of this plat or plan with the Planning
Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment (only include appropriate
board) of the Township of Hamilton.
(Applicant)
(Date)
(Owner)
(Date)
3. I hereby certify that I have prepared this plat or plan and that
all dimensions and information are correct.
(Name)
(Title and License
No.)
4. I have reviewed this plat or plan and certify that it meets all
codes and ordinances under my jurisdiction.
(Township Engineer)
(Date)
§ 550-226 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-226
1:1249
5. I have reviewed this plan and certify that it meets all codes
and ordinances under my jurisdiction.
(Township Planner)
(Date)
6. To be signed before the issuance of a building permit:
I hereby certify that all the required improvements have been
installed or a bond posted in compliance with all applicable
codes and ordinances.
(If improvements installed)
(Township Engineer)
(Date)
(If bond posted)
(Township Clerk)
(Date)
7. Approved by the Planning Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment
(only include appropriate board) Final
(Chairman)
(Date)
(Secretary)
(Date)
8. I hereby certify that this map complies with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-50 and further certify that it has been
approved for filing in the Office of the County Clerk of Mercer
County by the proper authority, the Planning Board of the
Township of Hamilton.
This certification shall expire if this map is not properly filed
with the said county on or before _____ (date).
Secretary, Planning Board
Date
(4) All additional details required at the time of preliminary approval.
(5) All dimensions of the exterior boundaries of any subdivision,
balanced and closed to a precision of one to 10,000, and the
dimensions of all lot lines to within one to 20,000. All dimensions,
angles and bearings must be tied to at least two permanent
monuments not less than 300 feet apart, and all information shall
be indicated on the plat. At least one corner of the subdivision shall
be tied to United States Geological Survey bench marks, with data
on the plat as to how the bearings were determined.
§ 550-226 HAMILTON CODE § 550-226
1:1250
C. Details required for final site plans.
(1) All details stipulated in § 550-225C(1) through (38).
(2) Each submission shall be at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet for a
tract up to 150 acres and one inch equals 200 feet for a tract of 150
acres or more. Each submission shall be on a sheet sized 24 by 36
inches. If one sheet is not sufficient to contain the entire tract, it
may be shown on separate sheets of equal sides, with reference on
each sheet to the adjoining sheets.
(3) Signature block as follows:
1. Application _____ Number _____ Map _____ Section _____ Lot
_____ Zone _____
2. I consent to the filing of this plat or plan with the Planning
Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment (only include appropriate
board) of the Township of Hamilton.
(Applicant)
(Date)
(Owner)
(Date)
3. I hereby certify that I have prepared this plat or plan and that
all dimensions and information are correct.
(Name)
(Title and License
No.)
4. I have reviewed this plat or plan and certify that it meets all
codes and ordinances under my jurisdiction.
(Township Engineer)
(Date)
5. I have reviewed this plan and certify that it meets all codes
and ordinances under my jurisdiction.
(Township Planner)
(Date)
6. To be signed before the issuance of a building permit:
I hereby certify that all the required improvements have been
installed or a bond posted in compliance with all applicable
codes and ordinances.
(If improvements installed)
(Township Engineer)
(Date)
§ 550-226 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-226
1:1251
(If bond posted)
(Township Clerk)
(Date)
7. Approved by the Planning Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment
(only include appropriate board) Final
(Chairman)
(Date)
(Secretary)
(Date)
(4) All additional details required at the time of preliminary approval.
(5) All dimensions of the exterior boundaries of any subdivision,
balanced and closed to a precision of one to 10,000, and the
dimensions of all lot lines to within one to 20,000. All dimensions,
angles and bearings must be tied to at least two permanent
monuments not less than 300 feet apart, and all information shall
be indicated on the plat. At least one corner of the subdivision shall
be tied to United States Geological Survey bench marks, with data
on the plat as to how the bearings were determined.
D. Action by the Township.
(1) The Township Department of Community Planning and Compliance
and all other individuals, offices and agencies to which copies of the
submission were forwarded shall submit their comments and
recommendations to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, within 30 days of their receipt of
the submission.
(2) Upon the submission of a complete application for final approval,
the Board shall grant or deny final approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Failure of the Board to act within 45
days or such further time as agreed to by the applicant shall
constitute final approval. In such case, the administrative officer
shall certify the submission date of the application and the failure
of the Board to act within the specified time period, and this
certification shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement of
the Board.
(3) If the Board acts favorably on the final submission, the Chairman
and the Secretary of the Board (or the acting Chairman and
Secretary where either or both may be absent) shall affix their
signatures to the original plan. The applicant shall provide the
administrative officer with the following documents:
(a) One paper print of the final plan.
§ 550-226 HAMILTON CODE § 550-226
1:1252
§ 550-227. Submission of application for conditional use or
variance. [Amended 11-2-1994 by Ord. No. 94-048]
(b) One reproducible (Mylar) print of the final plan.
(c) One cloth print of the final plan.
(4) Within 95 days of the date of the signing of the final subdivision
plat, the subdivider shall file a copy of same with the County Clerk.
In the event of failure to file within said 95 days, the approval of the
major subdivision shall expire, and any further proceedings shall
require the filing of a new plat as in the first instance. The Board,
for good cause shown, may extend the time for filing for an
additional 95 days.
(5) If the Board, after consideration and discussion of the final
submission, determines that it is unacceptable, a notation shall be
made by the Chairman of the Board to that effect on the plan, and a
resolution shall be adopted setting forth the reasons for such
rejection. One copy of the plan and the resolution shall be returned
to the applicant within 10 days of such determination.
E. Effect of final approval. Final approval of a site plan shall confer upon
the applicant the following rights for a two-year period from the date of
final approval:
(1) The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
first granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer,
whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed.
(2) If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval, the Board may extend the period of protection for
extensions of one year each, not exceeding three such extensions.
A. Procedure.
(1) All applications for variance relief to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment (with the exception of use or D variances) and not
involving any related site plan or subdivision proposal must be filed
with the administrative officer at least 21 days prior to the meeting
of the Board of Adjustment for which the application will be
scheduled for a hearing. The administrative officer shall, upon a
determination that the requirements of the development
application checklist(s) have been fulfilled, process the application
and issue an application number, which thereafter shall appear on
all papers, maps, plats and other documents submitted for
processing in conjunction with the application. The administrative
officer shall schedule the application for the next available Zoning
Board of Adjustment meeting.
(2) All applications for conditional use or use variance relief to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and not involving any related site plan
§ 550-226 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-227
1:1253
§ 550-228. Submission of application for a general development
plan. [Added 9-18-1996 by Ord. No. 96-042; amended 11-7-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-050]
or subdivision proposal must be filed with the administrative officer
in accordance with the development process calendar. The
administrative officer shall, upon a determination that the
requirements of the development application checklist(s) have
been fulfilled, process the application and issue an application
number, which thereafter shall appear on all papers, maps, plats
and other documents submitted for processing in conjunction with
the application. The administrative officer shall schedule the
application for the next Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment meeting, as the case may be.
B. Details required for variance relief applications (except use or D
variances).
(1) For a single- or two-family dwelling, a current survey or plot plat
showing all existing and proposed structures, easements,
driveways and parking areas on the property.
(2) For any other use, a sketch site plan indicating all details required
under § 550-224B.
(3) Floor plans and elevation drawings of existing and proposed
structures, noting type of exterior finish material to be used.
(4) Construction details showing typical structural features (i.e.,
foundation, footings, wall section, roof section) to be used.
A. Any developer of a parcel of land for which the developer is seeking
approval of a planned development may submit a general development
plan to the Planning Board prior to the granting of preliminary
subdivision approval or preliminary site plan approval. Planned
development approvals adopted prior to the enactment of this section
(November 7, 1996), and the procedural and substantive rights created
thereunder, shall remain in full force and effect.
B. Except for required reports and other written documentation, the
general development plan shall be submitted in plat form at a scale of
one inch equals 100 feet for a tract up to 150 acres and one inch equals
200 feet for a tract of 150 acres or more. Each submission shall be on a
sheet sized 24 inches by 36 inches. If one sheet is not sufficient to
contain the entire tract, it may be shown on separate sheets of equal
sizes, with reference on each sheet to the adjoining sheets.
C. A general development plan shall include the following:
(1) A land use plan, indicating the tract area and general locations of
the land use uses to be included in the planned development. The
total number of dwelling units and amount of nonresidential floor
§ 550-227 HAMILTON CODE § 550-228
1:1254
area to be provided and proposed land area to be devoted to
nonresidential use should be set forth. In addition, the proposed
types of nonresidential uses to be included in the planned
development should be set forth, and the land area to be occupied
by each proposed use should be estimated.
(2) A circulation plan showing the general location and types of
transportation facilities, including bus facilities and facilities for
pedestrian and bicycle access, within the planned development and
any proposed improvements to the existing transportation system
outside the planned development.
(3) An open space plan showing the proposed land area and general
location of land areas to be set aside for conservation and
recreational purposes and a general description of improvements
proposed to be made thereon, including a plan for the operation
and maintenance of such lands and including reforestation efforts.
(4) A utility plan indicating the need for and showing the proposed
location of sewage lines and waterlines and drainage facilities
necessitated by the physical characteristics of the site, proposed
methods for handling solid waste disposal, and a plan for the
operation and maintenance of proposed utilities.
(5) A stormwater management plan setting forth the proposed method
of controlling and managing stormwater on the site.
(6) An environmental inventory, including a general description of the
vegetation, soils, topography, geology, surface hydrology, climate
and cultural resources of the site, existing man-made structures or
features and the probable impact of the development on the
environmental attributes of the site.
(7) A community facility plan indicating the scope and type of
supporting community facilities.
(8) A local service plan, indicating those public services which the
applicant proposes to provide and which may include, but not be
limited to, water, sewer, cable and solid waste disposal.
(9) A housing plan outlining the number of housing units to be
provided.
(10) A fiscal report providing:
(a) An analysis of the impact of the proposed new population,
providing an estimate of the number of workers expected to be
added to the local employment workforce as a result of the
proposed development according to nonresidential use types.
(b) An analysis of the impact of the proposed new population upon
public schools.
§ 550-228 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-228
1:1255
(c) An analysis of development costs and benefits in order to
review estimated municipal and public school costs and
revenues. The analysis should also include impacts on the
taxable annual base of the Township and nonproperty tax
revenues for the Township and School District. Such cost-andbenefit
analysis should discuss the revenues expected to be
generated from the development compared to the anticipated
costs which the proposed development is expected to generate.
Revenues and costs should be shown for the municipality, the
school system, and the county.
(d) A market study that addresses the proposed commercial uses,
their size and potential trade area and impacts.
(11) A design and development criteria booklet should be provided,
establishing design and development criteria for buildings;
parking, service and access; lighting; signs; drainage, preservation
of existing major trees, setbacks from preserved wooded areas, use
of preserved wooded areas, tree protection during construction,
and other landscape design considerations. The booklet should also
address criteria for environmental and visual protection during
construction and provisions for review of energy conservation
measures.
(12) A proposed timing schedule in the case of a planned development
whose construction is contemplated over a period of years,
including any terms or conditions which are intended to protect the
interests of the public who occupy any section of the planned
development prior to the completion of the development in its
entirety.
(13) An agreement between the developer and the Township relating to
the planned development.
D. The planned development shall be developed in accordance with the
general development plan approved by the Planning Board,
notwithstanding any provision of the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.) or of any ordinance or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto after the effective date of the approval.
(1) The term of the effect of the general development plan approval
shall be determined by the Planning Board using the guidelines set
forth below in this section, except that the term of the effect of the
approval shall not exceed 10 years from the date upon which the
developer received final approval of the first section of the planned
development.
(2) In making its determination regarding the duration of the effect of
approval of the general development plan, the Planning Board shall
consider the amount of nonresidential floor area to be constructed;
prevailing economic conditions; the timing schedule to be followed
in completing the development and the likelihood of its fulfillment;
§ 550-228 HAMILTON CODE § 550-228
1:1256
the developer's capability of completing the proposed
development; and the contents of the general development plan
and any conditions which the Planning Board attaches to the
approval thereof.
E. In the event that the developer seeks to modify the proposed timing
schedule, such modification shall require the approval of the Planning
Board. The Planning Board shall, in deciding whether or not to grant
approval of the modification, take into consideration prevailing
economic and market conditions, anticipated and actual needs for
residential units and nonresidential space within the Township and the
region, and the availability and capacity of public facilities to
accommodate the proposed development.
F. The developer shall be required to gain the prior approval of the
Planning Board if, after approval of the general development plan, the
developer wishes to make any variation in the location of land uses
within the planned development or to increase the floor area ratio of
nonresidential development in any section of the planned development.
G. Except as provided hereunder, once a general development plan has
been approved by the Planning Board, it may be amended or revised
only upon application by the developer approved by the Planning Board.
A developer, without violating the terms of the approval, may, in
undertaking any section of the planned development, reduce the
amount of nonresidential floor space by no more than 15% or reduce
the nonresidential floor area ratio by no more than 15%.
H. Upon completion of each section of the development as set forth in the
approved general development plan, the developer shall notify the
Township administrative officer, by certified mail, as evidence that the
developer is fulfilling his obligations under the approved plan. For the
purposes of this section, "completion" of any section of the development
shall mean that the developer has acquired a certificate of occupancy
for every residential unit or every nonresidential structure, as set forth
in the approved general development plan and pursuant to § 15 of the
State Uniform Construction Code (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-133). If the Township
does not receive such notification at the completion of any section of
the development, the Township shall notify the developer, by certified
mail, in order to determine whether or not the terms of the approved
plan are being complied with.
(1) If a developer does not complete any section of the development
within eight months of the date provided for in the approved plan,
or if at any time the Township has cause to believe that the
developer is not fulfilling his obligations pursuant to the approved
plan, the Township shall notify the developer, by certified mail, and
the developer shall have 10 days within which to give evidence that
he is fulfilling his obligations pursuant to the approved plan. The
Township thereafter shall conduct a hearing to determine whether
or not the developer is in violation of the approved plan. If after
§ 550-228 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-228
1:1257
§ 550-229. Contribution disclosure statement. [Added 4-26-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-012]
such a hearing the Township finds good cause to terminate the
approval, it shall provide written notice of same to the developer,
and the approval shall be terminated 30 days thereafter.
(2) In the event that a developer who has general development plan
approval does not apply for preliminary approval for the planned
development which is the subject of that general development plan
approval within five years of the date upon which the general
development plan has been approved by the Planning Board, the
Township shall have cause to terminate the approval. However, the
Planning Board, in establishing the timing schedule, and the
Township, in negotiating a developer's agreement relating to the
planned development, may allow for preliminary approval for
section(s) of the planned development to be applied for subsequent
to five years of the date upon which the general development plan
has been approved by the Planning Board; in which case, the
Township shall not have cause to terminate the general
development plan approval as long as the developer shall fulfill his
obligations under the approved plan.
I. In the event that a development which is the subject of an approved
general development plan is completed before the end of the term of
the approval, the approval shall terminate with the completion of the
development. For the purposes of this section, a development shall be
considered complete on the date upon which a certificate of occupancy
has been issued for the final residential or nonresidential structure in
the last section of the development in accordance with the timing
schedule set forth in the approved general development plan and the
developer has fulfilled all of his obligations pursuant to the approval.
J. The Planning Board shall grant or deny general development plan
approval within 95 days after submission of a complete application to
the administrative officer or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute general development plan
approval of the planned development.
K. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, where constructed
uses and valid subdivision or site plan approvals for a planned
development in existence prior to August 20, 1996, establish a level of
intensity of use, off-tract requirements (construction or contribution,
design waivers and variances), any general development plan and
municipal development agreement for existing and newly proposed
areas in the planned development adopted after August 20, 1996, shall
recognize and protect the procedural and substantive vested rights
granted by previous construction and subdivision or site plan
approvals.
§ 550-228 HAMILTON CODE § 550-229
1:1258
A. Any land use application identified in this section shall include a
contribution disclosure statement containing the information set forth
herein.
B. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICATION CHECKLIST — The list of submission requirements
adopted by ordinance and provided by the municipal agency to a
developer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3.
CONTRIBUTION — Every loan, donation, subscription, advance or
transfer of money or other item of value, including any item of real
property or personal property, tangible or intangible (but not including
services provided without compensation by individuals volunteering
a part or all of their time on behalf of a candidate or committee),
made to or on behalf of any municipal campaign committee or fund
of any Hamilton Township municipal candidate or office holder, or
any Hamilton Township municipal or Mercer County party committee,
together with any pledge, promise or other commitment or assumption
of liability to make such transfer, as may be required to be reported
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq. For purposes of the disclosure
requirements under this section, any such commitment or assumption
shall be deemed to have been a contribution upon the date when such
commitment is made or liability assumed.
CONTRIBUTION DISCLOSURE STATEMENT — A list specifying the
amount, date and the recipient of any and all contributions made to or
on behalf of a municipal campaign committee or fund of any Hamilton
Township municipal candidate or office holder, or any Hamilton
Township municipal or Mercer County party committee, made up to one
year prior to filing the application and/or during the pendency of the
application process, and required to be reported pursuant to N.J.S.A.
19:44A-1 et seq. The identification and disclosure requirements of this
subsection shall begin with contributions made on or after the effective
date of § 550-229.
DEVELOPER — The developer as defined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, i.e., the
legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land proposed
to be included in a proposed development, including the holder of an
option or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land.
PROFESSIONAL — Any person or entity whose principals are required
to be licensed by New Jersey law and who supplies representation,
expert testimony or written reports in support of an application.
Professionals shall include both any individuals supplying the
representation, testimony or reports and the firms or entities within
which such individuals practice.
C. Disclosure requirements.
§ 550-229 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-229
1:1259
§ 550-230. through § 550-250. (Reserved)
(1) Any application for nonresidential development of more than
10,000 square feet and all residential development of five or more
units shall include in the application a contribution disclosure
statement from the developer and all associates of such developer
who would be subject to disclosure pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-48.1 or 40:55D-48.2, and all professionals who supply or
provide testimony, plans or reports in support of such application
and who have a proprietary interest in the property or development
which is the subject of the application or whose fee in whole or part
is contingent upon the outcome of the application.
(2) During the pendency of the application process until final approval
is granted, any applicant shall amend its contribution disclosure
statement(s) to include continuing disclosure of all contributions
within the scope of the disclosure requirement of Subsection C(1)
above.
(3) An application shall not be deemed complete by the administrative
officer or accepted for public hearing by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment until the required contribution
disclosure statement is submitted.
D. Availability of the disclosure statement. All contribution disclosure
statements shall be available in the office of the administrative officer
for review by any member of the public.
E. Intent of the disclosure statement. The contribution disclosure
statement shall serve to inform the public and not serve as evidence
relevant to the decision for land use approval.
§ 550-229 HAMILTON CODE § 550-230
1:1260
ARTICLE VIII
Fees, Guarantees and Inspections; Off-Tract Improvements
§ 550-251. Statement of intent.
It is the intent of the Township Council that these standards and practices
serve as Township standards for the design, construction and operation of
public and private improvements when requirements for the same are not
otherwise set forth by the State of New Jersey or Mercer County.
§ 550-252. General and procedural requirements.
All design plans and specifications shall be prepared by an engineer and/
or architect licensed in the State of New Jersey. All land surveys and plans
of same shall be instituted and prepared by a land surveyor licensed in the
State of New Jersey. The Township Engineer and/or Director of Public Works
may further require that elevation stakes on any project be set by a land
surveyor licensed in the State of New Jersey prior to commencement of
construction.
§ 550-253. Accelerated review option. [Added 6-20-2001 by Ord. No.
01-020]
A. All applicants may request an accelerated review of all land use
applications. The application reviews shall be conducted by municipal
professionals employed by Hamilton Township and other professional
consultants when necessary, and such professional services shall be
performed at the applicable overtime rate.
B. The escrow for accelerated review to be deposited shall be 150% of that
set forth hereinafter for municipal professional review for each type of
land use application. All such other requirements and standards related
to escrows and administration thereof as set forth in § 550-254 shall
apply.
C. The municipal professionals and other professional consultants
performing review of the land use application shall be designated by
the Director of the Department of Community Planning and
Compliance.
D. All such reviews shall be completed for presentation before the land use
board at the first hearing date legally permissible after filing of the
complete application.
E. The purpose of the accelerated review option is to recognize that
special situations may arise where it becomes necessary to facilitate
completion of professional evaluation of the subject application in
shorter time frames, without imposition of added expense upon the
government. Selection of accelerated review option shall not entitle the
applicant to priority placement on the land use board agenda.
§ 550-251 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-254
1:1261
§ 550-254. Fees. [Amended 11-2-1994 by Ord. No. 94-048;
9-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-034; 6-20-2001 by Ord. No. 01-020;
3-19-2008 by Ord. No. 08-013; 5-7-2008 by Ord. No. 08-023;
8-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-048; 10-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-063]
A. Escrow deposits and application fees.
(1) Consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2, applicants filing applications
for land use approval or relief set forth herein shall pay such
application fees as are due and all necessary and reasonable costs
for professional services, limited to review of applications, review
and preparation of documents, and necessary and reasonable costs
of review by Township employees, as well as consultants not
employed by Hamilton Township, where required by issues
presented in the land use application, for all land use approval
applications subject to jurisdiction of Hamilton Township.
(2) In conjunction with payment of such professional fees, the
applicant shall make an initial escrow deposit in the amount set
forth herein by remitting the same to the Chief Financial Officer of
Hamilton Township and shall execute an agreement in a form
approved by the Township obligating itself to pay such initial
deposit of fees and any additional fees for necessary and
reasonable professional review services as may be required to
complete the processing of a development application. The
application fee is a flat fee to cover direct administration expenses
and is nonrefundable.
B. Periodic accounting for escrow funds and expenditures. The Chief
Financial Officer, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2(c), shall prepare and
send to the applicant a statement, which shall include an accounting of
funds, listing all deposits, interest credited on account, disbursements
and the cumulative balance of the escrow account.
C. Determination of insufficient escrow deposit. If an escrow account
contains insufficient funds, which is defined as equal to or less than
20% of the escrow deposit, to enable completion of the necessary land
use development application reviews, the Chief Financial Officer shall
notify the Director of the Department of Community Planning and
Compliance, who shall provide the applicant with notice of the
insufficiency of the escrow balance in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.2(c), and applicant shall post such additional escrow deposit
as shall be agreed upon by the Township and the applicant within a
reasonable period of time. The additional amount shall satisfy all unpaid
bills and include amounts sufficient to complete all necessary and
reasonable reviews associated with the application. In addition, no
hearing before any Township board may be convened if such amounts
are due. This provision is expressly subject to the limitations of
Subsection G hereof.
§ 550-254 HAMILTON CODE § 550-254
1:1262
D. Account closeout procedure. Consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2(d),
closeout of the escrow account shall be completed in accordance with
the following procedure: The applicant shall send written notice by
certified mail to the Chief Financial Officer and the approving authority
and to the administrative officer that the application is complete. After
receipt of said notice, each Township professional shall render a final
bill to the Chief Financial Officer within 30 days. The Chief Financial
Officer shall render a written final accounting to the applicant on the
uses to which the deposit was put within 45 days of receipt of the final
bill from the Township professionals. Any balances remaining in the
escrow account, including interest, if applicable, shall be refunded to
the applicant along with the final accounting.
E. Amount of fees and escrow deposits due. Prior to an application being
deemed complete by the administrative officer, each applicant shall
submit to the Chief Financial Officer, in cash or by separate certified
check or money order, the sums mentioned herein as application fees
and initial escrow deposits. Where one application for development
includes more than one approval request, the sum of the individual
required fees shall be paid.
Application
Fees
Escrow to be
Deposited
(1) Subdivisions
a. Minor subdivisions and
resubdivisions
$500 $300 per lot
b. Preliminary major
subdivisions
$500 $300 per lot
c. Revised preliminary major
subdivisions
$200 $100 per lot
d. Final major subdivisions $500 $150 per lot
e. Revised final major
subdivisions (minor
engineering and/or survey
corrections)
$500 $300 per lot
f. Construction or public
works inspections
3% of the
amount of the
performance
guarantee
Not applicable
g. Certificates showing
approval of a subdivision
$10 Not applicable
h. Extensions to preliminary
subdivisions
$100 Not applicable
i. Extensions to final
subdivisions
$100 Not applicable
§ 550-254 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-254
1:1263
Application
Fees
Escrow to be
Deposited
j. Waiver from subdivision
design standard
$100 Not applicable
(2) Site plans:
a. Additional parking spaces $200 Not applicable
b. Preliminary site plan:
1. Residential $600 $250 per lot
2. Nonresidential $600 $250, plus $0.10
per square foot
over 5,000
square feet
c. Revision to preliminary
site plan:
1. Residential $500 $125 per lot
2. Nonresidential $500 1/2 of
preliminary site
plan escrow fee
d. Final site plan:
1. Residential $500 $150 per lot
2. Nonresidential $500 1/2 of
preliminary site
plan escrow fee
e. Revisions to final site plan:
1. Residential $350 $150
2. Nonresidential $350 1/2 of
preliminary site
plan escrow fee
f. Construction or public
works inspections
3% of the
amount of the
performance
guarantee
Not applicable
g. Extensions of preliminary
or final site plans
$100 Not applicable
h. Waiver of site plan design
standards
$100 $00
(3) Floodplain relief: These fees apply in the absence of any other
development review fees or if they are greater than the fees
collected for another section of the development application:
a. Single lot:
1. Residential $100 $100
§ 550-254 HAMILTON CODE § 550-254
1:1264
Application
Fees
Escrow to be
Deposited
2. Nonresidential $200 $100
b. Subdivisions
1. Residential $100 $100
2. Nonresidential $200 $100
c. Site plans
1. Residential $100 $100
2. Nonresidential $200 $100
(4) Variance relief:
a. Bulk variances
1. Residential $100 N/A
2. Nonresidential $150 $200; additional
$100 for each
variance over 3
b. Use variance
1. Residential $750 $1,000
2. Nonresidential $750 $1,000
(5) Application and appeal to
Zoning Board of Adjustment
pursuant to § 550-193
$150 $500
(6) For a list of property owners within 200 feet, a sum not to exceed
$0.25 per name or $10, whichever is greater, shall be charged. A
fee of $5 shall be charged for the updating of such a list.
(7) Conditional use permits:
a. Residential $200 $500
b. Nonresidential $300 $1,000
(8) Administrative waiver:
a. Front, rear and side yard
setbacks
$100 Not applicable
b. Site plan review $300 Not applicable
(9) Interpretations or special
questions
$200 $400
(10)Driveway installation permits $30 Not applicable
(11)Sketch site plan and concept
plan
$400 $600
(12)Sketch subdivision and
concept plan
$400 $150 per lot
§ 550-254 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-254
1:1265
§ 550-255. Guaranties and inspections. [Amended 11-2-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-048]
Application
Fees
Escrow to be
Deposited
(13)Copies of municipal Master
Plan
$25 per copy Not applicable
(14)Informal preapplication
meetings with Township
professionals, except minor
subdivision or hardship
variance for single-family
detached residential unit
$750
(15)General development plans $1,500 $25,000
F. Land use applications involving properties in the redevelopment areas
as designated in accordance with law shall be subject to 50% of the
escrow fees set forth herein. The entire application fee shall be
collected.
G. Municipal professional fees charged shall be the applicable hourly
salary, including benefits, as periodically established by ordinance as
adopted by the Township Council, and shall be applied against the
escrow paid by the applicant. Fee charged for accelerated reviews shall
be as set forth in § 550-253.
H. The Township administration shall provide the applicant with a written
disclosure statement setting forth the rates applicable to all
professionals performing reviews.
I. The Township administration shall make quarterly reports to Township
Council or as requested by Council. These reports shall include, as a
minimum, applications filed, applicable dates, and fees charged
regarding each application.
J. Application hearing transcripts. If an applicant desires that a certified
court reporter attend any public hearing concerning an application, the
cost of taking testimony and transcribing it and providing a copy of the
transcript to the Township shall be at the expense of the applicant, who
shall also arrange for the reporter's attendance.
A. Performance guaranty estimate.
(1) No final application for development shall be approved by the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment until
satisfactory completion and performance of all such required
improvements have been certified to the Board by the Township
Engineer and/or Director of Public Works, unless the owner shall
have filed with the municipality a performance guaranty assuring
the installation of said improvements on or before an agreed upon
§ 550-254 HAMILTON CODE § 550-255
1:1266
date and as hereinafter provided. Applications without a bond at
the time of the Board hearing will be granted a final approval
subject to an approved performance guaranty being filed with the
Township within 60 days of the date of the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment hearing.
(2) Except as hereinafter provided, the remaining required
improvements shall be at least 50% completed as to each category
set forth in the performance guaranty within one year from the
date of final approval or by such time as 50% of the lots in the
section in question have been conveyed in any manner by the
applicant, whichever shall first occur. At least 75% of the remaining
required improvements shall be completed as to each category as
set forth in the performance guaranty within 18 months from the
date of final approval or at such time as 75% of the lots in the
section in question have been conveyed in any manner by the
applicant, whichever shall first occur. Such improvements shall be
100% completed and accepted by the Township within two years
from the date of final approval or at such time as all of the lots in
the section in question have been conveyed in any manner by the
applicant, whichever shall first occur. It is the intention of the
governing body that this requirement will provide to those living in
each new section of a subdivision a lot that is as complete as
possible with respect to tract and individual lot improvements.
(3) A performance guaranty estimate shall be prepared by the
applicant, setting forth all requirements for improvements as
established by the Planning Board, and the estimated cost shall be
approved by the Township Engineer. The Planning Board shall pass
a resolution either approving or adjusting this performance
guaranty.
(4) If after construction has begun the Township Engineer determines
that circumstances warrant the installation of additional
improvements, the Planning Board shall recommend that
additional performance guaranties be posted, and the Planning
Board shall require that the developer install or construct the
additional improvements or post-performance guaranties. The
administrative officer may withhold building permits until the
provisions of this section have been complied with.
(5) The Township may require the posting of a performance guaranty
in the amount sufficient to restore the land to its condition prior to
the disturbance. This requirement shall specifically apply to soil
disturbance between preliminary subdivision and/or site plan
approval and final subdivision and/or site plan approval.
B. Approval by Attorney for the Planning Board.
§ 550-255 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-255
1:1267
(1) The subdivider shall present two copies of the performance
guaranty for approval as to form and execution by the Attorney for
the Board or the Township Attorney.
(2) The Attorney for the Board or Township Attorney shall notify the
Secretary to the Board prior to the meeting that the performance
guaranty is properly executed and can be added to the agenda.
C. Bonding and cash requirements. [Amended 6-18-2013 by Ord. No.
13-019]
(1) The performance guaranty shall be made payable and deposited to
Hamilton Township and shall be in the form of cash, a certified
check or a performance bond, in which the owner shall be
principal, said bond to be provided by an acceptable surety
company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey. The
Township shall issue its receipt for such deposits and shall cause
the same to be deposited in a bank named by the municipality in
the name of the Township, to be retained as security for completion
of all requirements and to be returned to the owner on completion
of all required work or, in the event of default on the part of the
owner, to be used by the Township to pay the cost and expense of
obtaining completion of all requirements. Every bond, whether
cash or surety, shall contain a clause to the effect that a
determination by the Township Engineer and/or Director of Public
Works that the principal has defaulted in the performance of his
obligation shall be binding and conclusive upon the surety and the
principal.
(2) For residential developments, the furnishing of a performance
guaranty in favor of the Township in an amount equal to 120% of
the cost of installation, which cost shall be determined by the
Township Engineer, for improvements which the Planning Board
may deem necessary or appropriate. Ten percent of the required
performance guaranty shall be deposited by the owner in cash with
the Township. The remaining 90% may be in cash or surety bond. In
the event of default, the ten-percent fund herein mentioned shall be
first applied to the completion of the requirements, and the cash or
the surety bond shall recite the foregoing provisions. Performance
bonds shall be limited to two years. If at the end of two years the
bonds have not been released and repairs are still outstanding, the
applicant will convey to the Township, in cash, 150% of the cost of
remaining repairs. This cash will be used by the Township to
complete repairs and release bonds. All interest on said funds shall
inure to the benefit of the Township and the developer in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1.
(3) For all nonresidential developments, the furnishing of a
performance guaranty in favor of the Township in an amount equal
to 120% of the cost of installation, which cost shall be determined
by the Township Engineer, for public improvements which the
§ 550-255 HAMILTON CODE § 550-255
1:1268
Planning Board may deem necessary or appropriate. Ten percent
of the required performance guaranty shall be deposited by the
owner in cash with the Township. The remaining 90% may be
in cash or surety bond. In the event of default, the ten-percent
fund herein mentioned shall be first applied to the completion of
the requirements, and the cash or the surety bond shall recite
the foregoing provisions. Performance bonds shall be limited to
two years. If at the end of two years the bonds have not been
released and repairs are still outstanding, the applicant will convey
to the Township, in cash, 150% of the cost of remaining repairs.
This cash will be used by the Township to complete repairs and
release bonds. All interest on said funds shall inure to the benefit
of the Township and the developer in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1.
(4) For all nonresidential developments, the furnishing of a
performance guaranty in favor of the Township in an amount equal
to 50% of the cost of installation, which cost shall be determined by
the Township Engineer, for nonpublic improvements which the
Planning Board may deem necessary or appropriate. Ten percent of
the required performance guaranty shall be deposited by the owner
in cash with the Township. The remaining 90% may be in cash or
surety bond. In the event of default, the ten-percent fund herein
mentioned shall be first applied to the completion of the
requirements, and the cash or the surety bond shall recite the
foregoing provisions. Performance bonds shall be limited to two
years. If at the end of two years the bonds have not been released
and repairs are still outstanding, the applicant will convey to the
Township, in cash, 150% of the cost of remaining repairs. This cash
will be used by the Township to complete repairs and release
bonds. All interest on said funds shall inure to the benefit of the
Township and the developer in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1.
(5) The time allowed for installation for improvements for which the
performance guaranty has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guaranty shall be
increased or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to
exceed 120% of the cost of the installation as determined as of the
time of the passage of the resolution.
D. Inspections and tests.
(1) All improvements and utility installations shall be inspected during
the time of their installation under the supervision of the Director
of Public Works or a qualified representative to ensure satisfactory
completion. The cost of said inspection shall be the responsibility of
the owner, and he shall pay to the Township a sum equal to $100
per lot for public works inspections fees or, for site plans, a sum of
$250 per acre. A minimum fee of $250 shall be required.
§ 550-255 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-255
1:1269
(2) Inspection schedule.
(a) In no case shall any paving work (including prime and seal
coats) be done without permission from the Public Works
Director. At least two days' notice shall be given to the Public
Works Director's office prior to any such construction, so that
he or a qualified representative may be present at the time the
work is to be done.
(b) The Public Works Office shall be notified after each of the
following phases of the work has been completed so that they
or a qualified representative may inspect the work:
1. Road subgrade.
2. Curb and gutter forms.
3. Curbs and gutter.
4. Road paving.
5. Sidewalk forms.
6. Sidewalks.
7. Drainage pipes and other drainage or flood control
facilities.
8. Street name signs.
9. Sanitary sewers or septic tanks.
10. Monuments.
11. Landscaping.
12. Lot grading.
13. Barricades.
14. Freestanding lights and signs.
15. Paving of parking areas and parking lot striping.
(c) A Public Works Inspector may be present during all phases of
construction; however, the phases at which it is mandatory are
as follows:
1. Storm drains, sanitary sewers and appurtenances.
a. Prior to installation of manholes and inlets.
b. Prior to backfilling.
2. Grading.
§ 550-255 HAMILTON CODE § 550-255
1:1270
a. After rough grading.
b. After fine grading.
3. Curb and sidewalk.
a. After setting forms and prior to pouring concrete.
b. While pouring concrete.
4. Areas to be paved.
a. After forming subgrade and prior to laying base or
subbase.
b. After laying subbase or base and prior to laying top
course.
c. Prior to laying top course.
5. In the case of site plans, the above phases in Subsection
D(2)(c)1. through 4. shall be certified by a licensed
engineer at each stage in lieu of on-site inspection by the
Township. No installation shall be covered until inspected
and approved by the Public Works Inspector.
(3) A final inspection of all improvements and utilities will be started
by the subdivider or developer by request to the Department of
Public Works to determine whether the work is satisfactory and in
agreement with the approved final drawings and the Township
specifications. The general condition of the site shall also be
considered. Upon a satisfactory final inspection report, action will
be taken to release or declare in default the performance guaranty
covering such improvements and utilities.
(4) Inspection by the Township of the installation of improvements and
utilities shall not operate to subject the Township to liability for
claims, suits or liability of any kind that may at any time arise
because of defects or negligence during construction or at any time
thereafter, it being recognized that the responsibility to maintain
safe conditions at all times during construction and to provide
proper utilities and improvements is upon the owner and his
contractors, if any.
(5) After completing the construction of all improvements covered by
the performance guaranty, the subdivider or developer shall
prepare a set of the approved utility plans and profiles, amended to
indicate as-built conditions, and shall apply to the Public Works
Director for final inspection of the work. The Public Works
Department shall report to the governing body on the condition of
the work and recommend that the performance guaranty be
released, extended or declared in default. The species of
landscaping shall be certified by the Division of Planning.
§ 550-255 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-255
1:1271
(6) Failure to have inspection. In the event that the subdivider or
developer fails to have improvements inspected when required,
Hamilton Township reserves the right to reject the work. It will be
the responsibility of the subdivider or developer to prove that the
work was done to Township specifications. If unable to do so, all
work in question will be removed and replaced under Township
inspection. No installation shall be covered unless inspected and
approved by the Public Works Inspector.
E. Construction standards.
(1) All standards and specifications of the Township as now or
hereafter adopted, if any, shall govern the design, construction and
installation of all improvements. Failure of the subdivider,
developer, his contractor or agent to conform to said specifications
will be just cause for the suspension of the work being performed.
No subdivider shall have the right to demand or claim damages
from the Township, its officers, agents or servants by reason of said
suspension.
(2) In the event that the Township has not adopted standards for a
specific type of improvement, then generally accepted engineering
standards, as set forth in engineering and construction manuals, as
may be modified by the Township Engineer for a specific situation,
shall be used.
(3) Gas, electric, telephone and similar utilities shall be installed in
accordance with applicable company, state and federal
requirements.
(4) All construction stakes and grades shall be set by a licensed land
surveyor in the employ of the subdivider, developer or contractor,
and a duplicate copy of the notes made therefrom shall be filed with
the Township Engineer. Where a laser beam is used, the instrument
will be certified as being in proper working condition, and a letter
will be supplied with the names of employees trained in the proper
use of laser beams.
(5) The Township shall be provided with a lot plan showing the final
grade elevation at the four corners of the structure or structures
and at the four corners of the property. If abnormal grading
conditions exist on the lot, the plan will show more detailed
information. The Township has the right to request a detailed asbuilt
plan of a lot if the grading looks questionable. On site plans,
additional elevations may be required or a final grade as built.
(6) Pertaining to problems of the burial of trees and other debris at
construction sites, the developer shall remove debris left on site
within 48 hours. The burial of trees and other debris at
construction sites is prohibited.
F. Release.
§ 550-255 HAMILTON CODE § 550-255
1:1272
(1) Upon substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility
improvements and the connection of same to the public system, the
obligor may notify the governing body, in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the municipal Clerk, of the completion or
substantial completion of improvements and shall send a copy
thereof to the municipal Engineer. Thereupon the municipal
Engineer shall inspect all improvements of which such notice has
been given and shall file a detailed report in writing with the
governing body, indicating either approval, partial approval or
reason for any rejection. The cost of the improvements as approved
or rejected shall be set forth.
(2) The governing body shall either approve, partially approve or reject
the improvements on the basis of the report of the municipal
Engineer and shall notify the obligor, in writing, by certified mail, of
the contents of said report and the action of said approving
authority with relation thereto not later than 65 days after receipt
of the notice from the obligor of the completion of the
improvements. Where partial approval is granted, the obligor shall
be released from all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty,
except for that portion adequately sufficient to secure provision of
the improvements not yet approved, provided that 30% of the
amount of the performance guaranty posted may be retained to
ensure completion of all improvements. Failure of the governing
body to send or provide such notification to the obligor within 65
days shall be deemed to constitute approval of the improvements,
and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from all liability
pursuant to such performance guaranty for such improvements.
(3) If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the
approving authority may require the obligor to complete such
improvements, and upon completion, the same procedure of
notification as set forth in this section shall be followed. In the
event that final approval is by stages or sections of development,
the provisions of this section shall apply by stage or section.
(4) As it pertains to landscaping improvements for any development
project, the performance guarantee being held by the Township
shall not be released until after the landscape material has been in
the ground and established for a minimum of two growing seasons
(i.e., spring and fall). Newly installed landscaping material shall not
be considered accepted and released during the time period May 1
and August 31, unless it can be demonstrated by the applicant or
project developer that the site is fully irrigated so that all landscape
plantings in beds and individual trees receive an ample amount of
water to sustain their growth during the late spring and summer
months. [Added 9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-064]
G. Conditions for acceptance of improvements. The approval of any
application for development by the Township shall in no way be
construed as acceptance of any street or drainage system or any other
§ 550-255 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-255
1:1273
§ 550-256. Off-tract improvements. [Amended 7-21-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-033; 11-6-1997 by Ord. No. 97-030; 4-7-1999 by Ord. No.
99-009; 12-8-2004 by Ord. No. 04-048]
improvement, nor shall such approval obligate the Township in any
way to maintain or exercise jurisdiction over such street or drainage
system or other improvement. No improvement shall be accepted by
the governing body unless and until all of the following conditions have
been met:
(1) The Township Engineer shall have certified in writing that the
improvements are complete and that they comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The final application for development shall have been approved by
the Planning Board.
(3) After a project is completed and a final inspection has been made to
the satisfaction of the Township Engineer, the Engineer will issue a
certificate of approval. This certificate shall not be issued until the
project is 100% completed.
(4) The owner shall have filed with the governing body a maintenance
guaranty in an amount equal to 15% of the original estimate of the
cost of installing the improvements. The maintenance guaranty
shall run for a period of one year. The procedures and requirements
governing such maintenance guaranty shall be identical with the
procedures and requirements for a performance guaranty as set
forth in this chapter. The requirements for a maintenance guaranty
may be waived by the governing body only if the Township
Engineer has certified that the improvements have been in
continuous use for not less than two years from the date the
Township Engineer certified completion of such improvements and
that during this period the owner has maintained the
improvements in a satisfactory manner.
A. Off-tract improvements required. As a condition of preliminary
subdivision or site plan approval involving new construction or a
change in use generating additional traffic, the applicant must pay,
prior to final approval, his prorated share of the cost of providing
reasonable and necessary street improvements, water, sewerage and
drainage facilities, and any other improvements for which contributions
are permitted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42, and easements therefor,
located outside the property limits of the development but necessitated
or required by construction or improvements within such development.
The prorated amount of the cost of such facilities that shall be borne by
each applicant within a related or common area shall be based on the
criteria established herein.
B. Determination of off-tract improvement requirements.
§ 550-255 HAMILTON CODE § 550-256
1:1274
(1) The decision regarding what, if any, off-tract improvements are to
be required of a developer shall be made by the municipal
reviewing agency. The decision will be based upon
recommendations from a committee composed of representatives
of the Planning Division, Engineering Division, Finance
Department, Department of Public Works and the Planning Board
Attorney and the administrative officer.
(2) This decision shall only be made upon analysis of the traffic
circulation and utility service plan elements of the Township
Master Plan. The municipal reviewing agency shall require
applicants to pay their fair share of the cost of providing reasonable
and necessary off-tract street improvements, necessitated or
required by construction or improvements within the development.
(3) The applicant's prorated share of the cost of required off-tract
improvements shall be computed at the time of application for
preliminary subdivision or site plan approval. The applicant's
prorated share of the cost shall remain constant as long as there is
no change to the overall scope of the application at final approval.
The municipal reviewing agency, however, may recompute an
applicant's prorated share of the cost of off-tract improvements or
may make changes in the type of improvement to be required upon
submission of a revised application differing substantially from
plans previously submitted and/or approved or upon application for
an extension of an approval.
C. Improvements to be constructed at the sole expense of the developer. In
cases where the reasonable and necessary off-tract improvement or
improvements is necessitated or required by the proposed development
application and where no other property owners receive a special
benefit thereby, the applicant may be required, as a condition of
approval, at the applicant's sole expense, to provide for and construct
such improvements as if such were an on-tract improvement in the
manner provided hereafter and otherwise provided by law.
D. Other improvements. In cases where the need for an off-tract
improvement is necessitated by the proposed application and where it
is determined that properties outside of the development will also be
benefited by the improvement, the following shall be utilized in
determining the prorated share of such improvements to the applicant:
(1) General criteria. The prorated share of costs may be determined by
the municipal reviewing agency on the basis of total cost of the offtract
improvement(s), the changes in market values of the property
affected and any other benefits conferred, the needs created by the
development, population and land use projections for the general
area of the applicant's property and other areas to be served by the
off-tract improvement(s), and the estimated time of construction of
the off-tract improvement(s).
§ 550-256 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-256
1:1275
(2) Additional criteria: roadways.
(a) The applicant may be required to pay a prorated share of offtract
street widening, alignment, channelization of
intersections, construction of barriers, new or improved traffic
signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting, shade
trees, utility improvements not covered elsewhere, the
construction or reconstruction of new or existing streets and
other associated street or traffic improvements.
(b) The applicant shall be required to provide projections of traffic
generation and directional distributions from the proposed
development.
(c) The applicant's prorated fair share shall be based upon
consideration of some or all of the following:
1. The percentage relationship between the anticipated peakhour
traffic volume of the proposed development and the
projected peak-hour volume of traffic utilizing the
improved facility.
2. The relationship between the additional traffic generated
by the proposed development and the growth of
background traffic at relevant streets and intersections in
the Township.
3. The impacts of the proposed development on off-tract
streets and intersections.
4. The off-tract street improvements necessitated by the
development.
5. The special benefit conferred upon the development as a
result of such off-tract street improvement.
6. The total cost of the off-tract street improvement.
7. Any unusual characteristics of the nature and type of
traffic generated by the particular development.
8. Existing traffic counts and patterns, the quality of roads
and sidewalks in the area and the Township, and other
factors related to the need created by the development
and the anticipated benefit thereto.
9. The use, condition and status of the remaining lands in the
general area.
(d) To facilitate the transportation impact, benefits and needs
appraisal required by this section, all development applications
shall include a traffic impact statement (TIS); provided,
however, that in the case of a minor subdivision or minor site
§ 550-256 HAMILTON CODE § 550-256
1:1276
plan application, the board of jurisdiction may grant a waiver
from the requirement of a formal TIS pursuant to this
paragraph upon an adequate showing that the transportation
impact of such application would be insignificant. An applicant
must: (i) affirmatively demonstrate to the Board that the
proposed development will not place a disproportionate or
excessive demand upon the total transportation resources
available to the development site and throughout the
Township; and (ii) propose a fair share contribution that shall
be made by the applicant to accommodate street
improvements necessitated by the traffic impacts which the
proposed development will have upon the total transportation
resources available to the development site and throughout the
Township within the criteria set forth in Subsection D(2)(c).
Submission of a TIS which meets the requirements of
Subsection D(2)(e) below shall be a condition to a
determination of completeness of an application. Upon review
of the TIS, a supplemental TIS may be required by the Board to
clarify, explain or augment specific areas of concern regarding
traffic impacts, needs, benefits or other issues identified by the
Board. An applicant located within the "Central Area TID" or
the "Sloan Avenue/Quakerbridge Road TID" shall submit a TIS
and contribute a fair share in accordance with the formulas set
forth in Subsection H(9). [Amended 8-19-2014 by Ord. No.
14-052]
(e) Applicants shall submit copies of a TIS, prepared by a qualified
traffic expert, containing the following information:
1. A study of background traffic for the existing a.m. and p.m.
street peak hours and a site-related peak hour, if different
from typical street peak hours, obtained by reliable traffic
counts at selected key study intersections sufficient to
ensure accurate sampling;
2. The projection of background traffic volumes at such
intersections using appropriate growth rates for the
projected completion date of the project and 10 years
subsequent to the submission of the application;
3. Projection of the number of a.m. and p.m. peak-hour trips
generated by the proposed development project estimated
by using standard trip-generation equations;
4. Current gap counts and analysis for all intersections that
will be impacted by the development along with a
projected gap analysis using appropriate growth rates for
the projected completion date of the project and 10 years
subsequent to the submission of the application;
§ 550-256 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-256
1:1277
5. Level-of-service analysis at signalized intersections and
unsignalized intersections impacts by the development;
6. A transportation service analysis based upon the
background traffic and trip-generation projections set
forth above, identifying streets and intersections that will
be burdened or otherwise impacted by the additional
traffic generated by the proposed development, street
improvements necessitated in whole or in part by the
additional traffic generated upon such streets and
intersections by the development, the proportional
benefits which the improvements would impart to the
proposed development, the ratio of the additional traffic
generated by the proposed development to the total of
such additional traffic plus the growth of background
traffic for the projected completion date of the project and
10 years subsequent to the submission of the application,
and an evaluation of the traffic impacts of the development
in the context of the Township Master Plan;
7. Such supplemental reports and additional data,
information or documentation as required by the board of
jurisdiction in order to evaluate and determine the traffic
impacts, special benefits and fair share contribution
attributable to the development.
(f) This Subsection D(2) shall not apply to development
applications where such developments are located within a
designated transportation improvement district (TID) as
provided for in Subsection H of this section.
(3) Additional criteria: drainage facilities.
(a) The applicant may be required to pay for a prorated share of
off-tract stormwater drainage improvements, including the
installation, relocation or replacement of storm drains,
culverts, catch basins, manholes, riprap or improved drainage
ditches and appurtenances thereto and installation, relocation
and replacement of other storm drainage facilities or
appurtenances associated therewith.
(b) The capacity and design of the drainage system required to
accommodate stormwater runoff from the proposed
development shall be based on methods and standards
consistent with other provisions of this chapter. Calculations,
plans and cost estimates shall be provided by the applicant's
engineer and approved by the Township Engineer.
(c) The capacity of a system required for the development of the
applicant's property and other properties in the same drainage
basin shall be determined by the Township Engineer. The plans
and cost estimates for the entire improved system shall be
§ 550-256 HAMILTON CODE § 550-256
1:1278
prorated by the Township Engineer. The prorated share shall
be determined with consideration given to the following:
1. The percentage relationship between the acreage of the
applicant's property and the acreage in the total drainage
basin.
2. The specific nature of the proposed development, the
amount of area to be covered by impervious surfaces and
the amount of stormwater runoff from the development.
3. The use, condition and status of the remaining area in the
drainage basin.
E. Computation of prorated share. In any case in which the applicant shall
not provide the municipal reviewing agency with the estimate of a
traffic consultant and/or consulting engineer with regard to estimated
improvements costs and all other information necessary to proportion
costs, the municipal agency may rely on the estimates of the Township
Engineer and other appropriate Township agencies in order to prorate
costs. Costs involved in preparation of said estimates may be charged to
the applicant and added to the applicant's prorated share of the offtract
improvements.
F. Off-tract improvement accounts.
(1) The applicant's prorated share of the cost of an off-tract
improvement shall be, as a condition of final subdivision or final site
plan approval, deposited in cash to the credit of the Township to be
placed in a suitable depository therefor.
(2) Acceptance of said money for off-tract improvements does not
constitute an obligation on the part of the Township to construct
the improvement. As a further condition of final approval, the
applicant shall be required to sign a statement acknowledging his
awareness that the Township is not obligated, by the acceptance of
the money, to construct the improvement.
(3) If the money has not been spent on the project within a period of 10
years from the date of deposit, application may be made for return
of this money or the unexpended portion thereof, without interest.
Money spent includes money spent on initial design and
engineering work. The applicant shall be required to sign a
statement acknowledging his awareness that the money deposited
in an off-tract improvement fund may be used for project design
purposes.
(4) If the applicant does not request the return of the money within a
period of one year, the money shall be placed in the Township's
general capital improvement fund and shall not be returnable to
the applicant thereafter.
§ 550-256 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-256
1:1279
G. Redetermination upon completion of improvements.
(1) Upon completion of off-tract improvements required pursuant to
this section, the subdivider's or developer's liability hereunder
shall be recalculated in accordance with the actual, as compared
with the estimated, cost of the improvements. To the extent that it
shall decrease the amount thereof, the municipality shall forthwith
refund the amount of such decrease to the subdivider or developer.
(2) In the event the payment by the applicant provided for herein is
less than the applicant's share of the actual cost of the off-tract
improvements, then the applicant shall be required to pay the
appropriate share of the cost thereof.
H. Transportation improvement district.
(1) There are hereby established transportation improvement districts
for the collection from applicants of fair share monetary
contributions, as determined by the municipal reviewing agency
pursuant to Subsection D(2) or the formulas set forth in Subsection
H(9), the proceeds of which shall be used by the Township to
construct the street improvements identified and described in the
circulation element of the Township's Master Plan as the "Central
Area TID" and the "Sloan Avenue/Quakerbridge Road TID":
(a) Transportation Improvement District – Central Area (TID-CA)
is an area of the Township generally bounded by Routes 33,
I-295, Kuser Road and U.S. Route 130, as further depicted on
the Township's Zoning Map.
(b) Transportation Improvement District – Sloan Avenue/
Quakerbridge Road Area TID is an area of the Township
generally bounded by the Township border to the east, north
and west, Hamilton Avenue, Route I-295, Klockner Road,
Whitehorse-Mercerville Road along the PSE&G right-of-way
and Nottingham Way, as further depicted on the Township's
Zoning Map.
(2) An applicant may, in lieu of the requirements imposed in
Subsection D(2), elect to contribute a fair share to the fund in
accordance with the formulas set forth in Subsection H(9). In the
event that an applicant elects to contribute a fair share to the fund,
the application for development shall include a certification, in a
form approved by the Township Attorney, signed by the applicant,
electing to contribute such fair share in an amount determined by
the formulas set forth in Subsection H(9). The board of jurisdiction
shall, as a condition of approval of the application, require the
applicant to enter into a developer's agreement with the Township
pursuant to Subsection I, confirming the applicant's fair share
contribution to the fund. Such contribution to the fund shall satisfy
all requirements for off-tract street improvements imposed by the
§ 550-256 HAMILTON CODE § 550-256
1:1280
municipal board of jurisdiction. [Amended 8-19-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-052]
(3) The level of improvement and the pro rata amount of the cost of
road and street improvement shall be borne by each developer or
owner with respect to development applications within an
established transportation improvement district, as set forth in a
subplan as part of the circulation element of the Township's Master
Plan entitled "TID Areas." Such subplan is hereby incorporated by
reference in its entirety as if fully set forth herein. The impact fee,
to be paid or otherwise satisfied by the developer or owner in
accordance with such subplan, is expressed as follows:
TID improvement fee = private share district improvement cost
divided by total new development square footage in the district.
(4) In determining the exact impact fee, the standards and policies
expressed in the subplan, hereby adopted by reference, shall apply.
For land uses not identified in the subplan, an equivalency factor
shall be developed equating the traffic generation in the p.m. peak
hour of a general office use square foot to a square foot of the new
land use. The impact fee for the new land use shall be based on the
equivalency factor derived multiplied by the impact fee for a
general office square foot.
(5) Impact fees are based on 2016 dollar estimates of district road
improvements identified in the circulation element of the
Township's Master Plan. These base-year costs shall be adjusted
annually by the bid price index published in the most recent issue
of the Dodge Building Cost Indexes for the United States and
Canadian Cities and shall be the average of the Philadelphia area
and New York metropolitan area or, if such periodical is no longer
published, as published in another publication of similar reputation
and reliability. [Amended 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 19-007]
(6) Further, impact fee adjustments shall be made based on an annual
report to be prepared by the Township Engineer in cooperation
with the Planner to evaluate adequacy of development land use
projections due to any rezoning, use variance approvals or
redevelopment not included within the initial database contained in
the TID subplan element to the Master Plan, as well as any changes
in the road improvement proposals included in the subplan. On an
annual basis from the date of adoption of an ordinance
implementing the TID program, improvement costs and pro rata
impact fees for remaining developments within the TID shall be
undertaken. Cost adjustment may include program administration,
updating and program maintenance and shall be based on actual
expenses incurred.
(7) Payment of the TID impact fee may be in cash or an equivalent inkind
construction of a TID improvement. Impact fees and/or in-kind
§ 550-256 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-256
1:1281
improvements are to be paid and/or constructed prior to the
signing of the final plan by Township officials.
(8) The developer's responsibility to contribute funds or make
improvements for off-tract road responsibilities as described in the
TID subplan shall be deemed satisfied by the developer and the
Township entering into a developer's agreement in accordance
with the provisions of Subsection I of this section and payment of
the required fee, as may be adjusted, or in lieu thereof, upon
completion by the developer of an in-kind road improvement as
contained within the TID subplan.
(9) The fair share voluntary contribution to the fund shall be fixed and
determined as follows: [Amended 2-19-2019 by Ord. No.
19-007]
(a) Central Area TID.
Land Use
Unit Fee
(per square foot)
Age-restricted/independent living $0.70
Commercial retail $3.95
Dwelling unit (except age-restricted/
independent living)
$1.54
Hotel/extended stay $1.60
Medical building/health care facility $3.00
Office $2.59
Public/institution $1.40
Research/development $1.80
Residential health care facility $1.10
Warehouse $1.10
(b) Sloan Avenue/Quakerbridge Road TID.
Land Use
Unit Fee
(per square foot)
Age-restricted/independent living $0.20
Commercial retail $3.00
Dwelling unit (except age-restricted/
independent living)
$0.60
Hotel/extended stay $0.40
Manufacturing $0.60
Medical building/health care facility $0.80
§ 550-256 HAMILTON CODE § 550-256
1:1282
Land Use
Unit Fee
(per square foot)
Office $1.20
Public/institution $0.80
Research/development $0.90
Warehouse $0.30
(10) Where an applicant pays the amount determined as its pro rata fair
share under protect, it shall institute legal action within one year of
such payment in order to preserve the right to a judicial
determination as to the fairness and reasonableness of such
amount. In the event that the applicant fails to institute legal action
within one year of such payment, it shall be deemed to have waived
its right to challenge its pro rata share.
(11) Applicants who have obtained preliminary or final approval prior to
the effective date hereof may choose to be treated, with respect to
such applications, in accordance with the provisions of their
respective approval resolution and other agreements with the
Township to the extent such approval or agreements address street
improvements identified in the TID or, in the alternative, may
choose to be treated in accordance with the standards set forth in
this section.
I. Implementation of TID obligation; developer's agreement.
(1) Findings by Board. The Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, in deliberation with respect to any application for
preliminary approval with regard to property located within a TID,
shall consider and make appropriate findings in any resolution of
memorialization, in concept form, as to the items to be covered in a
developer's impact agreement as provided for in Subsection I(2)
below.
(2) Developer's agreement. A condition to any final approval shall be
that the applicant shall enter into an agreement with the Township
of Hamilton in recordable form approved by the Township Attorney
(developer's impact agreement), based upon the findings of facts
and conditions of such approval. The developer's agreement will
provide for the following:
(a) Payment of an amount of money representing the applicant's
fair share of road and street improvements, inclusive of land
acquisition costs, if any, beyond normal right-of-way dedication
requirements, in accordance with the standards set forth in the
TID subplan, adopted by reference, including provision for
adjustment of such fee due to inflation or other factors.
§ 550-256 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-256
1:1283
(b) An installment payment schedule, if requested by the
applicant, based upon the phasing of the development, with
respect to the collection of the fee determined. With any
installment payment plan, full payment shall be required prior
to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for the
project or phase thereof subject to such installment payments.
(c) The limit of the applicant's off-tract traffic improvement
liability upon full or partial payment of the impact fee.
(d) A description of structural improvements to be made by or at
the expense of the developer in lieu of an impact fee
contribution, or some combination thereof, if any, and the
timing or sequence of such installation.
(e) A description of any credits or repayment due the developer as
a result of voluntary construction or payments in excess of the
developer's fair share, based upon the standards set forth in
the TID subplan.
(f) In the event that funds shall be escrowed, the terms and
conditions upon which such escrow shall be established,
maintained and released in accordance with Subsection F
herein.
(g) Such other matters as may be recommended by the Planning
Board or Township Council.
(3) Use of funds collected. Any funds collected by way of impact fee
shall be maintained in a separate escrow account credited to the
Township. Such funds shall be used only for improvements referred
to in the transportation improvement district subplan for that
transportation improvement district and as adopted as part of the
Township's capital improvement program, including payment to
contractors or others for actual construction; reimbursement to
third parties for work performed; planning, engineering feasibility
studies; contract administration and other related costs; right-ofway
and easement acquisition; inspection and professional fees for
the review and implementation thereof; and related program
administrative costs of the TID.
(4) Low- and moderate-income housing. Development applications
containing proposals for low- and moderate-income housing, as
defined by ordinance, shall be subject to this section, except that
any computations with respect to the number of units shall exclude
units which are approved for low- and moderate-income users.
(5) Contribution formula for existing uses. In the event that there is a
change in the use for existing space which would generate
additional traffic, the applicant's fair share shall be equal to the
difference between the contribution amount for the existing use
§ 550-256 HAMILTON CODE § 550-256
1:1284
§ 550-257. Disclosure requirements.
§ 550-258. through § 550-280. (Reserved)
and the proposed use. This contribution would be in addition to any
contribution required for a new addition to a building.
(6) Exemption for public buildings. Development applications made by
a municipal agency for the construction of a public building shall be
exempt from this article, provided that the Township Council finds
that the proposed building will serve a public purpose and promote
the public health, safety and welfare.
(7) Exemption for hospital. Development applications for construction
of facilities made by a hospital, as defined in § 550-7, shall be
exempt from transportation improvement district impact fees.
(8) Exemption for age-restricted housing developments accessory
buildings. No TID fee shall be charged for clubhouses, pool houses,
greenhouses, and other accessory buildings on the sites of agerestricted
housing developments.
A. Every applicant which is engaged in the development of three or more
dwellings or commercial or individual developments in excess of 1,000
square feet in area in the Township of Hamilton shall be required to
provide, in writing, to every potential purchaser or lessor, prior to any
sale or lease, the following information regarding the lands and/or
structures which are the subject of potential sale or lease:
(1) Any conditions of approval for construction which have been
imposed by any municipal agency or official.254
(2) Township Master Plan and Zoning Map classifications for adjacent
properties.
B. Any plans approved by a municipal agency as a prerequisite to
construction on a site shall be permanently posted within every sales or
leasing office of the applicant or sales agent. These shall include, but
not be limited to, subdivisions, site plans and variances.
C. This section shall only apply to requirement disclosures prior to initial
sale or lease and shall not apply to resales or subsequent leases.
254. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-256 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-258
1:1285

ARTICLE IX
Administration and Enforcement
§ 550-281. Interpretation and application of provisions.
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Township. Any action taken by the Township under
the terms of this chapter shall give primary consideration to the abovementioned
matters and to the welfare of the entire community. Moreover, if
an applicant or his agent can clearly demonstrate that, because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to his land, the literal enforcement of one or more
of these regulations is impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the
appropriate municipal agency may permit such exception or exceptions as
may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the rules,
regulations and standards established by this chapter.
§ 550-282. Enforcement.
A. Construction Official and administrative officer. It shall be the duty of
the Construction Official and administrative officer of the Township to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. No structure shall
be erected until a construction permit is obtained from the
Construction Official, and no structure or lot shall be used in violation
of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Construction Official to keep a
record of all applications and all construction permits which are either
issued or denied, with notations of any conditions involved, which data
shall form a part of the Township public records. A monthly report of
construction permits issued shall be filed with the Tax Assessor. It shall
be the duty of the administrative officer to inspect the structures and
land in the Township and order the owner, in writing, to remedy any
condition found to exist in violation of any provision(s) of this chapter.
B. Construction permits. Every application for a construction permit shall
be accompanied by three sets of plans drawn in ink or a blueprint
showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon; the
exact location, size and height of all existing and proposed structure(s);
the existing or intended use of each structure; the number of dwelling
units the structure is designed to accommodate; the number and
location of off-street parking spaces and off-street loading areas; and
such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as
may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this
chapter. A construction permit shall be granted or denied within 20
business days from the date of a complete application, unless additional
time is agreed upon in writing by the applicant. One copy of such plans
shall be returned to the owner when such plans shall have been
approved or denied by the Construction Official, together with such
permit as may be granted. All dimensions shown on these plans relating
to the location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on an
actual survey of the lot by a licensed land surveyor in the State of New
§ 550-281 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-282
1:1287
§ 550-283. Violations.
Jersey. The lot and the location of the structure(s) thereon shall be
staked out on the grounds before construction is started. No
construction permit shall be issued for any structure until prior site
plan, subdivision and variance approvals, as may be necessary, have
been granted by the appropriate municipal agency or municipal
agencies in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Certificate of occupancy.
(1) It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any structure or
part(s) thereof, either occupied by a new use or occupant or
hereafter erected, altered, converted or enlarged wholly or in part,
until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the
Construction Official. It shall be the duty of the Construction
Official to issue a certificate of occupancy only when he is satisfied
that the structure or part(s) thereof and the proposed use conform
to this chapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the
Township.
(2) A certificate of occupancy shall be granted or denied in writing
within 10 business days from the date that a written notification is
filed with the Construction Official that the erection of the
structure is completed, unless additional time is agreed upon by
the applicant in writing.
(3) Should the Construction Official decline to issue a certificate of
occupancy, his reason for doing so shall be so stated on two copies
of the application, and one copy shall be returned to the applicant.
(4) Upon notice being served of any condition found to exist in
violation of any provision(s) of this chapter with respect to any land
use, the certificate of occupancy for such use shall thereupon,
without further notice, be null and void, and a new certificate of
occupancy shall be required for any further use of such structure or
land.
(5) A monthly report of the certificates of occupancy issued shall be
filed with the Tax Assessor. A record of all certificates of occupancy
shall be kept in the office of the Construction Official, and copies
shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or
tenancy interest in the structure or land affected. The charge for
each copy shall be established by resolution of the governing body,
except that there shall be no charge to a municipal agency.
A. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, moved or converted or any building, structure or land is used in
violation of or contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the Township
may institute an action to enjoin or any other appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent such erection, construction, reconstruction,
§ 550-282 HAMILTON CODE § 550-283
1:1288
§ 550-284. Penalties.
alteration, conversion or use. However, nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to restrict the right of any party to obtain a review by any
court of competent jurisdiction according to law.
B. The Construction Official shall investigate any purported violation of
performance standards and, if there is reasonable ground for the same,
shall notify the administrative officer of the occurrence or existence of a
probable violation. The administrative officer shall investigate the
alleged violation. If the administrative officer finds that a violation
occurred or exists, such violation shall be terminated as provided
hereinbelow.
C. The services of any qualified expert employed by the administrative
officer to advise in establishing a violation shall be paid by the violator,
if said violation is established, and otherwise by the Township.
D. All violations, as ascertained in accordance with the above, shall be
terminated within a reasonable time, as determined by the
administrative officer. Failure to so terminate by the date fixed by the
administrative officer shall subject the responsible party to the penalty
provisions of this chapter. In addition, the Construction Official may
revoke the occupancy permit of the violator, and the Township may seek
such other relief as may be appropriate. Uses established before the
effective date of this chapter and nonconforming as to performance
standards shall be given a reasonable time in which to conform, as
determined by the administrative officer.
A. Fines.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof by any court authorized
by law to hear and determine the matter, be fined such sum not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000 as such court, in its discretion,
may impose; or if the party so convicted is a natural person, such
person may be imprisoned for such term not exceeding 90 days as
such court, in its discretion, may impose; or such natural person
may be both imprisoned and fined not exceeding the maximum
limits set forth herein as such court, in its discretion, may impose.
Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
(2) The owner of any building or structure, lot or land or part thereof
and/or the tenant or occupant of any building or structure, lot or
land or part thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter
shall be placed or shall exist or be suffered, allowed or permitted to
exist, and any architect, builder, developer, contractor, agent,
person or corporation engaged in connection therewith and who
assists in the commission of any such violation, shall each be guilty
§ 550-283 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-284
1:1289
§ 550-285. through § 550-310. (Reserved)
of a separate violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall each be
liable to the fine or imprisonment, or both, specified above.
B. Selling land before final subdivision approval.
(1) If before final subdivision approval has been granted any person, as
owner or agent, transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell any
land which forms a part of a subdivision for which municipal
approval is required in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, except pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on
final subdivision approval, such person shall be subject to a penalty
not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, and each lot disposition
so made may be deemed a separate violation.
(2) In addition to the foregoing, the Township may institute and
maintain a civil action:
(a) For injunctive relief.
(b) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to
such a contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not
been issued in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
(3) In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the
subdivider or his assigns or successors, to secure the return of any
deposit made or purchase price paid, and also a reasonable search
fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any. Any such
action must be brought within two years after the date of the
recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said
land or within six years, if unrecorded.255
255. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 550-284 HAMILTON CODE § 550-285
1:1290
ARTICLE X
Supplementary Regulations and General Modifications; Exceptions
and Additions
§ 550-311. Interpretation and application of regulations generally.
In interpreting and applying these regulations, the requirements contained
in this chapter are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to
carry out the purpose of these regulations. Except as hereinafter provided,
these regulations shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul
or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants
or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of these
regulations impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings or
upon the height of buildings, or require a larger percentage of lot to be left
unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations or
permits or any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties,
the provisions of these regulations shall govern.
§ 550-312. Use regulations. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord. No.
93-008; 3-16-2005 by Ord. No. 05-009]
A. Effect of zoning.
(1) Zoning affects all land. No land shall be used except for a purpose
permitted in the district in which it is located.
(2) Zoning affects all buildings. No building shall be erected,
converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered,
nor shall any building be used, except for a use permitted in the
district in which the building is located.256
B. Pending application for building permits. Nothing in this chapter shall
require any change in the overall layout, plans, construction, size or
designated use of any development, building, structure or part thereof
for which official approvals and required building permits have been
granted prior to February 1, 1979.
C. Expiration of variances, special use permits and conditional use
approvals.
(1) All variances, special use permits and conditional uses which have
been approved prior to February 1, 1979, shall expire within six
months of the date of the passage of this chapter, unless building
permits are secured and construction commences.
Notwithstanding the above, those variance and conditional use
approvals which have been outstanding for less than one year shall
expire within one year of the date of the passage of this chapter
unless building permits are secured and construction commences.
256. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 160-312(b), Only one principal building or use upon any lot,
which previously followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). See now § 550-121, Principal uses and buildings.
§ 550-311 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-312
1:1291
(2) Variances, special use permits, and conditional use approvals
associated with subdivision and/or site plan approval shall have
expiration dates which coincide with the expiration date of the
subdivision and/or site plan approval as prescribed by the
Municipal Land Use Law, Chapter 291, compiled as N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
(3) All other variances and/or conditional use approvals not referenced
in Subsection D(1) or (2) above shall expire within two years of
publication of their approval by either the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Planning Board, unless the applicant has
successfully fulfilled all conditions imposed by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Planning Board and obtained a certificate of
occupancy from the Township. The Zoning Board of Adjustment or
the Planning Board may grant one extension, not to exceed one
year in time, for the expiration of a variance and/or a conditional
use approval.
D. Street access to lots. No building shall be erected on a lot which does
not have frontage upon an improved street, which shall be either a
public street, a publicly approved street or a publicly maintained street.
E. Substandard buildings or structures. No building or structure shall be
used or occupied if such building or structure is in need of major
structural repairs or is unsafe or unsanitary or if the premises do not
have connection with the Township sanitary sewerage system or
alternative sewage facilities approved by the Health Officer.
F. Notification of property owners. Wherever in this chapter there is a
requirement for the notification of property owners, the provisions shall
apply irrespective of municipal boundary lines.
G. Parking, loading and vehicular access.
(1) Off-street parking and loading regulations. No building shall be
erected or structurally altered except in conformity with the offstreet
parking and loading regulations specified in this chapter.
(2) Vehicular access to streets, roads or highways. In all districts,
provisions shall be made for sufficient on-site or -lot vehicular
turnaround space to permit a vehicle to enter a street, road or
highway in a forward manner. The above shall not apply to minor
residential streets.
(3) Parking of commercial vehicles in residential zones and on
residential properties in any zone. One commercial vehicle of a
rated capacity not exceeding one ton or not having more than four
wheels, owned or used by a resident of the premises, shall be
permitted to be parked on a public street or parked or garaged on a
lot as an accessory use in accordance with the Code of the
Township of Hamilton. The provisions of this chapter must be met
on the single lot for which the use is accessory to the main use of
§ 550-312 HAMILTON CODE § 550-312
1:1292
the premises. The provisions shall not be deemed to limit the
number of commercial trucks or cars used upon an active farm for
agricultural purposes or construction equipment which is used on
the site for construction purposes.
H. Stripping of topsoil. No person shall strip, excavate or otherwise
remove topsoil for sale.
I. Public utility corporations. All facilities, such as pumping stations,
repeater stations and electric substations, which require a structure
above grade, shall harmonize with the character of the neighborhood
and shall have adequate fences and other safety devices. A site plan
shall be furnished to the Planning Board for review and approval.
J. Railroads. No railroad right-of-way shall be used for any other purpose
than the location of railroad tracks, spur tracks, loading and unloading
platforms, structures, facilities or uses incidental to railroad operation,
provided that none of the above uses, except railroad tracks, shall be
permitted where a railroad right-of-way is adjacent to or within 150 feet
from any residentially zoned property on the same side of the right-ofway
proposed to be used for spur tracks, loading and unloading
platforms, structures, facilities or uses incidental to railroad
operation.257
K. Public election voting places. The provisions of this chapter shall not be
construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a
voting place in connection with a municipal or other public election.
L. Location of certain traffic-generating uses. No use or structure
involving, as a principal part of the conduct of a business, the use or
servicing of motor vehicles, such as an automobile and gasoline service
station, automobile sales area, new and used car lots, community
garage or parking area, public garage, storage garage, drive-in
business, distribution plant, motor freight terminal or any other use or
structure which generates substantial or concentrated vehicular traffic,
shall be located within 600 feet of a church, school, library, hospital,
charitable institution or place of public assemblage, public park,
playground, fire station or an institution for the care or housing of
children or the aged and when the uses or structures are located along
the same street, road or highway. Similarly, no use or structure such as
second-mentioned above shall be located closer than 600 feet to a use
or structure such as first-mentioned above. The distances between uses
and structures shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest
boundary of the lot of one such use to the nearest boundary of the other
use.
M. Building setbacks along easements. No building or structure shall be
closer than 10 feet to a storm drain, water, sanitary sewer, gas or
257. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 160-312(l), regarding seasonal sales, which immediately
followed this subsection, was moved to Ch. 373, Sales, Art. II, Seasonal Sales.
§ 550-312 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-312
1:1293
electrical easement or right-of-way, unless otherwise approved by the
Township Engineer.
N. Accessory buildings.
(1) Accessory buildings attached to principal building. An accessory
building attached to the principal building shall comply in all
respects with the yard requirements of this chapter in respect to
the principal building.
(2) Accessory buildings on corner lot. Accessory buildings on corner
lots shall not be erected closer to the street line than the front yard
required on the adjacent lot.
(3) Accessory buildings prior to principal buildings. No building permit
shall be granted for the construction of an accessory building until
such time as a building permit shall have been granted for the
construction of the principal building upon the premises.
Construction of the principal building shall either precede or be
simultaneous with construction of the accessory building. An
accessory building shall not be located on a lot unless a principal
building is also located on that same lot.
O. 258Trailers and trailer camps; sales.
(1) House trailers. No house trailer, mobile home or other similar
habitable mobile equipment may be parked or stored in any district
except in accordance with the following regulations:
(a) Not more than one trailer shall be parked or stored on any lot.
(b) No trailer shall be parked or stored within 10 feet from a rear
lot line or side lot line.
(c) No trailer shall be parked or stored in any required side yard or
front yard.
(d) No trailer shall be occupied in any district for more than 48
hours, except as provided in Subsection R(1)(f) below.
(e) No trailer, whether intended for residence or otherwise, shall
be affixed to, nor shall there be affixed to it, any permanent
wall, patio, room, foundation or other permanent structure or
part of a structure.
(f) In the event of a residential structure on a lot experiencing a
disaster, natural or man-made, such as flood, fire, etc., the
administrative officer may grant permission to allow one house
trailer to be parked or stored and occupied temporarily on that
lot while the residential structure is being rebuilt or repaired.
258. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection O, Incongruous buildings, was repealed 6-19-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-020. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections
P through V as Subsections O through U, respectively.
§ 550-312 HAMILTON CODE § 550-312
1:1294
The house trailer may not be parked or stored and occupied
longer than 180 days. One extension of 60 days may be granted
by the administrative officer. If the residential structure is
not ready for occupancy within the time periods prescribed
above, a use variance must be sought from the Zoning Board
of Adjustment.
(2) House trailer camps and sales. Trailer camps, trailer parks,
commercial storage of house trailers and house trailer sales are
specifically prohibited in all districts.
(3) Use of trailer bodies for storage. Trailer bodies may not be used for
storage on any property in any zoning district in the Township.
P. Dog runs. Dog runs may be permitted as accessory uses to residential
properties, provided that they adhere to accessory building
requirements of the district and are maintained on a daily basis, except
that no portion of the run shall be located less than 15 feet from any lot
line. Runs may not have fences which exceed six feet in height.
Q. Motor vehicles.
(1) Unregistered motor vehicles are not permitted to be stored on any
lot.
(2) Antique automobiles must be properly registered and must display
antique license plates.
R. Trash removal from disturbed land.
(1) All excavated material, refuse, rubbish, solid waste, trade waste,
trash and garbage must be removed on a weekly basis by the
developer from any land disturbed for development.
(2) Appropriate safeguards must be made to ensure that such
materials do not travel to adjacent properties.
(3) Any of the above materials which appear on adjacent properties are
subject to removal on a weekly basis.
S. Disinterment of animal remains. The disinterment and/or removal of
animal remains buried in a pet cemetery is prohibited.
T. Separation of certain outdoor uses from residential property and zone.
No commercial activity which is conducted outside of an enclosed
building, which involves the potential release of gasoline or diesel
fumes, use of high-intensity illumination or involves vehicular queuing
or traffic generation, such as a gasoline service station, shall be
established or commenced within 500 feet of a residential property or
residential zone. Also, no residential use shall be established closer
than 500 feet to such activity. The five-hundred-foot distance shall be
measured in a straight line from the nearest activity area or structure
§ 550-312 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-312
1:1295
§ 550-313. Area and yard regulations. [Amended 1-20-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-008; 11-4-2005 by Ord. No. 05-025]
supporting such outdoor activity to the nearest boundary of the
residential property or residential zone.
U. Separation of certain motor vehicle intensive uses from residential
property and zone. No activity which, by virtue of its commercial nature
involves intensive motor vehicle use, including but not limited to
twenty-four-hour convenience stores and/or automobile or gasoline
service stations, particularly if the service station is located adjacent to
or is part of the convenience store, shall be established or commenced
within 500 feet of a residential property or residential zone. Also, no
residential use shall be established closer than 500 feet to such activity.
The five-hundred-foot distance shall be measured in a straight line from
the nearest activity area or structure supporting such activity to the
nearest boundary of the residential property or residential zone.
A. Area.
(1) Conformity with area regulations. Except as hereinafter provided,
no building shall be erected, reconstructed, converted, enlarged,
structurally altered or moved on a lot or moved to another lot,
unless such building or enlargement conforms to the area
regulations of the district on which such building is located.
(2) Maintenance of required yards. No yard or other open space for
each and every building existing February 1, 1979, or for any
building erected thereafter shall be encroached upon or reduced in
any manner, except in conformity with these regulations. No yard
for one principal building shall be considered as a yard for any
other principal building, and no yard on one lot shall be considered
as a yard for a principal building on another lot. Shrubbery,
driveways, off-street parking spaces, retaining walls, fences, curbs
and planting screens or planted buffer strips shall not be construed
to be encroachments on yards.
(3) Reduction or change in lot size. No lot shall be reduced in size so as
to produce a land parcel which is not in conformity with these
regulations, unless the land parcel is combined with other land to
produce a conforming lot or unless said parcel is needed and
accepted for public use.
(4) Required front yard and area for lots on streets and roads proposed
for right-of-way widening. Where a building lot has frontage upon a
street or road which is proposed for right-of-way widening, the
required front yard shall be measured from the proposed future
right-of-way line. The area between the existing right-of-way line
and the proposed right-of-way line shall not be included in the
minimum required lot area.
§ 550-312 HAMILTON CODE § 550-313
1:1296
(5) Substandard lots of record. Where a lot existed of record either by
subdivision or filed map or on Township records as of February 1,
1979, having an area of lesser dimensions than that required by
this chapter, and the owner of such lot does not own any other
parcel or tract adjacent thereto, said lot may nonetheless be used
for a one-family dwelling or for any nondwelling use permitted in
the district in which it is located, provided that the lot is of
sufficient size to assure adequate and safe facilities for the disposal
of sewage and waste products, and provided that there is adequate
separation between sewage and waste disposal systems and all
water supplies, as determined by the Division of Health, except that
no building may be erected on a lot of a width and area less than
the following:
District
Lot Width
(feet)
Lot Area
(square feet)
RRC 300 120,000
R-15 75 10,000
R-10 60 8,000
R-7 40 4,000
(6) Adjoining lots. When two or more adjoining lots of record with
continuous frontage are in one ownership at any time after
February 1, 1979, and such lots individually are less than the
requirements set forth by this chapter, then such group of lots shall
be considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted
width and area for the district in which located.
B. Yards; general; permitted obstructions in required yards.
(1) All required yards shall be unobstructed except as provided herein.
Since required yards shall be open to the sky, an obstruction shall
include the projection of a structure into such spaces at any level
above ground.
(2) Projection into yards of a porte cochere; cornices, eaves, belt
courses, sills, canopies or other similar architectural features;
chimneys; open fire escapes; open balconies, porches, platforms or
landing places; open ornamental fences, hedges, landscape
architectural features or guard railings around depressed ramp
areas; screening walls or fences; and landscape features such as
trees, shrubs or flowers are permitted, subject to the terms and
specifications contained in this subsection.
(3) Signs may be located within or project into a required yard, subject
to conditions of § 550-124.
(4) Parking and loading areas may occupy a required yard, subject to
provisions established for the district in which located.
§ 550-313 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-313
1:1297
(5) An arbor, trellis, flagpole or recreation yard may be permitted in
any required yard.
(6) Handicap access structures shall be permitted in all residential
zones to project into required front, rear and side yard setbacks
subject to review and approval of the administrative officer.
C. Front yards.
(1) Multiple-frontage lots. Any building constructed on a lot having a
frontage on two or more streets shall be so located as to comply
with the regulations governing the front yard restrictions and
setbacks on all streets on which such lot has frontage. In the case
of an interior through lot, the owner shall elect and so designate on
the site plan which yard shall be the required rear yard and the
required front yard. The designated rear yard shall be attractively
landscaped and maintained so as to conform to the character of the
front yards in the general area. In the case of a corner lot, driveway
access shall be from the lesser of the two streets. In the case of
existing buildings, the front shall be determined by the official
address of the building.
(2) Determination of frontage for irregularly shaped lots. The
minimum frontage requirements for irregularly shaped lots shall be
measured at the rear line of the required front yard, but in no case
shall the lot width at the street line be less than 2/3 of the minimum
lot width required by this chapter.
(3) Reduction of front yard setback requirements for substandard lots
of record existing by subdivision, filed map or on Township records
as of February 1, 1979. In any residential district where the
average setback line for existing buildings on all lots located wholly
or partly within 200 feet of any lot, and within the same block and
zoning district and on the same side of the street as such lot, is less
than the minimum setback required in the district, the
administrative officer may waive the front yard setback
requirement as contained in this chapter and set front yard setback
requirements at not less than the existing average setback distance
for all lots within 200 feet. When lots within the 200 feet are
vacant, the vacant lot shall be considered as having the minimum
required setback for the purpose of computing an average setback
distance.
(4) Architectural features. Architectural features may project into a
required front yard a distance not greater than the following:
(a) Open entrance shelter: four feet.
(b) Cornices and eaves: three feet.
(c) Windowsills and belt courses: six inches.
§ 550-313 HAMILTON CODE § 550-313
1:1298
(d) Chimneys: 24 inches.
(5) Fire escapes. Fire escapes are not permitted in front yards.
(6) Open balconies. Open balconies, not covered by a roof or canopy,
which extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may
be erected to project into front yards, provided that such structures
are not more than 30 inches in depth.
(7) Porches, platforms or landing places. Open structures, such as
steps, platforms, paved terraces or landing places, which do not
extend above the first-floor level of the building and which have no
wall more than 30 inches high, may project into a required front
yard for a distance not exceeding 10 feet.
(8) Awnings and movable canopies. An awning or movable canopy may
project into a required front yard not more than 10 feet.
(9) Bay or bow window. A bay or bow window may project into a
required front yard not more than 30 inches.
D. Side yards.
(1) Side yard requirements for substandard lots of record in closely
built areas. Where a lot existed of record either by subdivision, filed
map or on Township records as of February 1, 1979, and the owner
of such lot does not own any other parcel or tract contiguous
thereto, the administrative officer may waive the side line
requirements as contained in this chapter and set side line
requirements in keeping with the character of the immediate
neighborhood.
(2) Determination of side yards for irregularly shaped lots. Where the
application of side yard regulations is impractical for substandard
lots or lots of peculiar shape or location, such regulations may be
modified and the side yard requirements determined by the
administrative officer in keeping with the character of the
immediate area.
(3) Architectural features. Architectural features may project into a
required side yard a distance not greater than the following:
(a) Open entrance shelters: four feet.
(b) Cornices and eaves: three feet.
(c) Windowsills and belt courses: six inches.
(d) Chimneys: two feet.
(e) Steps and landings: four feet.
(4) Fire escapes. An open or lattice-enclosed fireproof outside fire
escape may project not more than six feet into a required side yard.
§ 550-313 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-313
1:1299
(5) Open balconies. Open balconies, not covered by a roof or canopy,
which extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may
be erected to project into side yards not more than 30 inches.
(6) Movable awnings and canopies. A movable awning or canopy may
project into a required side yard not more than four feet.
(7) Bay or bow window. A bay or bow window may project into a
required side yard not more than 30 inches.
E. Rear yards.
(1) Determination of rear yards for substandard or irregularly shaped
lots. Where the application of rear yard regulations is impractical
for substandard lots or lots of peculiar shape or location, such
regulations may be modified and the rear yard requirements
determined by the administrative officer in keeping with the
character of the immediate area.
(2) Architectural features. Architectural features may project into a
required rear yard a distance not greater than the following:
(a) Cornices and eaves: three feet.
(b) Windowsills and belt courses: six inches.
(c) Chimneys: two feet.
(3) Fire escapes. An open or lattice-enclosed fireproof outside fire
escape may project not more than six feet into a required rear yard.
(4) Open balconies. Open balconies, not covered by a roof or canopy,
which extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may
be erected to project into rear yards not more than 30 inches.
(5) Steps, platforms, paved terraces or landing places. Open
structures, such as steps, platforms, paved terraces or landing
places, which do not extend above the first-floor level of the
building and which have no wall more than 30 inches high, may
project into a required rear yard for a distance not exceeding 10
feet.
(6) Awnings and movable canopies. An awning or movable canopy may
project into a required rear yard not more than 10 feet.
(7) Bay or bow windows. A bay or bow window may project into a
required rear yard not more than 30 inches.
§ 550-313 HAMILTON CODE § 550-313
1:1300
ARTICLE XI
Historic Preservation Advisory Commission
[Added 10-4-2000 by Ord. No. 00-046]
§ 550-314. Creation; purpose.
There is hereby created a Historic Preservation Advisory Commission,
referred to in this chapter as the "Commission." The purpose of the
Commission shall be to carry out the responsibilities set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-109 through 40:55D-111; in addition, the creation of the
Commission is intended to further the following general purposes:
§ 550-315. Composition.
A. Encourage the continued use of historic resources and facilitate their
appropriate reuse.
B. Safeguard the heritage of the Township by preserving resources which
reflect elements of its cultural, social, economic and architectural
history.
C. Maintain and develop an appropriate and harmonious setting for the
historic and architecturally significant buildings, structures, sites,
objects or districts within the Township.
D. Stabilize and improve property values and discourage the unnecessary
demolition of historic resources.
E. Foster and enhance civic beauty and neighborhood pride.
F. Promote appreciation of the historic districts which may be established
in the Township for the education, pleasure and general welfare of the
citizens of the Township and its visitors.
G. Encourage private reinvestment in existing or new structures in a
manner that preserves, restores, repairs or is compatible with the
original architectural style which is characteristic of any historic
districts which may be established in the Township.
A. The Commission shall consist of nine regular voting members and two
alternate members. The members shall be divided into three classes as
follows:
(1) Class A: a person who is a Hamilton resident and is knowledgeable
in building design and construction or architectural history.
(2) Class B: a person who is a Hamilton resident and is knowledgeable
or with a demonstrated interest in local history.
(3) Class C: a person who is a Hamilton resident and shall hold no
other municipal office, position or employment, other than there
shall be one Class C member who is also a member of the Township
Planning Board.
§ 550-314 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-315
1:1301
§ 550-316. Appointment; terms; voting; vacancies.
§ 550-317. Conflicts of interest; removal.
B. Four of the regular members shall be drawn from Classes A and B; at
least one of those four shall be a Class A member, and at least one of
those four shall be a Class B member. Five of the regular members shall
meet the qualifications of Class C members and the two alternate
members shall be Class C members.
A. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township Council, shall
appoint all regular and alternate members of the Commission and shall
designate at the time of appointment the regular members by class and
the alternate members as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The
terms of the regular members first appointed under this chapter shall
be as follows: One-year terms for a Class A member and a Class C
member; two-year terms for a Class B member and two Class C
members; three-year terms for a Class C member and a member of
either Class A or Class B; and four-year terms for a Class C member and
a member of either Class A or Class B. The terms of the alternate
members first appointed under this chapter shall be one year for
Alternate No. 1 and two years for Alternate No. 2. Thereafter, the term
of a regular member shall be four years, and the term of an alternate
member shall be two years. Notwithstanding any other provision
herein, the term of any member common to the Commission and the
Township Planning Board shall be for the member's term of
membership on the Planning Board, and the term of any member
common to the Commission and the Township Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be for the member's term of membership on the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. Alternate members may participate in discussion of the proceedings but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice be
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall
vote.
C. The Secretary of the Commission shall immediately notify the Mayor of
any membership vacancies, along with recommendations made by the
Commission to fill such vacancies. A vacancy occurring otherwise than
by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Any
vacancies occurring on the Commission shall be filled with qualified
members within 60 days.
A. No member may act on any matter in which the member has, either
directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
B. A member may be removed by the Township Council for just cause.
Prior to such removal, the Township Council shall conduct a hearing, if
§ 550-315 HAMILTON CODE § 550-317
1:1302
§ 550-318. Election of officers; compensation of members and staff.
§ 550-319. Rules; procedures and meetings.
§ 550-320. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties.
so requested in writing by the member, within 10 days after receipt by
the member of written notice of intention to remove.
A. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson from
its members and select a Secretary, who may or may not be a member
of the Commission or a municipal employee.
B. The Township Council shall provide for the Commission in its budget
and shall appropriate funds for the expenses of the Commission.
C. The Commission members shall serve without compensation but shall
be reimbursed for expenses incurred in connection with official
business and may obtain the equipment, supplies and other material
necessary to its effective operation, within the limits of grants, gifts or
funds appropriated, if any, by the Township Council.
D. The Commission may employ, contract for and fix the compensation of
experts and other staff and services as it shall deem necessary, except
that the Commission shall obtain its legal counsel from the Township
Attorney. Expenditures pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed,
exclusive of gifts, donations or grant, the amount appropriated by the
Township Council for the Commission's use.
A. The Commission shall create and adopt internal rules and procedures
for the transaction of its business, which shall be known as the
"Hamilton Township Historic Preservation Advisory Commission
Administrative Procedures." Said rules shall not be inconsistent with
the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Commission shall make its decisions and recommendations in an
open public meeting in compliance with the Open Public Meetings Act
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 10:4-7 et seq. Applicants shall be notified of
the meetings, attendance requirements and advised of decisions. All
written minutes of meetings and proceedings shall be kept, including
voting records, attendance, findings and recommendations. All such
material shall become public record.
C. A quorum for the transaction of all business shall be five members.
A. Carry out the responsibilities set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-109 through
40:55D-111.
§ 550-317 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-320
1:1303
B. Recommend to the Planning Board and the Township Council sites to be
designated as historic landmarks in accordance with any procedures
which may be set forth in this chapter.
C. Recommend amendments from time to time, as circumstances warrant,
to the historic landmark designation list and landmark map, including
changes or extension of the boundaries of any historic district and
creation of new historic districts, in accordance with any applicable
provisions of this chapter.
D. Research and reevaluate properties listed in the cultural resources
survey against the criteria for the National Register of Historic Places
and prepare nominations for the consideration of the State Historical
Preservation Officer. Such properties shall be reviewed in consideration
of, but not limited to, the criteria for historic designation as established
by the Office of New Jersey Heritage and the National Park Service.
E. If the Township is certified under the state's Certified Local
Government (CLG) Program, the Commission shall, in accordance with
the state CLG guidelines, review and comment on all state and national
register nominations for the historic landmarks within the Township.
F. Advise the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment on
development that affects historic landmarks, in accordance with any
procedures set forth in this chapter.
G. Review actions, including those involving construction and/or zoning
permit applications, which affect the exterior appearance of historic
landmarks or architectural features within the historic district, in
accordance with any procedures set forth in this chapter.
H. Assist and advise other municipal agencies and public bodies in the
understanding of historic landmark significance and techniques of
historic preservation.
I. Collect and disseminate material on the importance of historic
preservation and techniques for achieving same.
J. Report at least annually to the Planning Board and the Township
Council on the state of historic preservation in the Township and
recommend measures to improve same.
§ 550-320 HAMILTON CODE § 550-320
1:1304
Chapter 565
SITE INVESTIGATION AND SOIL SAMPLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental impact — See Ch. 530.
Land development — See Ch. 550.
Soil removal — See Ch. 572.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 577.
§ 565-1. General requirements.
§ 565-2. Review.
The administrative officer and the Township's Environmental Commission
shall review preliminary site investigation and soil testing reports to
determine compliance with this chapter.
§ 565-3. Studies to be conducted.
The site investigation and soil sampling shall be conducted in two parts:
A. Prior to any development application (including major or minor
subdivision and site plan approvals) being deemed complete by the
Township's administrative officer, preliminary site investigation and soil
testing reporting, as outlined in this chapter, shall be filed and accepted
as part of the application.
B. Exemptions. The requirement to submit a preliminary site investigation
and soil testing report is not mandatory for the following: signage
applications; bulk variances for decks, pools and/or sheds for existing
uses; minor subdivisions which create no new lots; site plan waivers;
minor revisions to existing site plans; open space; recreation; continued
farming; and sites for which final approval has previously been granted.
Notwithstanding the listed exemptions, preliminary site investigation
and soil sampling reports may be required at the direction of the
Planning Board or the administrative officer.
A. Preliminary site investigation report.
(1) Applicants shall be required to submit a preliminary investigation
report. The purpose of the preliminary investigation report is to
provide historical information on the previous uses of the proposed
site so that potential contaminants or areas of concern can be
identified prior to any soil sampling. The preliminary investigation
report shall be based on diligent inquiry and at a minimum shall
contain the following:
(a) Names of all owners and operators.
(b) Dates of ownership of each owner.
§ 550-320 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-3
1:1305
(c) Dates of operation of each owner.
(d) Description of past agricultural or industrial use.
(e) List of pesticides, herbicides or insecticides used at the
property.
(f) Approximate periods and application rates of pesticides,
herbicides or insecticides used at the property.
(g) Any past remedial activities.
(h) All existing sampling data.
(i) A scaled site plan/survey detailing lot/block numbers, property
boundaries, buildings, pesticides storage areas, wetlands,
streams, ponds, septic and cesspool systems, underground
storage tanks, and inactive and active wells.
(j) Identification of all areas where nonindigenous fill materials
were used.
(k) A determination from the collected historical date
identification of the areas believed to be potentially
contaminated.
(2) The administrative officer and the Township's Environmental
Commission shall review the preliminary site investigation report
within 45 calendar days of receipt. Incomplete preliminary site
investigation reports shall be returned to the applicant with
comments for resubmittal. Following the acceptance of the
preliminary site investigation report, the applicant shall submit a
soil sampling report. The administrative officer shall have the
discretion to waive the soil sampling report requirement if the
applicant satisfactorily demonstrates that the site has not
historically been used for either agricultural or industrial uses.
B. Soil sampling report plan.
(1) Sampling locations and depths must be biased towards areas of
greatest potential contamination. If there is no basis for biasing
sampling locations, one sample shall be taken every two acres. A
minimum of one sample shall be taken at the proposed site.
Sampling locations shall be identified on the site plan and affixed
with GPS coordinates.
(2) Unless otherwise directed by the administrative officer, all samples
shall be analyzed for lead and or arsenic using USEPA Method
SW-846-6010B, and a pesticide scan performed using USEPA
Method SW-841-8081A. In the event additional contaminants are
suspected to exist and/or identified in the preliminary site
investigation, the administrative officer may require appropriate
§ 565-3 HAMILTON CODE § 565-3
1:1306
§ 565-4. Remedial action.
§ 565-5. Notification.
In the event that, for any major subdivision application, remediation is
required, any entity subsequently selling any of the subject lots shall
disclose to the purchaser of every lot the soil sampling results and the terms
of the approved remediation.
§ 565-6. Clearing, excavation, fill and grading. [Added 10-4-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-026]
analysis be performed using the applicable USEPA or NJDEP
analytical protocol.
(3) The date of the soil sampling must be provided, both by telephone
and in writing, to the Township's Department of Community
Planning and Compliance a minimum of 10 calendar days prior to
the collection of the samples.
(4) A table shall be submitted listing lead, arsenic, pesticides and other
contaminants analyzed under this chapter with the result of each
parameter analyzed for each sample.
(5) An evaluation of each contaminant, including its potential impact
upon groundwater or nearby surface waters shall be included in
the report. All sampling and analytical work, remediation, quality
assurance and laboratory methods must be conducted in
accordance with the most recent NJDEP Field Sampling
Procedures Manual protocol in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:26E-1.1
et seq., Technical Requirements for Site Remediation.
A. In the event that arsenic, lead, pesticides or other contaminants are
present on the property in excess of the NJDEP soil cleanup criteria, the
applicant shall submit for review to the administrative officer and the
Environmental Commission a remediation plan following protocol in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:26E, Technical Requirements for Site
Remediation.
B. Upon acceptance by the administrative officer, the remediation plan
shall be submitted to the NJDEP. The applicant shall obtain a letter from
the NJDEP stating that either the property may be developed with no
further action or the property may be developed only after
implementation of a remediation plan approved by NJDEP.
A. Word usage. For the purpose of this section, certain rules or word usage
apply to the text as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense and the
singular includes the plural, unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary.
§ 565-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-6
1:1307
(2) The term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the
word "may" is permissive.
(3) The words or terms not interpreted or defined by this section shall
be used with common or standard utilization.
B. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation
and enforcement of this section unless otherwise specifically stated:
ACID SOIL — Soil with a pH of four or less or that contains iron sulfide.
APPLICANT — An individual person, developer, a partnership,
corporation, other entity or public or quasi-public agency requesting
permission to engage in land disturbance activity.
COMMITTEE — The State Soil Conservation Committee in the
Department of Agriculture, established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:24-3.
CONTAMINANT — Any hazardous substance, hazardous constituent,
hazardous waste or pollutant.
CONTRACTOR — Any person engaged in the moving, delivery or
placement of fill from, in or upon any land in the Township.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
parcel of land included in a proposed development, including the holder
of an option or contract to purchase, or any other applicant or person
having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, grading,
transporting, storing or filling of land or any other activity which causes
soil to be exposed to the danger of erosion.
FARM — Any area which is used for the sole purpose of farming
which provides for the use of land within its capabilities and treatment,
within practical limits, to grow and harvest produce or other crop, the
raising of animals for slaughter or the production of milk. The raising of
animals as a hobby or as a pet is exempt from the requirements of this
section.
FILL or FILL MATERIAL — Any sand, gravel, earth, soil, recycled
concrete, roadbed material, or other material of any composition
whatsoever, the placement of which upon a site results in a change of
topography of the site.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any hazardous substance as defined
pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1976, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11b);
hazardous waste as defined pursuant to Section 1 of P.L. 1976, c. 99
(N.J.S.A. 13:1E-38); or pollutant as defined pursuant to Section 3 of P.L.
1977, c. 74 (N.J.S.A. 58:10A-3).
LAND — Any ground, soil or earth, including marshes, swamps,
drainageways and areas not permanently covered by water within the
Township.
§ 565-6 HAMILTON CODE § 565-6
1:1308
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, grading,
transporting, storing or filling of land and, in addition, any activity
which causes land to be exposed to the danger of erosion.
LOT — Any parcel of land separated from other parcels or portions as
by a lawful subdivision or deed of record, survey map or by a metes and
bounds description.
MOVE — To dig, excavate, deposit, place, fill, grade, regrade, level or
otherwise alter or change the location or contour of any site, or to
transport and to supply fill material or soil from one parcel or premises
to another.
PERMIT — A certificate or other document issued to perform work or
other activity under this section.
PLAN — A scheme or design which indicates land treatment measures,
including schedule of the timing for their installation, to minimize soil
erosion and sedimentation.
PRIORITY POLLUTANT PLUS 40 or PP+40 — The priority pollutant
list of 126 compounds and elements developed by the EPA pursuant to
Section 307(a)(1) of the Clean Water Act and 40 nontargeted organic
compounds detected by gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy (GC/
MS) analysis. For the purpose of this chapter, a PP-40 scan means the
analysis of a sample for all priority pollutants except those as analyzed
using GC/MS analytical methods. Nontargeted compound criteria shall
be used pursuant to the version of the EPA "Contract Laboratory
Program Statement of Work for Organic Analysis, Multi-media, Multiconcentration"
in effect as of the date which the laboratory is
performing the analysis.
REMEDIATION — All necessary actions to investigate and clean up any
known, suspected or threatened discharge or placement of hazardous
substances, including, as necessary, identifying areas of concern and
determining the presence of hazardous substances and the collection
and evaluation of data adequate to determine whether or not
discharged or placed hazardous materials exist. In addition,
remediation includes the determination of the nature and extent of any
discharged or placed hazardous substance, identifying and evaluating
any problems presented by the discharge or placement and the
performance of a remedial action.
SITE — Any plot, parcel or parcels of land.
SITE RESTORATION — Grading, landscaping, pavement repair or
construction, the installation of storm drains or inlets, construction
of stormwater detention basins, fences, walls, soil erosion protection
measures or other similar work necessary to bring a disturbed site to a
condition acceptable to the Township.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT OR COMMITTEE — The Mercer
County Soil Conservation District or the state agency committee
§ 565-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-6
1:1309
established or organized by the State of New Jersey, Department of
Agriculture, under the provisions of Chapter 24, Title 4 of the New
Jersey Revised Statutes.
STANDARDS — The standards promulgated by the Committee pursuant
to this Act.
STRIPPING — Any activity which significantly disturbs vegetated or
otherwise stabilized soil surface, including clearing and grubbing
operations.
C. No owner, applicant, developer, corporation, contractor, subdivider or
other person shall clear, grade, move, deliver, fill, place or otherwise
disturb, cause, allow or permit material to be moved or placed on any
property in the Township of Hamilton without first obtaining an
approved permit from the Township. Approval from the Mercer County
Soil Conservation District is also required if the above-noted activities
will disturb more than 5,000 square feet of land. All clearing, grading
excavation or embankment construction shall be in accordance with the
approved site plan or grading plan and shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) All clearing, grading, excavation or embankment construction shall
provide for stormwater runoff and such groundwater seepage as
may be encountered.
(2) All clearing, excavation and embankment construction shall be in
accordance with the applicable requirements, as same may be
amended, of the New Jersey Department of Transportation
standard specifications.
(3) To the extent possible, all proposed development shall be planned
such that site earthwork is balanced. However, where earthwork
balance cannot be attained and it is determined that a proposed
project may yield surplus soil, or may require the import of soil or
subbase materials, the developer shall provide the following
information to the administrative officer for approval. This
information shall be required for the import of soils in excess of
2,000 cubic yards or the import of subbase materials in excess of
500 cubic yards:
(a) A statement from a licensed professional engineer, indicating
that he or she has examined the grading plans and has
conducted cut and fill calculations. The statement shall include
the volume of material to be imported to the site.
(b) A completed clean fill verification form. Blank forms will be
provided by the Township.
(c) A proposed schedule of the soil import or export operations.
Such schedule shall provide the dates operations are to occur
and the anticipated average daily volume of truck traffic from
these operations.
§ 565-6 HAMILTON CODE § 565-6
1:1310
(d) A map of the proposed truck routes to and from the project
site.
(e) An escrow sum (of a reasonable amount to be determined by
the Township's Department of Community Planning and
Compliance) sufficient to allow the Township to monitor the
import and export of materials.
(f) A performance guaranty or a cash bond in the amount of 120%
of the cost of temporary or permanent site restoration. The
bond shall accompany a detailed estimate to be approved by
the Township Engineer. The bond shall be in a form approved
by the Township Attorney. A separate performance bond for
site restoration will not be required if the site work
improvements are guaranteed by a performance bond
approved for site plan approval.
(g) Certification that the soil to be imported is not high acid
producing soil. High acid producing soils are soils with a pH of
four or less or soils that contain iron sulfide.
(4) The applicant shall provide the above information to the
administrative officer prior to submitting site plan Mylars for
signature. In the event that the work is not subject to site plan
approval, the applicant shall provide the information 14 calendar
days in advance of the site disturbance.
(5) No owner, applicant, developer, corporation, contractor, subdivider
or person shall remove material from the site except in accordance
with an approved site plan or grading plan nor without the prior
approval of the administrative officer. The stockpile or removal of
soil from a site, except in relationship to an approved plan, shall not
be permitted without satisfying the requirements of Chapter 572,
Soil Removal, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton.
(6) No administrative waivers from the requirements of this section
shall be granted.
(7) The owner, applicant, developer, corporation, contractor,
subdivider or person shall adhere to all conditions and
requirements of the soil erosion control plan as approved by the
Mercer County Soil Conservation District. In addition to all
requirements of the plan, the individual transporting the material
shall do whatever is necessary to prevent mud, dirt, debris or dust
from being tracked onto public roadways.
(8) Violations and penalties.
(a) If any person violates any of the provisions of this chapter or
any standard promulgated pursuant to the provisions of any
statute or regulation or fails to comply with the provisions of
this section, the Township of Hamilton may institute a civil
§ 565-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-6
1:1311
action in Superior Court for injunctive relief to prohibit and
prevent such violations, and said court may proceed in a
summary manner.
(b) Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section or
any standard promulgated pursuant to this section or who fails
to comply with the provisions of a certified plan shall also be
subject to a penalty of not less than $250 per day nor more
than $3,000 per day to be collected in a summary proceeding
pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et
seq.).
(c) The construction official, upon receiving notice from the
Township Engineer that the developer or contractor is in
violation of this section, shall suspend the further inspections
or issuance of construction permits or certificates of
occupancy.
(9) Stop-work order. The Township Engineer, acting on behalf of the
Township of Hamilton, may issue a stop-work order if a project is
not being executed in accordance with this section.
(10) Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy for a building
on the lot shall be issued unless there has been compliance with the
provisions of this section and the completed clean fill verification
form. The applicant shall obtain and keep copies of soil trip tickets,
material delivery logs, daily reports and other documentation as
required to demonstrate compliance. Upon completion of the earth
work and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the
applicant shall provide a statement from a licensed professional
engineer that he or she has reviewed the documents and certifies
that the requirements of this section have been met.
(11) Completion of work. In the event that a certificate of occupancy is
not required on the property to receive the fill, the applicant shall
provide a statement from a licensed professional engineer that he
or she has delivered the documents pertaining to the import of fill
material and certifies that the requirements have been met.
(12) Exempted activities.
(a) The following activities are specifically exempt from this
section:
1. The use of land for gardening primarily for home
consumption.
2. The agricultural use of lands when operated in accordance
with a farm conservation plan approved by the local soil
conservation district or when the Township administrative
officer, in consultation with the Township Engineer,
§ 565-6 HAMILTON CODE § 565-6
1:1312
Chapter 572
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 215, § 215-9.
Land development — See Ch. 550.
Site investigation and soil sampling — See Ch.
565.
§ 572-1. Findings of fact.
determines that such use will not cause excessive erosion
and sedimentation runoff.
3. The construction of a swimming pool, patio or deck at a
single-family dwelling.
4. Landscaping of a single-family dwelling.
5. Activity that is part of a New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) remediation project.
6. Any activity that is part of a septic system repair or
removal project, as certified to by the Hamilton Township
Health Officer.
7. Site improvements approved by Township officials prior to
the effective date of this section.
A. The Council of the Township of Hamilton finds and determines that the
unregulated and uncontrolled grading of land, relocation, filling,
excavation and removal of soil on a large scale for the sale of or use
other than on the premises has resulted or may result in conditions
detrimental to the public safety, health and general welfare,
substantially hampering and deterring the efforts of the Township of
Hamilton to effectuate the general purpose of municipal planning. The
Land Development Ordinance, Chapter 550 of the Code of the Township
of Hamilton, specifically prohibits mining within the Township of
Hamilton.
B. The Council of the Township of Hamilton determines that the mining of
existing sand banks, sand pits, clay banks, clay pits, gravel pits or other
mineral deposits may now or in the future constitute a hazard to public
health, safety and welfare, and pollution of the environment and that it
is, therefore, vitally important that the Township protect the interests of
its citizens from dust, noise, pollution, the danger of deep pits and to
conserve needed topsoil in the Township.
§ 565-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 572-2
1:1313
§ 572-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Director of Community Planning and
Compliance of the Township of Hamilton, Mercer County, New Jersey.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other persons having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
ESTABLISHED GRADE — The contour of the land as it exists prior to the
proposed excavation or operation.
EXCAVATE or MOVE — To dig, remove, move, deposit, fill, grade, regrade
or level the soil or otherwise alter or change the contour of land or to
transport soil to or from such operation. This shall not be construed to
include plowing, spading, cultivating, harrowing or any other operation
usually and ordinarily associated with tilling of the soil for agricultural or
horticultural purposes.
LAND or LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by
a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
MINING — A process involving the removal of sand, clay, soil, gravel,
humus, peat and other organic or mineral materials.
OPERATIONAL FACE — The end of a working excavation, determined at the
end of each and every workday.
PERSON — An individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation, or
any group of two or more of them, or anyone acting in behalf of said person.
PROPERTY OWNER — The person owning fee interest or the person in
whose name the legal title to the property appears by deed duly recorded in
the office of the County Clerk of Mercer County, or the person in possession
of the property or buildings under claim of or exercising acts of ownership
over the same for himself or as the executor, administrator or guardian of
the property.
SOIL — Subsoil and topsoil.
SUBSOIL — All soil usually found lying beneath the top layer of soil, be
it sand, silt, gravel, clay, boulders, stone, aggregate, dirt, other mineral
deposits, or a combination of one or more of the foregoing.
TERMINATION — The cessation or abandonment of mining operations.
The following elements, among others, shall be considered in
determining whether an operation shall have been abandoned:
(1) Discontinuance of use.
(2) Passage of time since last usage.
A.
§ 572-2 HAMILTON CODE § 572-2
1:1314
TOPSOIL — Arable soil. Topsoil shall be a mealy loam which is
comparatively free from objectionable weeds. Topsoil shall have a minimum
organic content of not less than 2.75% by weight. Topsoil shall contain no
stones, clumps or similar objects larger than one inch in any dimension and
shall have a pH value of not less than 5.8 nor more than 6.5. The gradation
of the topsoil shall consist of the following limits: sand, 40% to 80%; silt,
10% to 30%; and clay, 10% to 30%. All topsoil shall be capable of supporting
vegetation.
WOODED AREAS — Areas containing numerous trees having attained a
diameter of four inches at a height of four feet, diameter breast height, from
the ground, as determined by the administrative officer.
§ 572-3. Restriction on materials to be removed.
The only materials which may be removed under this chapter are sand,
gravel and soil.
§ 572-4. Conformity required.
No person shall conduct any nonconforming mining operation or permit any
mined premises, the operation of which has been terminated, to remain
in the Township of Hamilton, except as may be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 572-5. Exceptions.
The following are exceptions to this chapter and shall not be construed to
be operations as covered under provisions of this chapter:
(3) Intention of operator.
Mining shall also be deemed to be terminated in any mining operation
or portion thereof where, as a result of the application of the terms of
this chapter, any further mining operations are prohibited.
B.
A. On-site excavations for purposes of construction not exceeding 500
cubic yards, confined within an area of 3,600 square feet.
B. On-site excavation and grading for yards, sidewalks, drainage ditches,
sewage disposal systems or other minor yard improvements.
C. New streets, roadways and driveways where regulated by other
ordinances.
D. Excavations made by Hamilton Township, the County of Mercer or the
State of New Jersey for public improvements, such as streets,
highways, drainage, sewers or other similar projects. It is intended to
include in this exception private contractors working under contract for
any of these governmental units.
E. Underground utility lines within the bounds of the public right-of-way.
§ 572-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 572-5
1:1315
§ 572-6. Application and payment of fee required.
On or before March 1 of each and every calendar year in which any person
conducts or will conduct any mining, said person shall file an application
and pay a fee for operation in the Township of Hamilton, such fee to be set
in the manner and amount set forth herein.
§ 572-7. Fees.259
F. Excavation in connection with development approved by the Planning
Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Township of Hamilton
under its site plan review or subdivision approval authority; provided,
however, that such excavation is necessary for the reasonable
development of the approved premises.
A. License fee. Along with the application there shall be deposited with the
administrative officer a license fee as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of
the Township Code.
B. Permit fee. There shall be no permit fee when 500 cubic yards or less of
soil are to be removed. All excavation in excess of 500 cubic yards shall
carry a permit fee as set forth in Chapter 215, Fees, of the Township
Code per cubic yard of material removed. This fee is in addition to the
above license fee.
(1) Said fee shall be payable to the Township quarter-annually, as
follows: Soil removed during the first quarter period shall be
payable in advance and shall be based upon the estimated amount
of soil to be removed during the quarter, in accordance with map
and other exhibits filed with the application and as determined by
the Township Engineer. The initial advance payment for the first
quarter shall be subject to adjustment upon determination and
certification of the actual volume of soil removed for said period by
the Township Engineer.
(2) All following quarter-annual payments shall be based upon the
volume of soil removed during the previous quarterly period, as
determined and certified by the Township Engineer.
(3) The applicant shall by the 10th of each month furnish the
administrative officer with a certification by a licensed professional
engineer of the quantity of soil removed during the previous month,
said certification to be accompanied by all receipts for soil
removed. Nothing in this provision is to be construed to mean that
the certification so requested and furnished shall be determinative
of or exclusive evidence of the quantity of soil removed. All
payments after the initial quarterly payment in advance shall be
259. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 572-5 HAMILTON CODE § 572-7
1:1316
§ 572-8. Phasing.
§ 572-9. Application for permit; required information.
Application for a mining permit shall be filed with the administrative officer
and shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed in § 572-7. Ten copies of the
application shall be made, and the application shall set forth the following
under oath:
due and payable upon certification. Failure to make payment in
accordance with this provision shall be grounds for revocation.
A. For all applications concerning sites greater than 10 acres, a phasing
program developed by the applicant shall be submitted to and subject
to the approval of the administrative officer. Each phase shall be
considered a distinct mining operation, the parameters of which are
defined by area and time. Phases shall not in any way overlap. No one
phase is to exceed five acres, and at no time shall work proceed in any
one phase until work in all preceding phases is deemed complete by the
administrative officer. A phase is deemed complete and the use
terminated when final grading, site cleanup and site rehabilitation is
performed per § 572-13. Consecutive phases must share at least one
common boundary.
B. Before excavation can commence on any phase, at least two soil borings
shall be performed within the boundaries of the new phase to determine
groundwater levels. The borings shall be performed to specifications
stated in § 572-9 and submitted to the administrative officer.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the owner, if other than the applicant.
C. The interest of the applicant in the lands in question.
D. The description and location of the land in question, including the Tax
Map, block and lot numbers.
E. The purpose or a description of the type of mining operation involved,
including the material actually excavated, which is the final product of
said mining operation.
F. The location, kind and quantity, in cubic yards, of soil to be removed
during the license year; the location, kind and quantity, in cubic yards,
of soil proposed to be removed over the overall life of the entire site.
G. The place to which the soil is to be moved and what roads within the
Township are to be used to transport soil.
H. The proposed dates of commencement and completion of the work, said
completion date in no event to exceed seven years from the date of
approval of the application.
§ 572-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 572-9
1:1317
I. The name, address and telephone number of the person having direct
charge or supervision over the soil removal operation.
J. A statement certified by a professional engineer shall be provided,
describing equipment used directly or indirectly in the mining
operation and whether or not said mining operation is conducted above
or below any groundwater level.
K. At the time the application is filed, the applicant shall furnish 10 copies
of a topographical map and cross sections of the lands in question. Both
the topographic map and cross sections shall be prepared and certified
by a licensed professional engineer or licensed land surveyor. The
topographic map shall be prepared at a scale of not more than 100 feet
to the inch with minimum contour intervals of one foot and shall show
the following:
(1) The present grades on a one-hundred-foot-grid layout.
(2) The proposed finished grades.
(3) The quantity, in cubic yards, of the soil to be removed.
(4) The grades of all streets and lots within 200 feet of the property in
question.
(5) Existing floodplains, brooks, streams or bodies of water within 500
feet of the property in question.
(6) The location and depth to water surface of any and all wells and
septic systems within 1,000 feet of the site.
(7) Proposed slopes and lateral supports.
(8) Present and proposed surface water drainage.
(9) All property boundaries.
(10) Designated area for soil storage.
(11) All man-made structures on the site and within 200 feet of the site.
(12) All existing trees on the site with a four-inch caliper or greater.
(13) Cross sections shall be made every 10 feet starting beyond the
limits of excavation. Each cross section shall show the present
grades, limits or proposed excavation and proposed finished
grades.
L. Approvals as may be required by all federal, state, county or regional
authorities, including but not limited to Soil Conservation District
approval and Department of Environmental Protection approval.
M. Environmental impact statement, including plans for reclaiming the site
as required in § 572-13. The statement should also include the
following:
§ 572-9 HAMILTON CODE § 572-9
1:1318
§ 572-10. Termination of operations.
(1) An inventory of existing environmental conditions at the project
site and in the surrounding region, which shall describe air quality,
water quality, water supply, hydrology, geology, soils, topography,
vegetation, wildlife, aquatic organisms, ecology, demography, land
use, aesthetics, history and archaeology; for housing, the inventory
shall describe water quality, water supply, hydrology, geology, soils
and topography.
(2) A project description, which shall specify what is to be done and
how it is to be done during construction and operation.
(3) A listing of all licenses, permits or other approvals as required by
law and the status of each.
(4) An assessment of the probable impact of the project upon all topics
described in Subsection M(1).
(5) A listing of adverse environmental impacts which cannot be
avoided.
(6) Steps to be taken to minimize adverse environmental impacts
during construction and operation, both at the project site and in
the surrounding region.
(7) Alternatives to all or any part of the project with reasons for their
acceptability or nonacceptability.
(8) A reference list of pertinent published information relating to the
project, the project site and the surrounding region.
N. Soil borings. The applicant shall obtain soil borings and groundwater
determinations at the rate of one for every one acre of land uniformly
distributed over the site. The borings shall extend to a point at least 10
feet below the lowest proposed point of excavation. The results of the
test borings shall be witnessed and certified by a licensed professional
engineer and submitted with the application. The applicant shall notify
the administrative officer at least 48 hours prior to his commencement
of the boring, and the administrative officer or his representative shall
be permitted to be present to witness the borings or verify any
information obtained therefrom. The persons performing said borings
shall cooperate in obtaining such additional information as the
Township Engineer shall reasonably request and shall take such
additional borings at the time as he may direct.
O. Phasing plan as required in § 572-8.
A. The owner of the mined premises shall notify the administrative officer
in writing within 30 days of the termination of all mining operations or
any phase thereof.
§ 572-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 572-10
1:1319
§ 572-11. Performance standards.
B. At such time, an as-built plan shall be provided with the information set
forth in § 572-9K. In addition, the use associated with said phase or
phases of the operation shall be deemed permanently terminated at
that time.
C. Upon written request by the administrative officer, the owner of the
mined premises shall file a statement under oath with the
administrative officer, stating that the mining operation of a premises
or portion of same has been terminated. In the event same is not filed
within 30 days after delivery of said request pursuant to this section,
the mining operation of said premises or portion thereof shall
henceforth be deemed terminated. The said written request may be
hand-delivered or mailed, certified mail, return receipt requested, to
any of the following addresses: the actual address of the owner of the
premises, the address appearing on the most recent information
submitted to the administrative officer pursuant to § 572-9B, or to the
registered agent if the owner is a corporation.
A. Appearance. Permitted excavations shall be operated in a neat and
orderly manner, free from junk, trash, trade waste or unnecessary
debris. Buildings shall be maintained in a sound condition, in good
repair and appearance. Weeds shall be cut as frequently as necessary to
eliminate fire and health hazards. Salvageable equipment stored in a
nonoperating condition shall be suitably garaged.
B. Control of operations. Permitted excavations shall be operated so as to
reduce dust to a minimum. Unless otherwise specified, operations shall
be conducted in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Access roads shall be maintained in a dust-free condition. In order
to minimize dust, access roads shall be paved in accordance with
Township specifications. Access roads shall be thusly improved to a
width of 24 feet from public thoroughfares to a point not more than
100 feet from the point at which haul vehicles are being loaded.
Areas used for the movement of haul vehicles and mobile
equipment closer than 100 feet to the point at which haul vehicles
are being loaded shall be finished with a bituminous asphalt
surface at least two inches thick and a base of stone macadam
designed to prevent failure of the road.
(2) The Township shall require the operator of any mining operations
to enter into an agreement whereby the operator or contractor
shall repair and maintain any Township roads which suffer damage
as a result of the mining operation or by its vehicles passing over
Hamilton Township, county and state roads in connection with the
mining operations.
§ 572-10 HAMILTON CODE § 572-11
1:1320
(3) Bulldozing, digging, scraping and loading of excavated materials
shall be done in a manner which reduces to the minimum level
possible the raising of dust.
(4) Speed limits of vehicles used by operators shall at all times be
observed. Continual violations shall be considered cause for
suspension of a mining permit.
(5) Any operable equipment stored overnight shall be rendered
inoperable.
(6) Traffic control. If more than 50 truckloads of material are to be
removed from the site during any weekday and if more than 25
truckloads of material are to be removed from the site during any
Saturday, the applicant is required to provide a special police
officer to direct traffic at all authorized site entrances.
C. Noise and vibration. Noise and ground vibration shall be reduced to a
minimum. To achieve this, loading points shall not be located closer
than 200 feet to any property line. In addition, a berm at least 10 feet in
height and landscaped shall be placed between the property line and all
mining activities.
D. Observation well. One cased observation well will be constructed on
site and extend 200 feet below grade or to the potable water supply
aquifer, whichever is at a higher elevation. Samples and measurements
will be taken from the well and analyzed by a certified testing
laboratory prior to the issuance of the special permit and when required
to demonstrate no degradation to the groundwater quality or change to
the groundwater elevation. In addition, monthly samples shall be
similarly taken and certified to the administrative officer to determine
that water level quality is not being adversely affected by the mining
operation.
E. Protection of streams and water-bearing strata. All permitted
excavations shall be conducted in a manner so as to keep adjacent
streams, percolation ponds or water-bearing strata free from
undesirable obstruction, silting, contamination or pollution of any kind.
To accomplish this, the following may be required and shall be
documented by detailed drawings and specifications prepared by a
licensed professional engineer and shall be submitted at the time of
application:
(1) Settling ponds or levees or other barrier and drainage structures in
order to prevent silting of any river, creek, stream or natural or
artificial drainage channel.
(2) Levees or other devices in order to prevent flooding of excavations
and lands beyond the excavations which may become subject to
flooding by reason of the excavation.
(3) No excavation below the water table.
§ 572-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 572-11
1:1321
(4) Restricted excavation in the natural or artificial drainage channel
or floodplain when such excavation may result in the deposit of silt
therein.
(5) No excavations within 500 feet of any private or public water
supply wells or any disposal system.
F. Modification of requirements. If at any time during the excavation
operation groundwater, springs or other water or drainage conditions
are encountered whereby a change in the plan with respect to the
proposed finished grade, drainage facilities or other changes are
desired or necessary in order to not result in conditions adversely
affecting the property or adjoining property owners or Township roads
or county roads or other public facilities, such changes, additions or
requirements as imposed by the administrative officer shall be
complied with, subject to the concurrence and approval of the
Township.
G. Finished grades. The owner or person in charge will so conduct the
operations that the removal of said soil shall not be below the finished
elevations shown on the approved plan. All finished grades on the
premises shall be no lower than the highest elevation in the center line
of any public road abutting the premises and no lower than the highest
elevation at any point on the property line of the premises.
H. Setback of cut slopes from property lines. Unless specifically approved
by the administrative officer, open cut slopes shall in no case be closer
than 200 feet to any exterior property line or closer than 200 feet to any
buildings or closer than 200 feet to the top of the bank of any stream
channel or closer than 200 feet to the right-of-way of any street,
roadway or alley which is an existing public right-of-way or Township-,
county- or state-maintained road or official plan line or future width line
of a county road, unless otherwise approved by the administrative
officer.
I. Screen plantings.
(1) All mining operations shall maintain a protective buffer zone, which
shall consist of a strip of land a minimum of 25 feet in width along
the perimeter of the property line and within the two-hundred-foot
setback. The buffer zone shall remain undisturbed throughout the
mining operation and shall include a ten-foot-high landscaped
berm. Under no circumstances shall any future mining take place
within 200 feet of a public road and/or below the grade of said road.
(2) Throughout the existence of the mining operation, whenever the
mining operation has a common property line with developed
property in another use, there shall be installed and maintained or
cultivated either:
(a) Natural woody vegetation screens to a width of at least 25 feet
along said common property line; or
§ 572-11 HAMILTON CODE § 572-11
1:1322
(b) A screen of evergreen shrubs or trees maintained at a height of
at least six feet to a width of at least 10 feet along said common
property line. Evergreen shrubs or trees shall be a minimum of
five feet to six feet in height at time of planting and shall
include, but not be limited to, the following plant species:
1. Tsuga canadensis (Canadian hemlock).
2. Pinus rigida (pitch pine).
3. Pinus resinosa (Norway pine).
4. Pinus echinata (shortleaf pine).
5. Pinus sylvestris (Scotch pine).
6. Pinus nigra (Austrian pine).
7. Pinus strobus (white pine).
(3) The administrative officer shall approve all items to be installed or
cultivated and may submit the landscape proposal to the
Environmental Commission for review.
J. Blasting. Blasting shall not be permitted in conjunction with any permit
issued under this chapter.
K. Liability insurance. Every operator or owner shall deliver to the
administrative officer a public liability insurance policy in limits fixed by
the Township Engineer and form approved by the Township Attorney
against liability arising from any such operation or activities incidental
thereto during the period of such operation. The insurance policy shall
name the Township of Hamilton as co-beneficiary.
L. Erosion on roads. The owner or operator shall construct and maintain
an earth bank or berm and do whatever is necessary to prevent any
erosion that may occur from being carried onto public roads and
watercourses or property of others during the extent of the removal
operation.
M. Fences. In the case of any open excavation more than 10 feet deep,
there shall be a fence approved by the administrative officer with
suitable lockable gates completely enclosing the portion of the property
on which the excavation is located, and such fence shall be located at all
points 40 feet or more distant from the edge of such excavation.
N. Survey monuments and setback lines. The property lines shall be
adequately defined by survey monuments and easily visible markers so
that requirements for keeping the excavation back from property lines
can be checked by visual observation.
O. Bench marks. Bench marks and reference points as approved by the
Township Engineer shall be established, indicating existing grades, so
§ 572-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 572-11
1:1323
§ 572-12. Topsoil handling and retention.
§ 572-13. Final grading; site cleanup; rehabilitation.
that amount, depth and extent of excavations can be monitored on a
daily basis.
P. Pooled water. Except in an approved detention or retention basin,
pooled water shall not be permitted to remain on the site longer than 48
hours.
A. There shall be stockpiled on the site the equivalent of not less than six
inches of topsoil necessary as final cover over the current phase of the
operation, which must be composed solely of the site's original top layer
of soil or its equivalent as determined by the Township Engineer.
B. The administrative officer shall require that stored soil and other
denuded areas be seeded according to recommendations by the
Township Engineer.
C. The excavator shall minimize compaction of all soil intended to support
plant growth.
D. The administrative officer shall require special soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures during any period of inactive
operations.
A. Rehabilitation of site. Before a permit is granted, a plan for
rehabilitation, showing both existing and proposed final contours, shall
be submitted and subject to the approval of the administrative officer.
In addition, a performance guaranty shall be submitted and approved in
accordance with § 572-14. After any operation the site shall be made
reusable for a use permitted in the zoning district wherein the
operation is situated. Where topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil
shall be set aside for retention on the premises after the operation. The
area shall be brought to final grade by a layer of topsoil not less than six
inches thick, capable of supporting vegetation. Fill shall be of suitable
material approved by the Township Engineer.
B. Trees, stumps, brush, limbs, debris, trade waste or trash shall not be
buried on the property, and any such material shall be removed from
the property and shall promptly be suitably disposed of off the site at a
properly licensed landfill or other designated site. The location of such
disposal site shall be filed with the administrative officer in writing
prior to such removal. The administrative officer shall specify the
particular routes and roads which are to be utilized by the applicant's
trucks when hauling the excavated material from and returning to the
site.
C. As many trees as practicable shall be preserved; regrading around tree
roots shall be avoided where practicable, pursuant to a plan approved
by the administrative officer.
§ 572-11 HAMILTON CODE § 572-13
1:1324
§ 572-14. Performance guaranty.
D. If in the judgment of the Township Engineer soil has been heavily
compacted, it must be loosened to a depth of 18 inches.
E. Disturbance of wooded areas that may be adversely affected requires
an approval of the administrative officer.
F. Upon termination of a mining operation, the surface of the premises
shall be left in a condition which provides for adequate drainage so as
to prevent water pockets or undue erosion. All grading and drainage
shall be such that natural stormwater leaves the premises at the
original flow rate and at the natural drainage points and that the area
drained to any one point is not increased. All areas shall be adequately
limed, fertilized and grass-seeded with New Jersey No. 4 grass or its
equivalent approved by the Township Engineer or shall be planted with
coniferous evergreens spaced approximately six feet on center and a
minimum of five feet to six feet in height, provided that said planting of
coniferous evergreens or grass seeding does not unreasonably interfere
with the actual prospective use of said premises.
G. Seeding. The area of the operation shall be seeded:
(1) Upon completion of operation; or
(2) If the removal extends over more than one planting season (April
15 and September 15) the owner shall replace topsoil on and seed
any parts of the property upon which the excavation has been
completed to finished grade by each April 15 and September 15;
the topsoil shall be tested by a certified testing laboratory with its
recommendations to be followed as to liming, fertilizing and
seeding to produce cover crop that will prevent soil erosion.
H. Acid soil (generally a pyrite-bearing material). In order to provide
suitable conditions for growth of vegetation and to prevent the
acidifying of drainage water with resultant damage and destruction to
aquatic life in those areas underlain with acid formations with pH below
4.0, the following requirements shall be met:
(1) Grading shall be such that a minimum of acid formation shall be
exposed.
(2) All exposed acid material shall be covered with a minimum of two
feet of nonacid soil suitable for plant growth, including six inches of
topsoil as defined herein.
(3) Brooks and ditches with acid formation exposed shall be surfaced
with trap rock or other suitable material to prevent water from
flowing in contact with the acid material.
A. Before issuance of any permit, the owner(s) shall submit in cash an
amount equal to 120% of the cost required that, in the opinion of the
§ 572-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 572-14
1:1325
§ 572-15. Access to site.
Issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter shall confer upon the
Township or its designees the right to enter upon the land and premises at
any time in order to accomplish and establish the objectives, policies and
procedures herein set forth.
§ 572-16. Permitted hours of operation.
§ 572-17. Compliance with permits required.
Nothing herein contained shall relieve the holders of any mining permit or
permits from complying with the terms and conditions of said permit or
permits or an agreement pursuant to which said permit or permits were
issued.
§ 572-18. Suspension or revocation of permit.
After reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard before the
administrative officer, the permit of any person may be revoked or
suspended for such period as the administrative officer may determine for
any violation of the terms hereof or the terms and conditions of any permit
granted hereunder.
Township Engineer, will secure the rehabilitation of the site in
accordance with the plan specified above. The form of guaranty shall be
approved by the Township Attorney and shall run for the same time as
the term of the special permit. In the event of default on the part of the
owner or operator, the guaranty shall be used by the Township to pay
the cost and expense of obtaining completion of all requirements.
B. The applicant and landowner shall enter into an agreement with the
Township, which agreement shall embody all the requirements of this
chapter and shall include, among other things, the period of time
during which this permit shall be effective and the procedure to be
followed for the renewal of said permit and any other matters affecting
performance under this chapter. The permit shall not be transferable
without the express approval of the administrative officer.
A. Permitted hours of operation shall be:
(1) Weekdays: 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(2) Saturdays: 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon.
B. Prohibited hours of operation shall include: all Sundays, legal holidays
and hours other than specified above as determined by the granting
authority.
C. No engines shall be started before or run after permitted hours.
§ 572-14 HAMILTON CODE § 572-19
1:1326
§ 572-19. Violations and penalties.260
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth in § 1-2, Violations;
penalties, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton. Each day's continued
violation shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 572-20. Effect on other provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to modify or repeal any of the
provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance or the Zoning Ordinance261 of the
Township of Hamilton or any other ordinance of the Township of Hamilton.
Chapter 577
STORMWATER CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 167.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 427.
Environmental impact — See Ch. 530.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 536.
Land development — See Ch. 550.
Site investigation and soil sampling — See Ch.
565.
Soil removal — See Ch. 572.
Stream Buffer Conservation Zone — See Ch.
583.
§ 577-1. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural best management practices
(BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
nature and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve
the established performance standards for water quality, quantity and
groundwater recharge.
260. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
261. Editor's Note: See Ch. 550, Land Development.
§ 572-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-1
1:1327
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in § 577-2, and to:
(1) Establish standards and regulations for the management and
discharge of stormwater runoff from land development projects
and other construction activities;
(2) Reduce artificially induced flood damage to public health, life and
property;
(3) Minimize increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes;
(4) Minimize the deterioration of existing watercourses, culverts,
bridges, dams and other structures that would result from
increased rates of stormwater runoff;
(5) Induce water recharge into the ground wherever suitable
infiltration, soil permeability and favorable geological conditions
exist;
(6) Prevent an increase in nonpoint source pollution;
(7) Maintain the integrity and stability of stream channels for their
biological functions, as well as for drainage, the conveyance of
floodwater, and other purposes;
(8) Control and minimize soil erosion and the transport of sediment;
(9) Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, and nonpoint source
pollution;
(10) Minimize public safety hazards at any stormwater detention facility
constructed pursuant to subdivision or site plan approval;
(11) Maintain high water quality in all streams and other surface water
bodies;
(12) Protect all surface water resources from degradation; and
(13) Protect groundwater resources from degradation.
C. Applicability.
(1) This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions
for the following major developments that require preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
§ 577-1 HAMILTON CODE § 577-1
1:1328
§ 577-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. The
definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions
in the stormwater management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7-13.262
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES or NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7-13.16.263
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
(2) This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of Hamilton in Mercer County, New
Jersey.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this chapter are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act
or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. This chapter
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law, except
that, where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
B.
262. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
263. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 577-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-2
1:1329
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A state development and redevelopment plan
center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, "development"
means any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed by the
County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not exempted by
the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater, sediments
or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body or to a
particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land or increases the impervious surface
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
§ 577-2 HAMILTON CODE § 577-2
1:1330
by 1/4 acre or more. "Disturbance" for the purpose of this chapter is the
placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or
bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Hamilton in Mercer County, New Jersey.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired or the replenishment of groundwater
resources.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the Official Map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 577-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-2
1:1331
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater, or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Hamilton in Mercer County, New Jersey, or
any of its administrative units exercising jurisdiction within the Township.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the metropolitan
planning area (PA1), designated centers, cores or nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA centers, cores or nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
§ 577-2 HAMILTON CODE § 577-3
1:1332
§ 577-3. General standards.
Design and performance standards for stormwater management measures.
§ 577-4. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 577-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
B. The standards in this chapter apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
plan or water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 577-10.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or
Clemmys muhlenbergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
§ 577-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-4
1:1333
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis that,
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned;
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections F and G that were not achievable on site; and
(5) In addition, the applicant may obtain a waiver if it agrees to
undertake a suitable mitigation measure as identified in the
Township's stormwater management plan.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at this Subsection E into the
design. The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention. The
applicant shall also complete and submit the NJDEP Low Impact
Development Model Checklist.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
§ 577-4 HAMILTON CODE § 577-4
1:1334
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to post construction. "Time of concentration"
is defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
1. Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
2. Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
3. Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
4. When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)2. above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Grates.
§ 577-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-4
1:1335
1. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
a. The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle-safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
b. A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches
or is no greater than 1/2 inch across the smallest
dimension.
2. Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
1. Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
2. Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
a. A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
b. A bar screen having a bar spacing of 1/2 inch.
§ 577-4 HAMILTON CODE § 577-4
1:1336
3. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1); or
4. Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate county clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 577-7 or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
1. The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 577-5, either:
a. Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
§ 577-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-4
1:1337
b. Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to post construction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
2. This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area, or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)3. below.
3. The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
a. Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities," as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
b. Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels; and lubricants, solvents and detergents that
are related to process, manufacturing or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
4. The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
§ 577-4 HAMILTON CODE § 577-4
1:1338
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 577-5, complete one of the
following:
1. Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten- and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
2. Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten- and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
3. Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates leaving the site for the
two-, ten- and one-hundred-year storm events are 50%,
75% and 80%, respectively, of the preconstruction peak
runoff rates. The percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the
portion of the site on which the proposed development or
project is to be constructed. The percentages shall not be
applied to post-construction stormwater runoff into tidal
flood hazard areas if the increased volume of stormwater
runoff will not increase flood damages below the point of
discharge; or
4. In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)1., 2. and 3.
above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of a "major development" in § 577-2 shall be submitted to
the appropriate soil conservation district for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable soil conservation district guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
§ 577-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-4
1:1339
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1 1/4 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
§ 577-4 HAMILTON CODE § 577-4
1:1340
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. TSS reduction
shall be calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in
Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods for review. A copy of any approved alternative
rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be provided
to the Department at the following address: Division of Watershed
Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AxB)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management
Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment
device
See § 577-6C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
§ 577-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-4
1:1341
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
1. A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
2. Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)1. above
shall only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where an applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
§ 577-4 HAMILTON CODE § 577-4
1:1342
encroachments proposed under this subparagraph shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established under the
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
1. Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
2. Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS postconstruction
removal rate;
3. Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
4. The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
5. A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
6. All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
§ 577-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-4
1:1343
§ 577-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)1. above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 – Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 – Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover have
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
§ 577-4 HAMILTON CODE § 577-5
1:1344
§ 577-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 – Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
(2) Alternate groundwater recharge calculation methods may be
submitted to the Township Engineer for review and approval.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; floodprone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high-water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
§ 577-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-6
1:1345
§ 577-7. Sources for technical guidance.
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of
the water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the
water quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure
shall be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of
the orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 577-8B.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed and installed to be strong, durable and corrosionresistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
5:21-7.4 and 5:21-7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 577-8.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 577-4 of this chapter.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 577-4 of this chapter, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed below, which are available from Maps and
Publications, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, 428
East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609)
777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures, such as bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
§ 577-6 HAMILTON CODE § 577-7
1:1346
§ 577-8. Standards for stormwater management basins.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee, or
any of the soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)3.
The location, address and telephone number of each soil
conservation district may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)3. The
location, address and telephone number of each soil conservation
district may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2 1/2 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed to
§ 577-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-8
1:1347
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable and corrosion-resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this subparagraph, "escape provisions" means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions, as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
See Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency of the Township that the variance or exemption will not
constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
§ 577-8 HAMILTON CODE § 577-8
1:1348
§ 577-9. Requirements for site development stormwater plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this chapter.
(3) The applicant shall submit five copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
§ 577-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-9
1:1349
consult the Township Engineer to determine if all of the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets
the standards set forth in this chapter.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map, as
appropriate, may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, all
perennial or intermittent streams including those that drain into or
upstream of the Category One waters, and other water bodies,
wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate buffer strips,
marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces,
existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and distances of
property lines, and significant natural and man-made features not
otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis: a written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s): a map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map, indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 577-3
through 577-6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
§ 577-9 HAMILTON CODE § 577-9
1:1350
§ 577-10. Maintenance and repair.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in § 577-4 of this chapter.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 577-10.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this chapter may, in
consultation with the municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsection C(1) through (6) when it can be
demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to
obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant to obtain, and
its absence will not materially affect the review process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as provided in § 577-1C of this
chapter shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C of
this section.
B. General maintenance.
§ 577-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-10
1:1351
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris or trash removal; and the name,
address and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project unless such owner or tenant owns or leases
the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice
removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall submit an annual inspection report
§ 577-10 HAMILTON CODE § 577-10
1:1352
prepared by a professional engineer licensed in New Jersey or
a New Jersey certified stormwater inspector to the Township of
Hamilton Department of Community Planning and Compliance,
Division of Engineering, by June 30 of each year. The inspection
report and log shall include and not be limited to: [Amended
12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-064264]
(a) Detention basin outflow structures, escape provision as
outlined in R.S.I.S. 7:8-6.2 and all components;
(b) Vegetation;
(c) Trash racks and overflow grates;
(d) Embankment erosion; and
(e) Sediment removal and pond maintenance.
(9) The owner of the stormwater management measure shall complete
minor repairs of facility within 14 days from notice of maintenance
issues. [Added 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-064]
(10) Each act or violation, and every day upon which any violation shall
occur or continues to occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
[Added 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-064]
(11) Failure to provide annual maintenance records: $100. [Added
12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-064]
(12) Notwithstanding the penalties set forth in § 577-11, any person
who has not complied with this section and who, after notice,
refuses to implement and maintain soil erosion control and
stormwater runoff control measures and facilities in conformance
with these regulations shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$1,000 or 90 days in jail, or both, plus the cost of prosecution.
[Added 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-064]
(13) The requirements of Subsection B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency. In
all other cases where the Township does not take responsibility for
repair and maintenance of any stormwater management resources,
the applicant shall post a two-year maintenance guarantee in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
(14) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
264. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection D(9) and (10), which
immediately followed this subsection, as Subsection D(13) and (14).
§ 577-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-10
1:1353
§ 577-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains
or uses any building, structure or land in violation of this chapter shall
be subject to penalties prescribed by the Township with consideration to
this chapter, including any penalties contained in the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.; the Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C.
7:8-1.1 et seq.; and/or Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations;
penalties, of the Code of the Township of Hamilton.
§ 577-12. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon approval by the Mercer
County Review Agency or 60 days from the receipt of this chapter by the
Mercer County Review Agency, if that agency should fail to act.
Chapter 583
STREAM BUFFER CONSERVATION ZONE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental impact — See Ch. 530.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 536.
Land development — See Ch. 550.
Site investigation and soil sampling — See Ch.
565.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 577.
§ 583-1. Intent and purpose.
In recognition of the fact that values afforded by functional stream buffers
contribute to the welfare of residents, the following regulations have been
enacted to provide reasonable controls governing the conservation,
disturbance, restoration and management of existing stream buffers for
all perennial and intermittent streams and all lakes, ponds and reservoirs
within the Township by establishing a Stream Buffer Conservation Zone
(SBCZ). The specific purposes and intent of this chapter are to:
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality may immediately
proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible
person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the Township from requiring the
posting of a performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
§ 577-10 HAMILTON CODE § 583-1
1:1354
§ 583-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CATEGORY ONE WATERS or C1 WATERS — Those waters designated in the
tables in N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.15, as same may be amended or revised.
CATEGORY TWO WATERS or C2 WATERS — Those waters not designated
as outstanding national resource waters or Category One at N.J.A.C.
7:9B-1.15, as same may be amended or revised.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — Any surface water drainage channels with
definite bed and banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water. Most
intermittent streams are shown on Natural Resources Conservation Service
county soil surveys. These are portrayed as a dashed line on a USDA Soil
Survey Map of the most recent edition, or as state open water identified in a
letter of interpretation issued by the NJDEP Land Use Regulation Program,
whichever is more inclusive.
A. Regulate the land use, siting and engineering of all development in the
SBCZ to be consistent with the intent and objectives of this chapter and
accepted conservation practices.
B. Prevent excessive nutrients, sediment and organic matter, as well as
biocides and other pollutants, from reaching surface waters by
optimizing opportunities for filtration, deposition, absorption, plant
uptake, biodegradation and denitrification, which occur when
stormwater runoff is conveyed through vegetated buffers as stable,
distributed sheet flow prior to reaching receiving waters.
C. Provide for shading of the aquatic environment so as to moderate
temperatures, retain more dissolved oxygen, and support a healthy
assemblage of aquatic flora and fauna.
D. Provide for natural organic matter (fallen leaves and twigs) and large
woody debris (fallen trees and limbs) that provide food and habitat for
small bottom-dwelling organisms (insects, amphibians, crustaceans,
and small fish), which are essential to maintain the food chain.
E. Increase stream bank stability and maintain natural fluvial
geomorphology of the stream system, thereby reducing stream bank
erosion and sedimentation and protecting habitat for aquatic
organisms.
F. Conserve the natural features important to land and water resources,
e.g., headwater areas, groundwater recharge zones, floodway,
floodplain, springs, steams, wetlands, woodlands and prime wildlife
habitats.
G. Work with state laws and other ordinances that regulate
environmentally sensitive areas to minimize hazards to life, property
and stream features and assist in the implementation of pertinent state
laws concerning erosion and sediment control practices.
§ 583-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 583-2
1:1355
LAKE, POND or RESERVOIR — Any impoundment, whether naturally
occurring or created in whole or in part by the building of structures for the
retention of surface water, excluding sedimentation control and stormwater
retention/detection basins and ponds designed for treatment of wastewater.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A stream that appears as a blue line on USGS
topographic quadrangle maps and flows continuously throughout the year
in most years.
THE TOWNSHIP — Township of Hamilton in Mercer County, New Jersey, or
any of its administrative units exercising jurisdiction within the Township
boundaries.
§ 583-3. Establishment of Stream Buffer Conservation Zone (SBCZ).
A. The SBCZ is defined as the designated area adjacent to surface water,
including lakes, ponds and reservoirs, and intermittent or perennial
streams. The SBCZ may or may not contain trees and other vegetation
at the time of chapter enactment. The SBCZ shall be measured from
each defined edge of an intermittent or perennial stream, or lake, pond
or reservoir at bankfull flow or level. The SBCZ will consist of two
distinct classifications. These classifications determine the width of the
SBCZ, except where steep slopes (in excess of 15%) are located within
the designated widths, in which case the SBCZ shall be extended to
include the entire distance of this sloped area. The two classes are
designated as:
(1) Class 1 stream conservation zones are adjacent to C1 waters and
extend 150 feet from the top of each bank at bankfull flow or
maximum pool elevation or the center line of intermittent streams
or the one-hundred-year floodplain, whichever is greater.
(2) Class 2 stream conservation zones are adjacent to C2 waters and
extend 75 feet from the top of each bank at bankfull flow or
maximum pool elevation or the center line of intermittent streams
or the one-hundred-year floodplain, whichever is greater.
B. The SBCZ is an overlay to the existing zoning districts.
(1) The provisions of the underlying district shall remain in full force,
except where the provisions of the SBCZ differ from the provisions
of the underlying district, in which case the provision which is more
restrictive and less permissive to a landowner or applicant shall
apply.
(2) To the extent permitted by law, these provisions are intended to
modify the type of land use, siting of structures and engineering of
all proposed development on parcels located within the SBCZ.
These provisions apply to land disturbances resulting from or
related to any activity or use requiring application for any of the
following permits or approvals:
(a) Building permit.
§ 583-2 HAMILTON CODE § 583-3
1:1356
§ 583-4. Stream Buffer Conservation Zone uses.
Stream Buffer Conservation Zones shall remain in a natural condition or,
if in a disturbed condition, including agricultural activities, at the time of
adoption of this chapter, may be restored to a natural condition. There shall
be no clearing or cutting of trees and brush, except for removal of dead
vegetation and pruning for reasons of public safety or for the replacement
of invasive species with indigenous species. There shall be no alteration of
watercourses, dumping of trash, soil, dirt, fill, vegetative or other debris,
regrading or construction within the SBCZ.
§ 583-5. Performance standards for Stream Buffer Conservation
Zones.
(b) Zoning variance.
(c) Conditional use.
(d) Subdivision/land development approval.
(e) Special exception.
A. Open space uses that are primarily passive in character shall be
permitted to extend into the SBCZ, provided near-stream vegetation is
preserved, including:
(1) Wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, forest preserves, fishing
areas, game farms, fish hatcheries and fishing reserves, operated
for the protection and propagation of wildlife, but excluding
structures.
(2) Passive areas of public and private parklands, including unpaved
hiking, bicycle and bridle trails, provided that said trails have been
stabilized with pervious materials.
B. Stream-bank stabilization or riparian reforestation, which conform to
the guidelines of the stream buffer management plan described in
§ 583-10, or wetlands mitigation projects that have been approved by
the Department of Environmental Protection are permitted to extend
into the SBCZ.
C. SBCZ crossing by recreational trails, roads, railroads, sewer and/or
water lines, and public utility transmission lines are permitted,
provided that any disturbance is offset by buffer improvements in
compliance with the stream buffer management plan mitigation plan
and any applicable state permits are acquired.
A. All new major and minor subdivision and site plans shall be designed to
provide sufficient areas outside of the SBCZ to accommodate primary
structures, any normal accessory uses appurtenant thereto, as well as
planned lawn areas. Portions of lots within the SBCZ must be
permanently restricted by deed or conservation easement held by the
§ 583-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 583-5
1:1357
§ 583-6. Nonconforming structures and uses in Stream Buffer
Conservation Zone.
Nonconforming structures and uses of land within the SBCZ are subject to
the following requirements:
§ 583-7. Uses specifically prohibited in Stream Buffer Conservation
Zone.
Any use or activity not specifically authorized within § 583-4 or 583-6 shall
be prohibited within the SBCZ.
§ 583-8. Administrative waiver; minimal impact.
Township to prevent clearing of vegetation within the SBCZ. Any lands
proposed for development which include all or a portion of a SBCZ
shall, as a condition of any major subdivision or major site plan
approval, provide for the vegetation or revegetation of any portions of
the SBCZ which are not vegetated at the time of the application or
which were disturbed by prior land uses, including for agricultural use.
However, the revegetation requirement does not apply to disturbances
of the section(s) of a development that, prior to the adoption of this
chapter, have been developed in accordance with the terms of an
approved development application. Said vegetation plan shall utilize
native tree and plant species in accordance with the stream buffer
management plan described in § 583-10.
B. Minimum required front, side and rear setbacks required for building
lots which exist as of the date of adoption of this chapter, but have not
obtained a building permit, may extend into the SBCZ, provided that a
deed restriction and/or conservation easement is applied which
prohibits clearing or construction in the SBCZ.
A. Existing nonconforming structures or uses may be continued but shall
not have the existing building footprint or uses expanded or enlarged.
B. Discontinued nonconforming uses may be resumed any time within one
year from such discontinuance but not thereafter when showing clear
indications of abandonment. No change or resumption shall be
permitted that is more detrimental to the SBCZ, as measured against
the intent and purpose under § 583-1, than the existing or former
nonconforming use. This one-year time frame shall not apply to
agricultural uses that are following prescribed best management
practices for crop rotation. However, resumption of agricultural uses
must be strictly confined to the extent of disturbance existing at the
time of adoption of this chapter.
A. An administrative waiver of the requirements in this chapter may be
granted by the administrative officer of the Township's Department of
Community Planning and Compliance where the consequent impact
upon the SBCZ is determined to be minimal. An administrative waiver
§ 583-5 HAMILTON CODE § 583-8
1:1358
§ 583-9. Boundary interpretation; appeals procedures; inspections;
conflicts.
may only be granted where it has been affirmatively demonstrated that
the proposed activity will not be materially detrimental or injurious
to other property or improvements in the area and will not endanger
public safety.
B. As a condition of the granting of an administrative waiver, depending on
the nature of the proposed action by the applicant, the applicant may be
required by the administrative officer to contribute to or participate in
the rehabilitation of an environmentally degraded stream corridor
within or adjacent to the subject site, at least equivalent in size to the
permitted SBCZ reduction and, if available, within the same watershed.
Rehabilitation may include reforestation, stream-bank stabilization and/
or removal of debris, in accordance with a stream buffer management
plan, or any other action/enhancement/improvement which benefits the
public welfare.
A. When a landowner or applicant disputes the boundaries of the Stream
Buffer Conservation Zone or the defined bankfull flow or level, the
landowner or applicant shall submit evidence to the Township Engineer
that describes the SBCZ, presents the landowner's or applicant's
proposed SBCZ and presents all justification for the proposed boundary
change.
B. Within 45 days of a complete submission of Subsection A above, the
Township Engineer or appointed representative shall evaluate all
material submitted and shall make a written determination, a copy of
which shall be submitted to the Director of Community Planning and
Compliance and the landowner or applicant. Failure to act within the
forty-five-day period shall not be interpreted to be an approval of the
proposed boundary change.
C. Any party aggrieved by any such determination or other decision or
determination under this section may appeal to the administrative
officer under the provisions of this chapter. The party contesting the
location of the SBCZ boundary shall have the burden of proof in case of
any such appeal.
D. Inspections.
(1) Lands within or adjacent to an identified SBCZ will be inspected by
the municipal representative when:
(a) Subdivision or land development plan is submitted.
(b) A building permit is requested.
(c) A change or resumption of nonconforming use is proposed.
§ 583-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 583-9
1:1359
§ 583-10. Stream buffer management plan.
(d) Discontinued use for more than a year as described in § 583-6.
The party contesting the discontinued use shall have the
burden of proof to demonstrate when use was discontinued.
(2) The SBCZ may also be inspected periodically by a representative
from the Township if excessive or potentially problematic erosion is
present, other problems are discovered, or at any time when the
presence of an unauthorized activity or structure is brought to the
attention of Township officials or when the downstream surface
waters are indicating reduction in quality.
E. Conflicts. All other ordinances, parts of ordinances or other local
requirements that are inconsistent or in conflict with this chapter are
hereby repealed to the extent of any inconsistency or conflict, and the
provisions of this chapter apply.
A. Within any SBCZ, no construction, development, use, activity or
encroachment shall be permitted unless the effects of such
development are accompanied by preparation, approval and
implementation of a stream buffer management plan.
B. The landowner, applicant or developer shall submit to the
administrative officer or an appointed representative a stream buffer
management plan prepared by an environmental professional,
professional engineer or other qualified professional, which fully
evaluates the effects of any proposed uses on the SBCZ. The stream
buffer management plan shall identify the existing conditions,
including:
(1) Existing vegetation;
(2) Field delineated streams, wetlands and the one-hundred-year
floodplain;
(3) Mapped soils;
(4) Existing subdrainage areas of site;
(5) Slopes in each subdrainage area segmented into sections of slopes
less than or equal to 10%; 11% to 19%; and 20% to 25%;
(6) All proposed activities; and
(7) A mitigation plan that demonstrates how the loss of value afforded
by the existing buffer will be compensated for.
C. The plan shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer in consultation
with the Environmental Commission as part of the subdivision and land
development process.
§ 583-9 HAMILTON CODE § 583-10
1:1360
§ 583-11. Violations and penalties.
Violators of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties
established in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2, Violations; penalties, of
the Code of the Township of Hamilton, as same may be amended.
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1994 Code to 2017 Code.
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1994 Code Location in 2017 Code
Ch. 1, General Provisions
§§ 1-2 and 1-3 Ch. 1, Art. I
§§ 1-1, 1-4 to 1-7 NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. II
D. The stream buffer management plan should include management
provisions in narrative and/or graphic form, specifying:
(1) The manner in which the SBCZ will be owned and by whom it will
be managed and maintained.
(2) The conservation and/or land management techniques and
practices that will be used to conserve and protect the SBCZ, as
applicable.
(3) The professional and personnel resources that are expected to be
necessary in order to maintain and manage the SBCZ.
(4) A revegetation plan, if applicable, that includes three layers of
vegetation, including herbaceous plants that serve as ground cover,
understory shrubs, and trees that form an overhead canopy.
Vegetation selected must be native and consistent with the soil,
slope and moisture conditions of the site. The revegetation plan
shall be prepared by a qualified professional, such as a landscape
architect or engineer, and shall be subject to the approval of the
municipal Engineer, in consultation with the Environmental
Commission.
E. A stream buffer management plan is not required where the SBCZ is
not being disturbed and conservation easement/deed restrictions
applied to ensure there will be no future clearing or disturbance of the
SBCZ.
§ 583-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1361
Chapter/Title From 1994 Code Location in 2017 Code
Ch. 2, Administration of Government
§§ 2-1 through 2-280 and 2-282 through
2-858
Ch. 5
§ 2-281, Criminal History Record
Background Checks
Ch. 24, Art. I
Ch. 6, Air Pollution Control Ch. 90
Ch. 10, Alarm Systems Ch. 94
Ch. 14, Alcoholic Beverages
Art. I, In General Ch. 99, Art. I
Art. II, Licensing; Regulation of Licensed
Premises
Ch. 99, Art. II
Ch. 18, Amusement Devices and Games REP
Ch. 22, Animals
Art. I, In General
§ 22-1, Structures for Keeping Animals Ch. 108, Art. I
§ 22-2, Removal of Animal Waste Ch. 108, Art. II
§ 22-3, Authority to Order Quarantine of
Dogs and Cats
Ch. 108, Art. III
Art. II, Dogs Ch. 108, Art. IV
Art. III, Cats Ch. 108, Art. V
Ch. 26, Auctions and Auctioneers REP
Ch. 30, Automobile Dealers Ch. 119
Ch. 34, Bicycles REP
Ch. 38, Construction of Buildings and
Structures
Art. I, In General Ch. 167
Art. II, Registration of Contractors REP
Art. III, Numbering of Buildings Ch. 141
Ch. 42, Dance and Nightclub Facilities Ch. 184
Ch. 44, Elections
Art. I, In General Ch. 51, Art. II
Art. II, Disclosure Filings by Local
Candidates, Political Committees,
Continuing Political Committees, Political
Party Committees, Candidate Committees
and Joint Candidates Committees
Ch. 51, Art I
§ DT-1 HAMILTON CODE § DT-1
1:1362
Chapter/Title From 1994 Code Location in 2017 Code
Art. III, Prohibition on Awarding Professional
Services Contracts to Certain Contributors
to Political Campaigns
Ch. 19, Art. I
Art. IV, Prohibition on Awarding Public
Redevelopment Agreements to Contributors
to Political Campaigns
Ch. 19, Art. II
Ch. 46, Environmental Event Notification Ch. 206
Ch. 50, Fees Ch. 215
Ch. 54, Fire Prevention and Protection
Art. I, In General
§§ 54-1 through 54-7 Ch. 228, Art. I
§ 54-8, Key Box Ch. 228, Art. III
Art. II, Enforcement of State Uniform Fire
Code
Ch. 228, Art. II
Art. III, Use of Fire Insurance Proceeds Ch. 223
Ch. 58, Food and Food Establishments
Art. I, In General (Reserved) Omitted
Art. II, Packaging and Labeling of Meat Ch. 235, Art. I
Art. III, Licensing of Retail Food
Establishments
Ch. 235, Art. II
Ch. 62, Games of Chance Ch. 242
Ch. 64, Hazardous Materials Collection and
Disposition
Ch. 260, Art. I
Ch. 65, Hotels Ch. 449, Art. II
Ch. 66, Housing
Art. I, In General (Reserved) Omitted
Art. II, Unfit Dwellings Ch. 146
Art. III, Housing Standards and Regulations Ch. 268
Ch. 70, Insurance
Art. I, In General (Reserved) Omitted
Art. II, Insurance Fund Ch. 33
Ch. 74, Jewelry, Precious Metals and Gem
Dealers
Ch. 273
Ch. 78, Junk Dealers Ch. 277
Ch. 82, Licenses and Permits Ch. 285
Ch. 86, Miscellaneous Provisions and Offenses
§ 86-1, Loitering REP
§ 86-2, Civil Disturbances Ch. 12
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1363
Chapter/Title From 1994 Code Location in 2017 Code
§ 86-3, Interference with Police Officer REP
§ 86-4, Misuse of Crime Watch Identification
Card
Ch. 178, Art. I
§ 86-5, Parental Responsibility for Violations
by Minors
Ch. 334
§ 86-5.1, Public Smoking and Use of Tobacco
Products by Students and/or Minors at
School Facilities or Properties
Ch. 408, Art. I
§ 86-5.2, Smoking at Youth Athletic or
Recreational Events Prohibited
Ch. 408, Art. II
§ 86-6, Display of Obscene Materials Ch. 323
§ 86-7, Drug Paraphernalia REP
§ 86-8, Drug-Free School Zones Ch. 196, Art. I
§ 86-9, Political Signs REP
§ 86-10, Abandonment or Removal of
Shopping Carts
Ch. 394
§ 86-11, Parking and Use of Trailers, Camp
Vehicles and Boat Trailers
Ch. 473
§ 86-12, Operation of Motor-Powered Boats Ch. 130
§ 86-13, Trees and Shrubs Ch. 477
§ 86-14, Improper Disposal of Waste Ch. 427, Art. I
§ 86-15, Illicit Connection Ch. 427, Art. II
§§ 86-16 through 86-19 (Reserved) Omitted
§ 86-20, Sex Offender Residency Prohibition;
2,500 Feet
REP
§ 86-21, Gang-Free School Zones Ch. 246, Art. II
§§ 86-22 through 86-24 (Reserved) Omitted
§ 86-25, Gang Loitering; Prohibition;
Penalties
Ch. 246, Art. I
§ 86-26, Non-Resident Student Enrollment
Prohibition; Penalties
Ch. 379
§ 86-27, Graffiti Ch. 254
§ 86-28, Public Urination and Defecation Ch. 345, Art. I
§ 86-29, Public Nudity Ch. 345, Art. II
§ 86-30, Violence Disturbances Ch. 345, Art. III
§ 86-31, Malicious Injury or Destruction of
Property
Ch. 345, Art. IV
Ch. 88, Newspaper Vending Machines Ch. 306
§ DT-1 HAMILTON CODE § DT-1
1:1364
Chapter/Title From 1994 Code Location in 2017 Code
Ch. 90, Noise Ch. 311
Ch. 94, Nuisances Ch. 317
Ch. 98, Parks and Playgrounds
§§ 98-1 through 98-7, Rules and Regulations Ch. 340, Art. I
§ 98-10, Pesticide Spraying Ch. 354, Art. I
§ 98-15, Township Dog Park Ch. 340, Art. II
Ch. 102, Peddling and Soliciting
Art. I, In General (Reserved) Omitted
Art. II, Peddlers, Hawkers and Vendors Ch. 349, Art. I
Art. III, Solicitors and Canvassers Ch. 349, Art. II
Art. IV, Charitable Solicitations Ch. 349, Art. III
Ch. 106, Personnel Ch. 45
Ch. 110, Property Maintenance
Art. I, In General Ch. 449, Art. I
Art. II, Residential Property Ch. 362, Art. I
Art. III, Commercial Property Ch. 362, Art. II
Ch. 114, Sales Ch. 373
Ch. 118, Sewers, Sewage Disposal,
Pretreatment Permitting and Enforcement
Ch. 385
Ch. 122, Solid Waste Management
Art. I, In General (Reserved) Omitted
Art. II, Receptacles; Private Collection Ch. 420, Arts. I and IV
Art. III, Littering Ch. 289
Art. IV, Recycling Ch. 420, Art. II
Ch. 123, Solid Waste Services - Garbage,
Refuse and Recylables
Ch. 420, Art. III
Ch. 126, Special Officers Ch. 66
Ch. 130, Streets and Sidewalks
Art. I, In General (Reserved) Omitted
Art. II, Snow and Ice Removal Ch. 435, Art. I
Art. III, Street Excavations Ch. 435, Art. II
Art. IV, Construction and Repair of Curbs
and Sidewalks
Ch. 435, Art. III
Art. V, Maintenance of Sidewalk, Driveway
Apron and Curb Area
Ch. 435, Art. IV
Art. VI, Structures in Right-of-Way Ch. 435, Art. V
Art. VII, Parades Ch. 435, Art. VI
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1365
Chapter/Title From 1994 Code Location in 2017 Code
Ch. 134, Swimming Pools Ch. 442
Ch. 138, Taxicabs Ch. 454
Ch. 142, Theaters Ch. 460
Ch. 146, Towing Ch. 468
Ch. 148, Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 485
Ch. 150, Vending Machines
Art. I, In General Ch. 496, Art. I
Art. II, Attendants Ch. 496, Art. II
Art. III, Food and Beverage Vending
Machines
Div. 1, Generally REP
Div. 2, Licensing Ch. 496, Art. III
Ch. 152, Water
Art. I, In General (Reserved) Omitted
Art. II, Individual and Semipublic Water
Supplies
Div. 1, Generally REP
Div. 2, Bacteriological Tests Ch. 502, Art. I
Ch. 154, Environmental Impact Statement Ch. 530
Ch. 155, Stream Buffer Conservation Zone Ch. 583
Ch. 157, Flood Damage Prevention Ch. 536
Ch. 158, Stormwater Control Ch. 577
Ch. 160, Land Development Ch. 550
Ch. 169, Site Investigation and Soil Sampling Ch. 565
Ch. 170, Soil Removal Ch. 572
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
KEY:
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
§ DT-1 HAMILTON CODE § DL-1
1:1366
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-055 12-18-2012 Alcoholic beverages:
possession or consumption by
minors on private property
Ch. 99, Art. III
13-001 1-15-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-002 1-15-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-003 2-5-2013 Streets and sidewalks:
maintenance of sidewalk,
driveway apron and curb
areas amendment
Ch. 435, Art. IV
13-004 2-5-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 550
13-005 2-19-2013 Contracting procedures:
competitive process for
insurance, insurance
consulting and professional
services contracts
Ch. 19, Art. III
13-006 2-19-2013 Fees amendment NLP; see Ch. 215
13-007 3-5-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-008 3-5-5013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-009 3-5-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-010 3-19-2013 Fees amendment NLP; see Ch. 215
13-011 3-19-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-012 3-19-2013 Administration of government
amendment; Personnel
amendment
Ch. 5; Ch. 45
13-013 4-2-2013 Exceed budget and establish
cap bank
NCM
13-014 4-16-2013 Swimming pools amendment Ch. 442
13-015 5-21-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-016 5-21-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-017 5-21-2013 Accepting sidewalk easement NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1367
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13-018 5-21-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-019 6-18-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 550
13-020 6-18-2013 Capital improvements NCM
13-021 6-18-2013 Sewer utility improvements NCM
13-022 6-18-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-023 7-16-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-024 Accepting deed of dedication NCM
13-025 7-16-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-026 7-16-2013 Taxicabs and limousines Ch. 454
13-027 8-20-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-028 8-20-2013 Accepting deed of dedication NCM
13-029 8-20-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-030 9-17-2013 Property maintenance: brush,
weeds and trash amendment
Ch. 362, Art. I
13-031 9-17-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 550
13-032 9-17-2013 Lease authorization NCM
13-033 9-17-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-034 9-17-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-035 9-17-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-036 9-17-2013 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 5
13-037 10-1-2013 Animals: cats amendment Ch. 108, Art. V
13-038 10-1-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-039 10-1-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-040 10-1-2013 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 268
§ DL-1 HAMILTON CODE § DL-1
1:1368
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13-041 10-15-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-042 11-6-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-043 11-6-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-044 12-3-2013 Land development
amendment
Ch. 550
13-045 11-19-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
13-046 11-19-2013 Capital improvements and
appropriation
NCM
13-047 12-17-2013 Accepting deed of dedication NCM
13-048 12-17-2013 Salaries amendment NCM
13-049 12-17-2013 Fees amendment: marriage
ceremonies
NLP; see Ch. 215
14-001 2-4-2014 Fees amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 14-079;
see Ch. 215
14-002 Not adopted
14-003 2-4-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-004 3-4-2014 Alley vacation NCM
14-005 2-18-2014 Administration of government
amendment; fees amendment
Ch. 5; Ch. 215
14-006 2-18-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-007 2-18-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-008 2-18-2014 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 268
14-009 2-18-2014 Fees amendment: marriage
ceremonies amendment
NLP; see Ch. 215
14-010 3-4-2014 Accepting sight triangle
easement
NCM
14-011 3-4-2014 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 45
14-012 3-18-2014 Fees amendment: fee waiver
amendment
NLP; see Ch. 215
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1369
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-013 3-18-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-014 3-18-2014 Fees amendment NLP; see Ch. 215
14-015 3-18-2014 Parks and playgrounds: rules
and regulations amendment
Ch. 340, Art. I
14-016 3-18-2014 Accepting sight triangle
easement and stream buffer
conservation easement
NCM
14-017 4-1-2014 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 268
14-018 4-1-2014 Construction codes, uniform
amendment
Ch. 167
14-019 4-1-2014 Easement vacation NCM
14-020 4-1-2014 Accepting deed of easement NCM
14-021 4-1-2014 Exceed budget and establish
cap bank
NCM
14-022 6-17-2014 Land development
amendment
Ch. 550
14-023 5-6-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-024 Miscellaneous provisions and
offenses amendment
Not adopted
(defeated)
14-025 5-6-2014 Land development
amendment
Ch. 550
14-026 4-15-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-027 4-15-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-028 5-6-2014 Land development
amendment
Ch. 550
14-029 5-6-2014 Accepting deed of sight
triangle easement
NCM
14-030 5-20-2014 Sewer utility improvements
and appropriation
NCM
14-031 5-20-2014 Capital improvements and
appropriation
NCM
14-032 5-20-2014 Emergency appropriation NCM
14-033 5-20-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
§ DL-1 HAMILTON CODE § DL-1
1:1370
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-034 5-20-2014 Vending machines: licensing
of food and beverage vending
machines amendment
Ch. 496, Art. III
14-035 6-17-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-036 6-17-2014 Hunting and firearms Ch. 270
14-037 6-17-2014 Accepting right-of-way
dedication
NCM
14-038 6-17-2014 Accepting sidewalk easement NCM
14-039 6-17-2014 Accepting sidewalk easement NCM
14-040 6-17-2014 Government energy
aggregation program and
agreement
NCM
14-041 Not adopted
14-042 6-17-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-043 8-19-2014 Acquisition of property NCM
14-044 7-15-2014 Accepting right-of-way
dedication
NCM
14-045 7-15-2014 Land development
amendment
Ch. 550
14-046 8-19-2014 Land development
amendment
Ch. 550
14-047 8-19-2014 Auctions and auctioneers
amendment
REP
14-048 8-19-2014 Amusement devices and
games amendment
Ch. 104
14-049 8-19-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-050 8-19-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-051 8-19-2014 Accepting sight triangle
easement
NCM
14-052 8-19-2014 Land development
amendment
Ch. 550
14-053 9-16-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-054 9-16-2014 Accepting deed of stream
buffer conservation easement
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1371
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-055 9-16-2014 Accepting deed of stream
buffer conservation easement
NCM
14-056 9-16-2014 Accepting deed of stream
buffer conservation easement
NCM
14-057 9-16-2014 Accepting deed of right-ofway
dedication
NCM
14-058 Acquisition of property NCM
14-059 9-16-2014 Salaries amendment NCM
14-060 9-16-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-061 9-16-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-062 9-16-2014 Fees amendment NLP; see Ch. 215
14-063 9-16-2014 Land development
amendment
Ch. 550
14-064 9-16-2014 Land development
amendment
Ch. 550
14-065 9-16-2014 Parks and playgrounds: rules
and regulations amendment
Ch. 340, Art. I
14-066 Fees amendment Vetoed
14-067 10-21-2014 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing and regulation
amendment
Ch. 99, Art. II
14-068 10-21-2014 Accepting deed of stream
buffer conversation easement
NCM
14-069 10-21-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-070 10-21-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-071 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Not adopted
(defeated)
14-072 Deed dedication NCM
14-073 11-18-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-074 11-18-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-075 11-18-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
§ DL-1 HAMILTON CODE § DL-1
1:1372
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-076 11-18-2014 Accepting deed of revocation
and a recreation/conservation
easement
NCM
14-077 11-18-2014 Lease authorization NCM
14-078 12-16-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-079 12-16-2014 Fees amendment: Township
property lease and rental
fees; policies
NLP; see Ch. 215
14-080 12-16-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
14-081 12-16-2014 Street vacation NCM
15-001 1-20-2015 Accepting deed of dedication NCM
15-002 1-20-2015 Accepting deed of dedication NCM
15-003 1-20-2015 Accepting deed of dedication NCM
15-004 1-20-2015 Accepting deed of dedication NCM
15-005 1-20-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-006 2-3-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-007 2-3-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-008 2-17-2015 Noise amendment Ch. 311
15-009 3-3-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-010 3-3-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-011 Exceed budget and establish
cap bank
NCM
15-012 3-17-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-013 Food and food establishments
amendment
Not adopted
(defeated)
15-014 4-21-2015 Bond refund NCM
15-015 4-21-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-016 4-21-2015 Acquisition of property NCM
15-017 5-19-2015 Accepting deed-restricted
affordable housing property
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1373
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-018 5-19-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-019 6-16-2015 Capital improvements and
appropriation
NCM
15-020 6-16-2015 Capital improvements and
appropriation
NCM
15-021 6-16-2015 Lease authorization NCM
15-022 Lease agreement Not adopted
15-023 6-16-2015 Lease authorization NCM
15-024 6-16-2015 Lease authorization NCM
15-025 6-16-2015 Food and food
establishments: retail food
establishments and vending
machines amendment
Ch. 235, Art. II
15-026 7-21-2015 Parks and playgrounds: rules
and regulations amendment
Ch. 340, Art. I
15-027 7-21-2015 Land development
amendment
Ch. 550
15-028 7-21-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-029 7-21-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-030 7-21-2015 Fees amendment: Township
property lease and rental
fees; policies amendment
NLP; see Ch. 215
15-031 7-21-2015 Fees amendment: ecological
facility
NLP; see Ch. 215
15-032 Lease agreement NCM
15-033 Street vacation NCM
15-034 8-18-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-035 Deed easement: release of
wetlands conservation
easement
NCM
15-036 Sale of property Not adopted
15-037 9-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-038 9-15-2015 Authorizing sale of property NCM
§ DL-1 HAMILTON CODE § DL-1
1:1374
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-039 9-15-2015 Redevelopment plan for a
particular rehabilitation area
NCM
15-040 10-6-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-041 10-6-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-042 10-20-2015 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 45
15-043 10-20-2015 Salaries amendment NCM
15-044 11-5-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-045 11-5-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-046 11-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-047 11-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-048 12-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
15-049 Not adopted
15-050 12-15-2015 Authorizing private sale of
properties
NCM
15-051 12-15-2015 Accepting tree preservation
easement
NCM
15-052 12-15-2015 Accepting sight triangle
easement
NCM
15-053 12-15-2015 Accepting sight triangle
easement
NCM
15-054 12-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-001 2-2-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-002 2-2-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-003 2-2-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-004 2-2-2016 Fire prevention: enforcement
of Uniform Fire Code
amendment
Ch. 228, Art. II
16-005 2-2-2016 Lease authorization NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1375
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-006 2-2-2016 Accepting land donation NCM
16-007 3-1-2016 Unfit or abandoned buildings
amendment
Ch. 146
16-008 3-15-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-009 3-15-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-010 4-5-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-011 4-19-2016 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
16-012 Exceed budget and establish
cap bank
NCM
16-013 6-21-2016 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 536
16-014 5-3-2016 Swimming pools amendment Ch. 442
16-015 5-3-2016 Animals: dogs amendment Ch. 108, Art. IV
16-016 5-3-2016 Vending machines: licensing
of food and beverage vending
machines amendment
Ch. 496, Art. III
16-017 5-3-2016 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 268
16-018 5-17-2016 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 268
16-019 5-17-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-020 6-21-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-021 7-19-2016 Street name change: portion
of Birch Street to Lincoln
Avenue
NCM
16-022 7-19-2016 Capital improvements and
appropriations
NCM
16-023 7-19-2016 Sewer utility improvements
and appropriations
NCM
16-024 7-19-2016 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 268
16-025 Massage and/or somatic
establishments
Not adopted
§ DL-1 HAMILTON CODE § DL-1
1:1376
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-026 7-19-2016 Parks and playgrounds: rules
and regulations amendment
Ch. 340, Art. I
16-027 7-19-2016 Lease authorization NCM
16-028 7-19-2016 Unfit or abandoned buildings
amendment
Ch. 146
16-029 7-19-2016 Smoking and tobacco
products: ecological facility
no smoking policy
Ch. 408, Art. III
16-030 7-19-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-031 7-19-2016 Fees amendment: Oktoberfest
vendors and crafters
amendment
NLP; see Ch. 215
16-032 8-16-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 550
16-033 8-16-2016 Animals: dogs amendment Ch. 108, Art. IV
16-034 8-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-035 8-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-036 8-16-2016 Animals: dogs amendment Ch. 108, Art. IV
16-037 9-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-038 9-20-2016 Accepting deed of right of
way
NCM
16-039 9-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-040 9-20-2016 Animals: dogs amendment Ch. 108, Art. IV
16-041 9-20-2016 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing and regulation
amendment
Ch. 99, Art. II
16-042 10-4-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-043 10-4-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-044 10-4-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-045 10-4-2016 Fees amendment NLP; see Ch. 215
16-046 10-4-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1377
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-047 10-18-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-048 10-18-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-049 10-18-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-050 10-18-2016 Massage and/or somatic
establishments
Ch. 296
16-051 11-15-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-052 11-15-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-053 12-20-2016 Land development
amendment
Ch. 550
16-054 12-6-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-055 1-3-2017 Massage and/or somatic
establishments amendment
Ch. 296
16-056 1-3-2017 Fees amendment NLP; see Ch. 215
16-057 1-3-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-058 1-3-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
16-059 1-3-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
17-001 1-17-2017 Fees amendment NLP; see Ch. 215
17-002 1-17-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-003 3-7-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-004 2-7-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-005 2-7-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
17-006 2-21-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
17-007 3-7-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-008 3-7-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-009 3-7-2017 Accepting deed of dedication NCM
17-010 Not adopted
§ DL-1 HAMILTON CODE § DL-1
1:1378
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-011 3-21-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-012 4-4-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-013 4-4-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
17-014 4-18-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-015 4-18-2017 Bond NCM
17-016 5-2-2017 Capital improvements and
appropriation
NCM
17-017 Not adopted
17-018 5-2-2017 Grant of easement NCM
17-019 5-2-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-020 5-16-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-021 5-16-2017 Bond NCM
17-022 5-16-2017 Permanent sanitary sewer
easement
NCM
17-023 5-16-2017 Permanent sanitary sewer
easement
NCM
17-024 6-20-2017 Administration of government
amendment; fees amendment
Ch. 5; Ch. 215
17-025 6-20-2017 Land development
amendment
Ch. 550
17-026 7-18-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-027 7-18-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-028 7-18-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 215
17-029 7-18-2017 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
17-030 8-15-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 215
17-031 8-15-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-032 8-15-2017 Salaries amendment NCM
17-033 9-19-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-034 9-19-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1379
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-035 9-19-2017 Fees amendment; peddlers,
solicitors, canvassers and
transient merchants
Ch. 215; Ch. 349
17-036 10-17-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-037 10-17-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-038 11-21-2017 Lease agreement NCM
17-039 11-21-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 215
17-040 11-21-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-041 11-21-2017 Land development
amendment
Ch. 550
17-042 12-5-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-043 12-5-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-044 12-19-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 215
17-045 12-19-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 485
17-046 12-9-2017 Salaries NCM
18-001 2-6-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-002 2-20-2018 Salaries Amendment NCM
18-003 2-20-2018 Use of Disbursing
Organizations
NCM
18-004 2-20-2018 Lease Authorization NCM
18-005 3-20-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 215
18-006 3-20-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-007 3-20-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-008 3-20-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-009 3-20-2018 Accepting a Deed of Right of
Way
NCM
18-010 3-20-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 550
§ DL-1 HAMILTON CODE § DL-1
1:1380
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-011 3-20-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 550
18-012 3-20-2018 Taxation: Tax Exemption and
Abatement Program for
Residential Improvements
Repealer; Hotel Tax
Amendment
Ch. 449, Art. I; Ch.
449, Art. II
18-013 4-3-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
18-014 4-3-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 215
18-015 4-17-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-016 4-17-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-017 5-15-2018 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 5
18-018 5-1-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 215
18-019 5-1-2018 Lease Authorization NCM
18-020 6-19-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 550
18-021 5-15-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-022 5-18-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-023 6-19-2018 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 5
18-024 6-19-2018 Crane Regulations Ch. 172
18-025 6-19-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-026 Not adopted
18-027 7-17-2018 Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Amendment
Ch. 385
18-028 7-17-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 550
18-029 7-17-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 550
18-030 11-20-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 550
18-031 8-21-2018 Sewer Utility Improvements
and Appropriation
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1381
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-032 7-17-2018 Capital Improvements and
Appropriations
NCM
18-033 7-17-2018 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 5
18-034 7-17-2018 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 5
18-035 7-17-2018 Acquisition of Property NCM
18-036 7-17-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-037 8-21-2018 Street Vacation NCM
18-038 8-21-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-039 8-21-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-040 8-21-2018 Government Energy
Aggregation Program
NCM
18-041 9-18-2018 Peddlers, Solicitors,
Canvassers and Transient
Merchants Amendment
Ch. 349
18-042 9-18-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 550
18-043 9-18-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-044 9-18-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-045 9-18-2018 Animals: Dogs Amendment Ch. 108, Art. IV
18-046 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 5
18-047 Not yet adopted
18-048 10-2-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-049 10-2-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-050 11-20-2018 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 550
18-051 10-16-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-052 10-16-2018 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 5
§ DL-1 HAMILTON CODE § DL-1
1:1382
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-053 11-20-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-054 11-20-2018 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 5
18-055 11-20-2018 Streets and Sidewalks: Street
Excavations Amendment
Ch. 435, Art. II
18-056 11-20-2018 Acquisition of Property NCM
18-057 11-20-2018 Acquisition of Property NCM
18-058 11-20-2018 Housing Standards
Amendment
Ch. 268
18-059 12-4-2018 Accepting Deed of Dedication NCM
18-060 12-18-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-061 12-4-2018 Housing Standards
Amendment
Ch. 268
18-062 12-4-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 215
18-063 Not yet adopted
18-064 12-18-2018 Stormwater Control
Amendment
Ch. 577
18-065 12-18-2018 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 5
18-066 12-18-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-067 1-2-2019 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 550
18-068 12-18-2018 Housing Standards
Amendment
Ch. 268
18-069 12-18-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
18-070 12-18-2018 Salaries NCM
18-071 Not yet adopted
18-072 12-18-2018 Fire Prevention: Enforcement
of Uniform Fire Code
Amendment
Ch. 228, Art. II
18-073 1-2-2019 Animals: Dogs Amendment Ch. 108, Art. IV
18-074 1-2-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 215
18-075 1-2-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 215
19-001 2-5-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1383
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-002 2-5-2019 Easement NCM
19-003 2-5-2019 Street Vacation NCM
19-004 2-19-2019 Fire Prevention: Enforcement
of Uniform Fire Code
Amendment
Ch. 228, Art. II
19-005 2-19-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 215
19-006 2-19-2019 Zoning Map Amendment See Ch. 550
19-007 2-19-2019 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 550
19-008 2-19-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
19-009 2-19-2019 Parks and Playgrounds: Rules
and Regulations Amendment
Ch. 340, Art. I
19-010 3-5-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
19-011 3-19-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
19-013 4-2-2019 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 550
19-014 4-2-2019 Acceptance of Right of Way NCM
19-015 4-2-2019 Easement NCM
19-016 4-2-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
19-017 4-2-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
19-018 4-16-2019 Exceed Budget, Cap Bank NCM
19-019 4-16-2019 Establishing Traffic Control
Signal
NCM
19-020 4-16-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
19-021 4-16-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
19-022 4-16-2019 Deeds of Right of Way
Dedication
NCM
19-023 5-7-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
19-024 5-7-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485
§ DL-1 HAMILTON CODE § DL-1
1:1384
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-025 5-21-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485 9
19-026 5-21-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485 9
19-027 5-21-2019 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 550 9
19-028 5-21-2019 Redevelopment Plan NCM 9
19-029 Not adopted 9
19-030 Not adopted 9
19-031 7-16-2019 Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 550 9
19-032 7-16-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485 9
19-033 7-16-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485 9
19-034 7-16-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485 9
19-035 8-20-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485 9
19-036 8-20-2019 Construction Codes,
Uniform Amendment
Ch. 167 9
19-037 8-20-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485 9
19-038 8-20-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485 9
19-039 Not adopted 9
19-040 9-17-2019 Stormwater
Management:
Private Storm Drain
Inlet Retrofitting
Ch. 427,
Art. III
9
19-041 9-17-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485 9
19-042 9-17-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485 9
19-043 9-17-2019 Jewelry, Precious
Metals, Gems and
Secondhand Goods
Dealers Amendment
Ch. 273 9
19-044 10-1-2019 Agreement NCM 9
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1385
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-045 10-1-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485 9
19-046 10-1-2019 Bond NCM 9
19-047 10-15-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485 10
19-048 10-15-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485 10
19-049 10-15-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 215 10
19-050 10-15-2019 Authorization to
Enter Agreement
NCM 10
19-051 11-13-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485 10
19-052 11-13-2019 Redevelopment Plan NCM 10
19-053 12-3-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485 10
19-054 12-3-2019 Creation of Right-of-
Way Reservation
NCM 10
19-055 12-3-2019 Creation of Right-of-
Way Reservation
NCM 10
19-056 12-3-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485 10
19-057 12-3-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 485 10
19-058 Not adopted 10
19-059 12-3-2019 Street Renaming Ch. 485,
reference
only; Ch.
550,
reference
only
10
19-060 Approval of
Application for
Long-Term Tax
Exemption and
Authorization of
Agreement
NCM 10
19-061 12-17-2019 Construction Codes,
Uniform Amendment
Ch. 167 10
19-062 12-17-2019 Vacation of Right-of-
Way
NCM 10
§ DL-1 HAMILTON CODE § DL-1
1:1386