Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Harrington
Park of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Mayor and Council
of the Borough of Harrington Park, as revised, codified and consolidated
into chapters and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1
through 350, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Borough of Harrington Park,"
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1967 Code and all other
general and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this
Code, except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of
Harrington Park by impressing thereon the Seal of the Borough, as provided
by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk
of the Borough, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Harrington
Park" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Harrington Park, pursuant to law, shall cause
this Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the
public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
authorized by the Borough. The Clerk shall also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough
of Harrington Park to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this
section or any part of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be subject to
the penalties as set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties, of the Code
of the Borough of Harrington Park, in the discretion of the Judge imposing
the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Except as provided in § 1-13, Ordinances saved from repeal, below, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Borough of Harrington Park
which is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to
remain in full force and effect.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to August 16, 2010.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
N. Ordinance No. 630, adopted October 20, 2008, regarding cat licensing
fees.
O. Ordinance No. 632, adopted November 17, 2008, Employee Manual
amendment.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature changes. The following nomenclature changes have been
made throughout the Code:
(1) "Dog Warden" to "Animal Control Officer."
(2) "Construction Enforcement Department" or "Building Department"
to "Construction Department."
(3) "Construction Officer," "Construction Code Enforcement Officer,"
"Construction Official" or "Code Official" to "Construction Code
Official."
(4) "Building Subcode Officer" to "Building Subcode Official."
(5) "Electrical Subcode Officer" to "Electrical Subcode Official."
(6) "Fire Protection Subcode Officer" to "Fire Protection Subcode
Official."
(7) "Land Use Ordinance" to "land use ordinances."
(8) "Zoning Enforcement Officer" to "Zoning Officer."
(9) "Zoning Official" to "Zoning Officer."
(10) "Magistrate" to "Judge."
§ 1-13 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 1-14
1:6
C. Violations and penalties. In the following sections, the penalties have
been added or amended to refer to the general penalty in Chapter 164,
Fines and Penalties: §§ 85-40B(1)(a), 93-5, 99-5, 99-17A, 112-4, 118-5,
150-28, 162-9, 179-9, 219-5, 230-14, 230-19, 237-12, 237-16, 242-9,
248-14, 248-25, 256-5, 291-6, 291-11, 291-17, 291-22, 291-27. 291-32,
291-37, 291-43, 291-49, 297-36, 337-6, 350-43J, 350-92C.
D. Statutory references. Throughout the Code, references to the New
Jersey statutes have been cited using "N.J.S.A." and unconsolidated
references in the text of ordinances have been supplemented with the
consolidated (N.J.S.A.) reference.
E. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7

ARTICLE II
Terminology
[Adopted with 2017 Code revisions (upon enactment, adoption
information will be inserted here)]
§ 1-15. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application
of all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the
context may otherwise require, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Harrington Park in the County of Bergen and
State of New Jersey.
BOROUGH COUNCIL or COUNCIL — The Mayor and Council members of
the Borough of Harrington Park.
CLERK or MUNICIPAL CLERK — The Municipal Clerk duly appointed
pursuant to law.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the Borough government
established or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department,
together with any agency or instrumentality of the Borough government
assigned to the organizational unit by the Borough Council.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of this Code.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
ORDINANCE — Any local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted, and
including this Code, so long as it shall have been adopted by the procedure
required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it shall remain in
force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
STREET — Includes a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
YEAR — A calendar year, unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-16. Word usage.
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9
A. The present tense includes the past and the future tenses, and the
future the present.
B. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
C. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
D. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" permissive.
E. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first day and including the last day, and if the last day is a
Sunday, legal holiday or a day on which the offices of the Borough of
Harrington Park are closed, the day shall be excluded.
F. The word "writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and
any other mode of communication using paper or similar material
which is in general use, as well as legible handwriting.
G. Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey
during any day in any year.
H. The word "used" shall include "designed, intended or arranged to be
used."
§ 1-16 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 1-16
1:10
ARTICLE III
Adoption of 2017 Code Revisions
[Adopted 11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 719]
§ 1-17. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the 2011 Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment and
revision of the Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of
such ordinances and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such
provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All
such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby
reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Harrington Park, and it is the intention of said Mayor and Council that each
such provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears
in said Code.
§ 1-18. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-19. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Harrington Park, pursuant to law, shall cause
this Adoption of Revisions Ordinance to be published, in the manner
required, in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient
copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for
inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
enactment and publication of this Adoption of Revisions Ordinance, coupled
with availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall
be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-20. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. In compiling and preparing the 2011 Code and subsequent ordinances
for publication as the 2017 Code of the Borough of Harrington Park
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, no changes in the meaning or intent of
such ordinances have been made, except as provided for in Subsections
B, C and D hereof. In addition, certain grammatical changes and other
minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces
of legislation. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature.
(1) "Board of Recreation Commissioners" is changed to "Recreation
Commission."
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:11
(2) "Building Department" is changed to "Construction Department."
(3) "Chair" and "Chairman" are changed to "Chairperson."
(4) "Building Inspector" and "Construction Official" are changed to
"Construction Code Official."
(5) "Board of Adjustment" is changed to "Zoning Board of Adjustment."
(6) "State Department of Health and Senior Services" is changed to
"Department of Health."
(7) Chapter 85, Article IV, is amended to change instances of "agerestricted
unit" to "age-restricted housing.”"
(8) Chapter 350 is amended to change instances of "Zoning Official"
and "Zoning Enforcement Officer" to "Zoning Officer.”"
(9) Chapter 350, Article XV, is amended to change instances of
"Construction Code Official" to "Zoning Officer."
C. Chapter 325, Trailers, Mobile Homes, and Campsites, is renumbered as
Chapter 127 and renamed as "Commercial Vehicles."
D. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule
A2 attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to
become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
2. Editor’s Note: In accordance with § 1-20D, the chapters, articles and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or repealed by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 11-20-2017 by Ord. No.
719." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 1-20 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 1-20
1:12
Chapter 3
AMBULANCE CORPS
§ 1-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:13

ARTICLE I
Length of Service Award Program
[Adopted 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 690]
§ 3-1. Creation of program.
A Length of Service Award Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 19973 to reward members of
the Harrington Park Volunteer Ambulance Corps for their loyal, diligent,
and devoted services to the residents of Borough of Harrington Park.
§ 3-2. Program features.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth below,
that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that shall
be established by the Borough of Harrington Park pursuant to P.L. 1997, c.
388, and that such plan shall be administered in accordance with the laws
of the State of New Jersey, the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, and this article.
§ 3-3. Contribution criteria.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible
ambulance squad member that meets the criteria as follows:
A. One hundred points are required for a member to be eligible for a full
annual contribution; 90 points are required for a member to be eligible
for 90% annual contribution; 80 points are required for a member to be
eligible for 80% annual contribution; 70 points are required for a
member to be eligible for 70% annual contribution; 60 points are
required for a member to be eligible for 60% annual contribution; and
50 points are required for a member to be eligible for 50% annual
contribution.
B. Five years of service are required for vesting. However, for previous
years of service, each active member shall be entitled to a credit, for
vesting purposes only, of one year credit for each two years of active
service to a maximum of five years credit, for full vesting.
C. The annual contribution per eligible active ambulance squad member,
commencing with the year 2014, shall be as be as follows: $1,150.
D. In future years, the base annual contribution shall be increased
commensurate with the percentage increase in the consumer price
index (CPI).
3. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-185 et seq.
§ 3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-4
1:15
§ 3-4. Crediting of points.
Each active volunteer ambulance squad member shall be credited with
points for volunteer services provided to the Harrington Park Volunteer
Ambulance Corps in accordance with Schedule A attached.4
§ 3-5. When effective.
This article shall not take effect unless it is approved by voters as a public
question at the next general election.5
§ 3-6. Referendum question.
The following referendum question shall be submitted to the voters of the
Borough of Harrington Park at the November 4, 2014, general election:
Shall the Borough of Harrington Park be authorized to establish a Length
of Service Award Program for the active members of the volunteer
ambulance squad that serve the municipality pursuant to the following
terms and conditions:
1. The program shall provide for annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each active volunteer ambulance squad member that meets
the eligibility criteria and in accordance with Schedule A adopted by the
Borough of Harrington Park.
2. The estimated cost for the first year of the program has been calculated
at between $15,000 and $25,000.
4. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
5. Editor's Note: This article was approved at the election on 11-4-2014.
§ 3-4 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 3-6
1:16
Chapter 6
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health ordinances — See Part III of
the Code.
§ 3-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-6
1:17

ARTICLE I
Board of Health
[Adopted 4-12-1911 by Ord. No. 5 (Ch. 8 of the 1967 Code)]
§ 6-1. Establishment; statutory citation. [Amended 4-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 658]
There shall be in and for the Borough of Harrington Park a Board of Health
in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq.
§ 6-2. Members; appointment; compensation; terms of office.
[Amended 1-2-1989 by Ord. No. 413; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 6586]
Said Board of Health shall consist of seven members. All members shall be
proposed by the Mayor, but appointed by the Mayor and Council, shall be
residents of the Borough, shall serve without compensation and shall hold
said office for a term of three years, except in the case of vacancies which
shall be filled for the unexpired terms.
§ 6-3. Rules and regulations; President.
Said Board of Health shall adopt rules and regulations for its own
government and shall elect a President from among its own members.
§ 6-4. Officers and assistants. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
6587]
Said Board of Health shall appoint a Registrar of Vital Statistics, Secretary
to the Board and a registered environmental health specialist (REHS), also
known as the "Health Officer," and may also appoint such other officers
or assistants as said Board of Health may deem necessary. All appointees
of said Board of Health shall be governed by the rules of said Board, and
they may be removed for cause by said Board. The members of the Police
Department of said Borough, when on police duty, shall be special sanitary
inspectors, and they shall promptly report to the Board of Health every
violation of the health ordinances of the Borough which may come within
their observation or knowledge.
§ 6-5. Debts limited to amount of appropriation.
The Board of Health shall not contract any debts of any kind beyond the
amount of the appropriation made for its use by the Mayor and Council.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-5
1:19

ARTICLE II
Recreation Commission
[Adopted 7-18-1955 by Ord. No. 169 (Ch. 36 of the 1967 Code)]
§ 6-6. Establishment and composition. [Amended 2-6-1967 by Ord.
No. 215]
A Recreation Commission in the Borough of Harrington Park is hereby
established, which shall consist of seven persons, citizens and residents of
the Borough of Harrington Park.
§ 6-7. Appointment of Commissioners.
The members of the Recreation Commission shall be appointed by the
Mayor.
§ 6-8. Term of office; vacancies. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
The members of said Recreation Commission shall hold office for the term
of five years and until their respective successors are appointed and shall
qualify. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
§ 6-9. Salaries of Commissioners.
The members of said Recreation Commission shall receive no salary or
other compensation for their services.
§ 6-10. Election of officers.
Upon the appointment of the members of said Recreation Commission,
said Board shall organize and elect such officers and adopt such rules and
regulations as said Board may deem necessary for the faithful discharge of
its duties and for the proper exercise of the powers conferred on said Board,
as provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:12-1 to 40:12-8, inclusive, as amended and
supplemented.
§ 6-11. Authority and duties.
The Recreation Commission shall have full control over all lands,
playgrounds and recreation places acquired or leased under the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:12-1 to 40:12-8, inclusive, as amended and supplemented,
and may adopt suitable rules, regulations and bylaws for the use thereof
and the conduct of all persons while on or using the same; any person
who shall violate any such rules, regulations or bylaws shall be deemed
and adjudged to be a disorderly person. The custodians, supervisors and
assistants appointed by the Recreation Commission shall, while on duty
and for the purpose of preserving order and the observance of the rules,
regulations and bylaws of the Recreation Commission, have all the power
and authority of police officers of the Borough of Harrington Park.
§ 6-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-12
1:21
§ 6-12. Employees; salaries.
The Recreation Commission may appoint a Secretary or Clerk and such
number of custodians, supervisors and assistants for the several
playgrounds and recreation places under its control as it shall think
necessary and proper and shall fix and determine their respective salaries,
subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Harrington Park.
§ 6-13. Annual report.
The Recreation Commission shall make an annual written report on or
before the first day of January of each year and transmit the same to
the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Harrington Park. Said annual
written report shall contain an itemized accounting of all activities, receipts,
disbursements, expenditures and number of employees for the full year.
§ 6-14. Additional powers and duties.
The Recreation Commission shall, in addition to the powers and duties
defined herein, be chargeable with the performance of all duties and shall
be vested with all other powers as are more particularly set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:12-1 to 40:12-8, inclusive, as amended and supplemented.
§ 6-12 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 6-14
1:22
ARTICLE III
Environmental Commission
[Adopted 5-20-1974 by Ord. No. 261 (Ch. 15 of the 1967 Code)]
§ 6-15. Creation.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq., there is hereby established in and
for the Borough of Harrington Park, County of Bergen and State of New
Jersey, an Environmental Commission to be known as the "Harrington Park
Environmental Commission."
§ 6-16. Appointment of members; Chair; compensation.
§ 6-17. Terms of office. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
The membership of the Environmental Commission shall be for three years
or until the appointment and qualification of their successors. Any member
may be removed for cause by the Mayor or by the Council of the Borough
of Harrington Park, provided that written charges are served upon said
member and a hearing held thereon, at which time such member shall be
entitled to be heard in person or by counsel. Should a vacancy occur other
than by expiration of term, said vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired
term. Except for initial adjustments or for special aspects of the Planning
Board, Recreation Commission and Council members as set forth in § 6-16,
all appointments shall commence the first day of January of the year for
which the appointment is made.
§ 6-18. Powers.
A. The Environmental Commission should consist of seven members to be
appointed by the Mayor of the Borough of Harrington Park, provided
that all members must be residents of the Borough of Harrington Park.
At all times one member of such Commission shall be a member of the
Planning Board of the Borough of Harrington Park, one member shall
be a Councilman of the Borough of Harrington Park and one shall be
from the Recreation Commission of Harrington Park. Should such
member's term on the Planning Board, Council or Recreation
Commission terminate, then a replacement from said body shall be
designated to fill the unexpired term on said Commission in order to
ensure such representation. [Amended 11-21-1977 by Ord. No. 297]
B. The Mayor shall designate from said Commission one member to serve
as Chairperson of said Environmental Commission, whose duty it shall
be to preside at all meetings.
C. No member may receive any compensation, although expenses may be
provided for upon approval by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Harrington Park.
A. The Environmental Commission shall have the following powers:
§ 6-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-18
1:23
§ 6-19. Index of open areas.
The Environmental Commission shall create and maintain an index of all
open areas of the Borough of Harrington Park for the publicly or privately
owned areas, in order to obtain information on the proper present and
future use of such areas, and may from time to time recommend to the
Planning Board of the Borough of Harrington Park such programs
concerning such open space for inclusion in the Master Plan of the Borough
of Harrington Park and for prospective development and use of such areas.
(1) To study and make recommendations concerning open space
preservation.
(2) To study and make recommendations concerning water resources
management.
(3) To study and make recommendations concerning air pollution
control.
(4) To study and make recommendations concerning solid waste
management.
(5) To study and make recommendations concerning noise control.
(6) To study and make recommendations concerning soil and
landscape protection.
(7) To study and make recommendations concerning environmental
appearances.
(8) To study and make recommendations concerning marine resources
as well as protection of flora and fauna.
(9) To conduct research into the use or potential use of open land areas
of the municipality.
(10) To coordinate the activities of other unofficial bodies or
organizations concerned with the use of open space.
(11) To advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts and
pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems necessary to effectuate
the purposes and powers as herein set forth.
(12) To promote in general an environmental, ecological conservation
and natural resources program for the Borough of Harrington Park.
B. In addition to the aforesaid, upon designation by the Mayor and
Council, said Environmental Commission may act as liaison between
other environmental commissions or governing bodies of other
municipalities along with federal agencies on a county, state or federal
level.
§ 6-18 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 6-20
1:24
§ 6-20. Management of properties.
When designated by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Harrington
Park, the Environmental Commission may manage, for environmental and
conservation purposes, such lands which are owned in whole or in part
by the Borough of Harrington Park by virtue of direct acquisition,
condemnation or donation.
§ 6-21. Acquisition of lands.
If authorized and approved by the Mayor and Council of the Borough
of Harrington Park, the Environmental Commission may acquire property,
both real and personal, in the name of the municipality, by gift, purchase,
grant, bequest, devise or lease, for any of its purposes, and shall administer
the same for such purposes subject to the terms of the conveyance or
gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest,
development right, easement (including conservation easement), covenant
or other contractual right (including a conveyance on conditions or with
limitations or reversions) as may be necessary to acquire, maintain,
improve, protect, limit the future use of or otherwise conserve and properly
utilize open spaces and other land and water areas in the Borough.
§ 6-22. Records and reports.
The Environmental Commission shall convene no fewer than six times a
year and may convene more often at the determination of the members
of said Commission. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings and records
maintained by said Commission of all of its activities. The Commission shall
report periodically, as required by the Mayor and Council, to the Mayor and
Council, but in any event the Commission shall make an annual report to
the Mayor and Council indicating its accomplishments or activities for the
preceding year and its plans or projects for the following year. Included in
said reports shall be an accounting for any expenditures made during the
period of the report. Such report and accounting shall be presented to the
Mayor and Council by January 15 of the succeeding year.
§ 6-23. Organization. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
In furtherance of § 6-15 of this article, the Chairperson of the Environmental
Commission shall organize said Commission within 30 days of its creation,
and the Commission shall choose, by majority vote, a person designated to
act in the absence of the Chairperson. The Commission is also authorized
to adopt bylaws governing its procedural operation, which bylaws shall
not become effective without the approval of the Mayor and Council of
the Borough of Harrington Park. Similarly, should the Commission be
designated by the Mayor and Council to manage certain funds as set forth,
such managing shall not necessarily be exclusive but may be jointly with the
Mayor and Council or with other bodies or agencies of joint use as may be
determined necessary by the Mayor and Council. In conjunction with said
management, the Commission may recommend rules and regulations for
§ 6-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-23
1:25
the use of said properties and the conduct of all persons using the same,
which rules shall be subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council or any
joint agencies charged with the final responsibility for management of said
lands.
§ 6-24. Appropriations.
The Environmental Commission shall have no powers to raise funds of
its own other than the receipt of gifts of real or personal property as
hereinabove provided, with the exception that the Mayor and Council may
authorize private fund-raising activities, if deemed necessary. The Mayor
and Council may annually determine and appropriate sufficient sums for
the care, custody, policing or maintenance of lands controlled in whole
or in part by such Commission, which funds shall be raised by taxation
as part of the municipal budget. In addition, the Mayor and Council may
appropriate annually a sum for the expenses incurred by the Environmental
Commission.
§ 6-25. Clerical and other employees.
The Commission may appoint or employ a Secretary or Clerk and other
personnel as may be necessary for the operation of the Commission and for
custodial, supervisory or other care of lands within the jurisdiction of said
Commission, provided that the expenditure of such funds must be within
the limits of the total appropriation of funds made by the governing body
on behalf of such Commission; provided, further, however, that any salaries,
as opposed to expenses, shall be fixed and determined by the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Harrington Park and shall be included in the
general Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Harrington Park.
§ 6-23 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 6-25
1:26
Chapter 12
CLAIMS APPROVAL
§ 12-1. Presentation of bill of demand.8
Any person claiming payment from the Borough of Harrington Park shall
present a detailed bill of demand to the office of the Chief Financial Officer,
and the governing body shall authorize payment by resolution.
§ 12-2. Duty of Clerk to examine for signature.9
It shall be the duty of the Chief Financial Officer to see that the signature of
the officer, department head or employee certifying that the materials have
been received by, or the services rendered to, the Borough of Harrington
Park appears on every claim, and the claim shall be reviewed by the Council
liaison.
§ 12-3. Approval by committee chairperson.
Claims shall then be presented to the chairperson of the committee
responsible for the placing of the order, who, if satisfied the claims are
proper, shall approve the same. After such approval is given, the
chairperson shall file the claims with the Borough Clerk, who shall then
present these claims to the governing body for formal approval at a regular
meeting.
§ 12-4. Mayor's approval; incorporation into minutes.
Where the Mayor does not approve claims prior to the time they are
presented to the governing body for approval, it shall be the duty of the
Mayor to incorporate in the official minutes, by signing the approving
resolution or by approving the schedule of claims approved by the
governing body, that he has examined and officially approved the same for
payment.
§ 12-5. Consideration of claim by governing body.
Claims shall be considered by the governing body, which shall approve the
same, except that said governing body may reject any claims presented to
it, stating the reason for such rejection. Any disapproved claim shall be
referred back to the Borough Clerk with such instructions as the governing
body may give at the time of disapproval.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 6-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-6
1:27
§ 12-6. Approval by governing body; recording in minutes.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk to record all claims in the official
minutes of the Borough, indicating that the governing body has by formal
action approved the same, with appropriate record as to any claims
disapproved or rejected.
§ 12-7. Notation of approval on claim; date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk, or such other officer designated by
resolution of the governing body, to indicate on said claims that they have
been approved for payment, with the date of approval thereof noted on the
claim.
§ 12-8. Issuance of checks.10
After the Clerk has certified that the claims have been approved, he shall
turn the same over to the Chief Financial Officer, who shall forthwith
prepare the necessary checks for the payment thereof, which said checks
shall be signed by the Mayor and the Borough Clerk and thereafter
countersigned by the Chief Financial Officer. After preparing checks for
the payment of claims, he shall record them in a proper book of account
and thereafter mail or otherwise distribute the checks to the claimants. In
the event of the absence of any of the above-named officials, those duly
authorized by law to act in their absence shall sign the necessary checks.
§ 12-9. Payrolls.
In the case of payrolls, the Borough contribution to the social security
system (OASI) and the group insurance plan for employees, the appropriate
department heads or such officers or employees as may be designated
by resolution of the governing body shall prepare the necessary payrolls,
payments or deductions for all employees, which payrolls, payments or
deductions shall be duly certified by the person authorized to certify that
the services, payments or deductions have been rendered or are required
and the amount specified is in fact due and owing to the employee or
employees or to the social security system or to the established group
insurance plan for employees. Said payrolls, payments or deductions shall
be approved by the department head responsible therefor, paid by the Chief
Financial Officer of the Borough and subsequently thereafter presented to
the governing body for ratification and approval.
§ 12-10. Payroll account; manner of payment.11
This chapter shall provide for the establishment of a payroll account, and
the governing body may thereafter by resolution prescribe the manner in
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 12-6 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 12-10
1:28
which payroll checks shall be drawn, who shall sign the same and the dates
on which payment shall be made. In addition, the governing body may, if
it so elects, adopt a resolution providing for biweekly payment of salaries,
wages and compensation or adopt a salary ordinance or resolution.
§ 12-11. Receipts required for claims for travel expenses.
In case any officer or employee of the Borough presents a claim or voucher
for reimbursement for actual and necessary travel expenses, the same shall
be supported by receipts, where available, setting forth said expenses and
claim for reimbursement.
Chapter 20
COURT
§ 20-1. Establishment. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
There is hereby established within the Borough of Harrington Park, Bergen
County, New Jersey, a Municipal Court, known as the "Municipal Court of
the Borough of Harrington Park," pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
2B:12-1.
§ 20-2. Definitions. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Construed to mean a corporation, firm or individual, unless
another meaning is herein clearly expressed. The singular number, when
used herein, includes the plural, unless otherwise expressed. The masculine
gender, when used herein, includes the feminine gender.
§ 20-3. Powers and duties. [Added 3-15-1994 by Ord. No. 460;
amended 2-17-1998 by Ord. No. 506]
The Municipal Court and Municipal Judge thereof shall have and exercise
all of the functions and powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred by the
provisions of the above-mentioned statutory provisions, as amended and
supplemented, or provided by any other law.
§ 20-4. Public Defender fee. [Added 3-15-1994 by Ord. No. 460;
amended 2-17-1998 by Ord. No. 506]
The Municipal Judge may require a person applying for representation by a
Municipal Public Defender to pay an application fee of not more than $200.
The Municipal Judge may waive any required application fee in whole or in
part if he, in his discretion, determines that the application fee represents
an unreasonable burden upon the person seeking representation.12
Chapter 26
§ 12-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-4
1:29
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 53.
§ 26-1. Request for defense.
Except as hereinafter provided, the Borough of Harrington Park
(hereinafter known as the "Borough") shall, upon the request of any present
or former official, employee or appointee of the Borough, provide for
indemnification and legal defense of any civil action brought against said
person or persons arising from an act or omission falling within the scope
of their public duties.
§ 26-2. Interpretation of terms.
The terms of this chapter and the definition of official, employee and
appointee are to be construed liberally in order to effectuate the purposes
of this chapter, except that these terms shall not mean:
§ 26-3. Conditions for defense.
A. Any person who is not a natural person.
B. Any person while providing goods or services of any kind under any
contract with the Borough except an employment contract.
C. Any person while providing legal or engineering services for
compensation unless said person is a full-time employee of the
Borough.
D. Any person who as a condition of his or her appointment or contract is
required to indemnify and defend the Borough and/or secure insurance.
A. The Borough shall provide for defense of and indemnify any present or
former official, employee or appointee of the Borough who becomes a
defendant in a civil action if the person or persons involved:
(1) Acted or failed to act in a matter in which the Borough has or had
an interest.
(2) Acted or failed to act in the discharge of a duty imposed or
authorized by law.
(3) Acted or failed to take action in good faith.
12.Editor's Note: Original § 25-3, Disturbance of Municipal Court, and § 25-4, Violations and
penalties, which immediately followed this section, were repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658.
§ 20-4 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 26-3
1:30
§ 26-4. Refusal by Borough to defend and indemnify.
The Borough shall not indemnify any person against the payment of punitive
damages, penalties, or fines but may provide for the legal defense of such
claims in accord with the standards set forth herein. The Borough may
refuse to provide for the defense and indemnification of any civil action
referred to herein if the Mayor and Council determine that:
Chapter 33
FIRE DEPARTMENT
B. For purposes of this chapter, the duty and authority of the Borough to
defend and indemnify shall extend to a cross-claim or counterclaim
against such person.
A. The act or omission did not occur within the scope of a duty authorized
or imposed by law.
B. The act or failure to act was the result of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice of the person requesting defense and
indemnification.
C. The defense of the action or proceeding by the Borough would create a
conflict of interest between the Borough and the person or persons
involved.
§ 26-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-4
1:31

ARTICLE I
Organization of Volunteer Company
[Adopted 9-13-1915 by Ord. No. 26 (Ch. 17, Art. I, of the 1967
Code)]
§ 33-1. Establishment and composition. [Amended 11-18-1941 by
Ord. No. 124; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
The Volunteer Fire Department of the Borough of Harrington Park be and
the same is hereby established coextensive with the territorial limits of said
Borough and shall consist of companies presided over by a Chief. Each
company shall have apparatus necessary for the extinguishing of fires and
shall be officered by an Assistant Chief, Captain, Lieutenant and a Second
Lieutenant, and a board of seven trustees.
§ 33-2. Membership; restrictions. [Amended 8-17-1964 by Ord. No.
20513]
Each company shall not have fewer than 25 nor more than 60 active
members, and any person hereafter elected to active membership shall be
not less than 18 years of age nor more than 50 years of age.
§ 33-3. Election; removal of officers. [Amended 11-18-1941 by Ord.
No. 12414]
The election of Chief, Assistant Chiefs, Captains, Lieutenants and Second
Lieutenants shall be confirmed by a majority vote of the Borough Council.
The Borough Council shall have the power to remove for cause, suspend,
fine or discipline said officers, after hearing; provided, however, that no
fines imposed shall exceed the fine as designated in § 164-1. The vote of five
Councilmen shall be necessary to remove or dismiss any of said officers.
§ 33-4. Order of recognition and designation. [Amended 4-18-2011
by Ord. No. 658]
The companies of said Volunteer Fire Department shall, by resolution of
the Mayor and Council of this Borough, be recognized and designated
numerically, in order as organized.
§ 33-5. Authority of individual companies.
Each company shall have power to make, alter or amend its constitution,
bylaws and rules describing the qualifications of its officers and members
and for the regulation of the business and conduct of its affairs; provided,
however, that no constitution, bylaws or rules shall contain anything
contrary to the provisions of this article.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 33-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-5
1:33

ARTICLE II
Length of Service Awards Program
[Adopted 6-19-2000 by Ord. No. 531]
§ 33-6. Creation of program.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997 (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-185 et
seq.) to reward members of the Volunteer Fire Department for their loyal,
diligent, and devoted services to the residents of the Borough of Harrington
Park.
§ 33-7. Program features.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth below,
that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that shall
be established by the Borough of Harrington Park pursuant to P.L. 1997, c.
388 (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-185 et seq.), and that such a plan shall be administered
in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey, the United States
Internal Revenue Code, and this article.
§ 33-8. Contribution criteria.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible member
that meets the following criteria:
A. Points.
(1) One hundred points are required for a member to be eligible for full
annual contribution.
(2) Ninety points are required for a member to be eligible for 90%
annual contribution.
(3) Eighty points are required for a member to be eligible for 80%
annual contribution.
(4) Seventy points are required for a member to be eligible for 70%
annual contribution.
(5) Sixty points are required for a member to be eligible for 60%
annual contribution.
(6) Fifty points are required for a member to be eligible for 50% annual
contribution.
B. Five years of service are required for vesting; however, for past service,
each active member shall be entitled to credit for vesting purposes only
of one year of credit for each two years of active service to a maximum
of five years credit, or full vesting.15
§ 33-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-8
1:35
§ 33-9. Crediting of points.
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the Volunteer Fire Department in accordance with the
attached schedule.
LOSAP Point System
100 points needed for a qualifying year
1. Fire Department responses (50 points maximum, 20 minimum):
60% attendance 50 points
45% attendance 35 points
30% attendance 20 points
2. Drills (40 points maximum, 20 points minimum): points are credited for
participation in Department, mutual aid and special drills at 2 points
per drill.
3. Training (50 points maximum): points credited for certified firematic
training courses upon receipt of certificate of completion at 2 points
per hour.
4. Holder of an elected office (40 point maximum): points are credited for
completion of one-year term in an elected position. Only one position
can be credited per year.
Chief 40 points
Assistant Chief 30 points
Captain 20 points
Lieutenant 15 points
President 15 points
Treasurer 10 points
Secretary 10 points
All VPs 5 points
Active Ex-Chief 15 points
5. Meetings (24 points maximum, 12 points minimum): 6 meetings are
required to get credit for any meetings, 2 points per meeting.
C. The amount of payment may change annually, and the maximum base
amount shall be increased by the consumer price index (cpi).16,17
15.Editor's Note: Original Subsection C, which provided payment amounts for the years 2001
through 2005, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
17.Editor's Note: Original § 33-9, Estimated cost of program, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. III).
§ 33-8 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 33-9
1:36
LOSAP Point System
100 points needed for a qualifying year
6. Miscellaneous activities (35 points maximum): points will be credited
for participation in the following activities which are deemed official
Fire Department functions at 2 points per activity:
Work details
Cleanups
Truck inspection
Fund-raising activities
Wakes and memorial services
Firematic competitions
Committee meetings
Parades
Wetdowns
Attendance at an outside firematic association activity
§ 33-10. Referendum required.
This article shall not take effect unless it is approved by voters as a public
question at the next general election.18
§ 33-11. Terms and conditions. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Pursuant to the referendum question submitted to the voters of the Borough
of Harrington Park at the general election held on November 6, 2000, the
Borough of Harrington Park was authorized to establish a Length of Service
Awards Program for the volunteer firefighters that serve the municipality
pursuant to the following terms and conditions:
A. The program shall provide for annual contributions to a deferred
income account for each active volunteer member that meets the
eligibility criteria and in accordance with the schedule adopted by the
Borough of Harrington Park.
B. The estimated cost of the program has been calculated at between
$21,000 and $40,250 per year.
18.Editor's Note: This article was approved 11-6-2000.
§ 33-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-11
1:37
Chapter 53
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 26.
Fire Department — See Ch. 33.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 60.
Police Department — See Ch. 66.
§ 33-11 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 33-11
1:38
ARTICLE I
Assessor
[Adopted 1-1-1980 by Ord. No. 310 (Ch. 7 of the 1967 Code)]
§ 53-1. Establishment of office.
There is hereby established the office of Tax Assessor of the Borough of
Harrington Park, who shall be appointed by the governing body pursuant to
Chapter 128 of the Laws of 1978 (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146).
§ 53-2. Qualifications.
The Tax Assessor shall be qualified as set forth in Chapter 44 of the Laws of
1967 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.25) as the same may, from time to time, be amended.
§ 53-3. Term of office.
The Municipal Tax Assessor shall hold office for a term of four years from
the first day of July next following appointment to said office.
§ 53-4. Compensation.
The compensation of the Tax Assessor shall be determined by the governing
body by ordinance duly adopted from time to time.
§ 53-5. Duties.
The Tax Assessor shall perform the duties required of the holder of such
office pursuant to Title 54 of the New Jersey statutes and such regulations
as may from time to time be promulgated by the New Jersey Division of
Taxation and the Bergen County Board of Taxation.
§ 53-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-5
1:39

ARTICLE II
Historian
[Adopted 7-19-1982 by Ord. No. 333 (Ch. 18A of the 1967 Code)]
§ 53-6. Creation of office.
There is hereby created the office of Borough Historian.
§ 53-7. Compensation.
The Borough Historian shall serve without compensation, but the Mayor
and Council may annually appropriate such funds as may be necessary to
reimburse the Borough Historian for expenses incurred in the performance
of the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article.
§ 53-8. Appointment.
The Borough Historian shall be appointed for one year by the Mayor, with
approval of the Council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and
Council.
§ 53-9. Powers and duties.
The Borough Historian shall have the following powers and responsibilities:
A. The Borough Historian shall carry out an historical program, including
but not restricted to collecting, preserving and making available
materials relating to the history of the Borough of Harrington Park. The
Historian shall store such materials in such manner as to ensure their
preservation according to the guidelines offered by the New Jersey
Historical Commission in accordance with the Local Historians
Enabling Act (1979) (N.J.S.A. 40:10A-1 et seq.) and shall notify the State
Archivist, New Jersey Historical Commission, County Historian and the
Mayor and Council of any materials which should be acquired for
preservation. Upon leaving the position, the Borough Historian shall
turn over all materials and records and reports into the possession of
the successor, if then appointed, or to the governing body until a
successor shall be appointed.
B. The Borough Historian shall make an annual written report to the
Mayor and Council stating all the work performed and accomplished
during that year. The Borough Historian shall transmit a copy of such
report to the New Jersey Historical Commission.
C. The Borough Historian may research, write and cause to have
published a municipal history and may recommend appropriate
historical materials for publication.
D. The Borough Historian may assist a Landmark Commission, as well as
advise the Mayor and Council, concerning the acquisition,
administration, use and disposition of any landmark or historic site,
§ 53-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-9
1:41
including such places in the Borough included on the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places. Such advice may be furnished to the Office
of Historic Sites, Department of Environmental Protection.19
E. The Borough Historian shall assist in projects of commemoration,
including the erection of monuments, historic markers and guide signs.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 53-9 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 53-9
1:42
ARTICLE III
Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted 2-21-1989 by Ord. No. 414; amended in its entirety
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
§ 53-10. Statutory nature of position.
The statute (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10 et seq.) provides for certification of
finance officers and establishes the position, qualifications, and duties of
the Chief Financial Officer for municipal governments. It defines the
responsibility of the Chief Financial Officer and clarifies the requisite
experience and educational requirements. It also prohibits a member of
the local governing body from serving as Chief Financial Officer in the
municipality and provides that tenure for a Chief Financial Officer will occur
after four years.
§ 53-11. Salary.
The municipality is not required to adopt a separate ordinance creating the
position of Chief Financial Officer. However, the municipality must adopt a
salary ordinance establishing a salary for the position.
§ 53-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-11
1:43

ARTICLE IV
Purchasing Agent
[Adopted 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 588]
§ 53-12. Office created.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-9, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Harrington Park hereby create the office of Purchasing Agent to implement
those regulations and activities as provided therein.
§ 53-13. Statutory provisions incorporated.
The Borough specifically adopts and incorporates by reference herein all
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-9 and such other provisions as may be
referenced therein.
§ 53-14. Powers and duties.20
The governing body shall appoint a designated purchasing agent with all
power and authority as provided for within the statutes and as necessary to
faithfully perform the duties of purchasing agent.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 53-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-14
1:45

ARTICLE V
Borough Administrator
[Adopted 7-15-2013 by Ord. No. 681]
§ 53-15. Authorization to employ Administrator; appointment.
The Mayor and Council are hereby authorized to employ a Borough
Administrator. Such Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council.
§ 53-16. Compensation.
The Borough Administrator shall receive such compensation as per the
Salary Ordinance range.
§ 53-17. Powers and duties of Administrator.
A. The Borough Administrator shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) Provide for the enforcement of all laws and ordinances within the
Borough.
(2) Create/prepare the agenda for and attend all meetings of the
Council and attend all meetings of the Borough except those for
which the Mayor and Council determine that attendance is not
required because of a conflict or other reason. The Borough
Administrator shall have the right to take part in the discussion on
all matters coming before the Council but shall have no right to
vote. The Borough Administrator shall be entitled to notice of all
special and regular meetings of the Council.
(3) Recommend to the Council such measures as, in his or her
judgment, he or she deems to be in the best interest of the
Borough.
(4) Propose to the Mayor and Council such personnel rules and
regulations as the Borough Administrator deems necessary to
manage the Borough personnel. These rules may cover procedures
and policies to govern the following:
(a) The administration of the position description, classification
and pay plans.
(b) Assistance with recruitment, selection, promotion, evaluation,
transfer, discipline and separation of Borough personnel.
(c) Establishment of hours of work, attendance, leave regulations
and working conditions.
(d) Maintenance and use of necessary records and forms.
(e) System of handling all grievances.
§ 53-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-17
1:47
§ 53-18. Matters directed to Borough Administrator's attention.
All offices and departments shall submit all matters requiring Council action
or attention to the Borough Administrator, who shall submit them to the
Council with recommendations as may be deemed necessary. All
departmental or employee requests shall be submitted to the Borough
Administrator, who shall provide instruction in conjunction with the Mayor
and Council as to policy and action. Except as otherwise provided by state
law or ordinance, elected and appointed Borough officers shall deal with the
administrative services of the Borough through the Borough Administrator
in conjunction with the Mayor and Council and shall not give orders to
subordinates of the Borough Administrator, either publicly or privately.
(5) Assist with the collective bargaining processes of the Borough and
recommend to the Mayor and Council collective bargaining
agreements for consideration and approval by the Council and
administer all employee organization contracts reached through
the collective bargaining process.
(6) Direct, supervise and coordinate the activities of all departments,
offices, and agencies of the Borough, except as otherwise provided
by law, and administer the affairs of the Borough to ensure that all
Borough business is accomplished efficiently and economically.
(7) Recommend to the Council the creating, consolidating, and
combining of offices, positions, departments or units of the
administrative and executive departments of the Borough.
(8) Assist the CFO and Finance Committee in preparing and
submitting to the Mayor and Council a recommended annual
budget for operations and recommended capital programs and
administer the approved budget after adoption.
(9) Evaluate Borough projects, programs, agreements, equipment and
services and make recommendations on modifications and
improvements thereto.
(10) Devote his or her entire time to the discharge of his or her official
duties.
(11) Hold such other appointive offices as may be consistent with law, as
the Mayor and Council may determine, and faithfully and honestly
discharge the duties and powers associated with such office.
B. The Borough Administrator shall perform such other duties as may be
required by the Council consistent with state statutes and the
ordinances of the Borough.
C. The powers assigned to the Borough Administrator are not intended to
diminish those powers otherwise assigned to other officers by statute or
ordinance, including but not limited to the Mayor and Council.
§ 53-17 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 53-19
1:48
§ 53-19. Removal.21
The Borough Administrator may be removed in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:9-138 with three months' notice and approval of the governing body.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 53-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-19
1:49

ARTICLE VI
Tax Collector
[Adopted with 2017 Code revisions (upon enactment, adoption
information will be inserted here)]
§ 53-20. Office created; term.
The office of Borough Tax Collector is hereby created, and the head of
that office shall be the Borough Tax Collector. The Tax Collector shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of Council for a term of four years
from the first day of January next following his/her appointment. Vacancies
other than due to the expiration of the term shall be filled by appointment
for the unexpired term.
§ 53-21. Salary.
The municipality must adopt a salary ordinance establishing a salary for the
position.
§ 53-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-21
1:51
Chapter 60
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 26. Officers and employees — See Ch. 53.
§ 53-21 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 53-21
1:52
ARTICLE I
Personnel Code
[Adopted 7-18-1997 by Ord. No. 499]
§ 60-1. Adoption of Personnel Code.
The Borough of Harrington Park hereby adopts a Personnel Code to inform
employees of existing Borough policies, procedures and work practices and
the responsibilities of employment.
§ 60-2. Adoption procedure; amendment.
The Mayor and Council shall adopt a Personnel Code by filing a copy thereof
with the Municipal Clerk, who will cause the code to be delivered to and
acknowledged by each employee of the Borough. Such code shall become
effective on the date of final passage of this article. The Mayor and Council
will from time to time review the Personnel Code and add, amend, alter or
delete any provision(s) as is determined by them to be necessary to effect
the intent of this article.
§ 60-3. Input from departments.
The Mayor and Council may, but shall not be obliged to, solicit from the
several departments input regarding the development and amendment of
the Personnel Code.
§ 60-4. Amendment procedure.
After the initial approval and filing of the Personnel Code with the Borough
Clerk, the Mayor and Council may alter, amend or modify the Personnel
Code by filing any such amendment with the Municipal Clerk, who shall
distribute copies of the proposed amendment for posting to all department
heads of the Borough within 10 days. If further filing regarding the
amendment is not received by the Clerk within 20 days of the initial filing,
the amendment or action shall be posted in the code and each employee
shall be delivered a copy of the amendment and shall sign an
acknowledgement for the receipt of the amendment.
§ 60-5. Shortening of time limitations.
Nothing in this article shall prevent the Mayor and Council from shortening
any time limitations herein as the result of any emergent condition.
§ 60-6. Recording of instruments.
The Mayor, Clerk or other such authorized representative shall execute,
deliver and record any and all instruments or papers necessary to effect the
intent of this article.
§ 60-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-7
1:53
§ 60-7. Filing of copy.22
A certified copy of the attached Personnel Code along with this article shall
be filed with the Borough Clerk.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 60-7 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 60-7
1:54
ARTICLE II
Personnel Practices and Employee Manual
[Adopted 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 578]
§ 60-8. Establishment of titles for public employment.
The Borough of Harrington Park shall by ordinance establish titles for
public employment by the Borough of Harrington Park and salary ranges for
Borough of Harrington Park employees.
§ 60-9. Adoption of personnel policies. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 658]
The Mayor and Council shall by resolution adopt and amend from time to
time an Employee Manual and procedures, including rules concerning the
hiring and termination of employees, terms and conditions of employment,
and regulations required to comply with applicable federal and state
employment-related law. The Employee Manual adopted pursuant to said
resolution(s) shall be applicable to all officials, appointees, employees,
prospective employees, volunteers and independent contractors of the
Borough of Harrington Park.
§ 60-10. Implementation and enforcement.
The Mayor shall be responsible for implementing and enforcing the
personnel practices adopted by ordinance or resolution authorized pursuant
to this article. If there is a conflict between said personnel practices and
any duly adopted and lawful collective bargaining agreement, personnel
services contract or federal or state law, the terms and conditions of that
contract or law shall prevail. In all other cases, the practices adopted
pursuant to this article shall prevail.
§ 60-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-10
1:55

ARTICLE III
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 7-28-2008 by Ord. No. 628]
§ 60-11. Program created.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq., the Mayor and Council of the Borough
of Harrington Park hereby create the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program pursuant to New Jersey statutes and the New Jersey
Administrative Code.
§ 60-12. Incorporation of statutory provisions.
The Borough specifically adopts and incorporates by reference herein all
provisions of N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq. and such other provisions as may be
referenced therein.
§ 60-13. Reservation of right to designate qualified positions.
The Borough of Harrington Park hereby reserves unto itself the right by
ordinance to later designate such positions and/or employees who may
qualify for such Defined Contribution Retirement Program.
§ 60-14. Execution of document to effectuate provisions.
The Borough Clerk and such other authorized representative shall sign and
execute any such document to effect the provisions herein.
§ 60-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-14
1:57
Chapter 66
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 33. Personnel policies — See Ch. 60.
§ 60-14 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 60-14
1:58
ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted 4-1-1968 by Ord. No. 220 (Ch. 32 of the 1967 Code);
amended in its entirety 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 387]
§ 66-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established, as an executive and enforcement function of
the municipal government of the Borough of Harrington Park, a Police
Department of and for the Borough.
§ 66-2. Members, officers and personnel.
The Police Department shall consist of the following:
A. The Chief of Police or in his/her absence the Deputy Chief of Police or
Director shall be the head of the Police Department and shall be directly
responsible to the Police Committee, as the appropriate authority
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:A:14-118, for the efficiency and routine day-today
operations of the Police Department and shall, pursuant to policies
established from time to time by the Police Committee, and pursuant to
the rules and regulations established from time to time by the Mayor
and Council for the government of the Police Department and for the
discipline of its members (the "Police Rules and Regulations"), as said
Police Rules and Regulations are from time to time amended,
supplemented and/or superseded by directives from any law
enforcement agency (including, but not limited to, the State Attorney
General and the Bergen County Prosecutor) or supplemented by
general and/or special orders issued by the Chief of Police or in his/her
absence the Deputy Chief of Police: [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No.
653; 10-21-2013 by Ord. No. 683]
(1) Administer and enforce the Police Rules and Regulations (as
amended and/or supplemented) and any special emergency
directives of the Police Committee for the disposition and discipline
of the Police Department and its officers and personnel.
(2) Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the Police Department.
(3) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
(4) Delegate such of his/her authority as he/she may deem necessary
for the efficient operation of the Police Department to be exercised
under his/her direction and supervision.
(5) Report at least monthly to the Police Committee in such form as
shall be prescribed by such Committee on the operation of the
Police Department during the preceding month and make such
other reports as may be requested by such Committee.
§ 66-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-2
1:59
§ 66-3. Terms of office. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 653]
The terms of office of the Chief of Police or Director and such other
members, officers and personnel as shall be deemed necessary by the
Mayor and Council, their compensation and their powers, functions and
duties shall be such as the Mayor and Council shall deem necessary for the
effective government of the Police Department.
§ 66-4. Supervision and control of Department. [Amended
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 653]
(6) Personally, or through a designee, promptly investigate any
conduct by any member or employee of the Police Department
which constitutes or may constitute an unauthorized absence, or a
dereliction of duty, or improper conduct, or a violation of any law or
any of the Police Rules and Regulations (as amended and/or
supplemented) and, if the Chief of Police or Director deems it
appropriate, he/she may cause written charges or a letter of
reprimand to be filed with the Borough Clerk pursuant to law.
(7) In all cases in which, in the discretion of the Chief of Police or
Director, emergency discipline is required, he/she may immediately
suspend with pay any member or employee of the Police
Department and, in the event of such a suspension, he/she shall, as
soon as practically possible thereafter, report such action to the
Mayor and Council.
B. Such other members, officers and personnel as shall be deemed
necessary by the Mayor and Council.
A. The Police Department shall be under such supervision and control of
the Police Committee of the Mayor and Council as is delegated to the
Police Committee from time to time by the Mayor and Council. The
Police Committee shall, on a day-to-day basis, be the appropriate
authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 to which the Police Chief or in
his/her absence the Deputy Chief of Police or Director shall be
immediately responsible for the efficiency and routine day-to-day
operations of the Police Department and shall have the authority to
establish from time to time policies to ensure the efficiency and orderly
operation of the Police Department. In addition, it shall be the
responsibility of the Police Committee to make recommendations to the
Mayor and Council with respect to decisions such as, but not limited to,
hiring, firing and promoting personnel; compensation; the purchase of
equipment; the organization of the Police Department; and all other like
matters. [Amended 10-21-2013 by Ord. No. 683]
B. The Police Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by the Borough Council. The Police Committee shall consist of three
members of the Borough Council. One member shall be Chairperson of
the Police Committee, and he/she shall be known as the "Police
Commissioner" of the Borough. Another member shall be its Vice
§ 66-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 66-4
1:60
§ 66-5. Police officers and other personnel.
§ 66-6. Testing.
All members, officers and personnel of the Police Department shall, before
appointment or promotion, be required to pass such physical, psychological,
psychiatric, medical, written and oral examinations as may be required by
the Mayor and Council or the Police Committee. Subject to the limitations
imposed by law, and at the sole expense of the Borough, each member,
officer and other employee of the Police Department shall, at any time the
Mayor and Council or the Police Committee deems it necessary for the
efficient government of the Police Department, submit to and cooperate
in any and all physical, psychological, psychiatric and other examinations
directed by the Mayor and Council or the Police Committee.
§ 66-7. Appointments.
All appointments to the Police Department shall be made by the Mayor upon
the recommendation of the Police Committee and shall be confirmed by the
Borough Council. Appointments may be made to fill vacancies due to any
cause, and additional permanent members and other personnel (for whom
Chairperson. Each appointment shall be for a term not exceeding one
year. The Police Committee, the Police Chair, the Vice Chairperson of
the Police Committee who shall act as Police Chair in the absence of
the Police Chair, and the third member of the Police Committee shall
have such authority in connection with police or related matters as is
from time to time conferred upon or delegated to each by ordinance or
resolution of the Mayor and Council. The Police Committee shall have
the power and duty to act to provide for the health, safety or welfare of
the municipality in an emergency situation through special emergency
directives.
A. In addition to the Chief of Police or Director, the permanent members of
the Police Department may, in the discretion of the Mayor and Council,
include one Deputy Chief of Police, one Captain of Police, two
Lieutenants of Police and four Sergeants of Police, as well as such
number of patrol officers as the Mayor and Council deem necessary.
[Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 653; 10-21-2013 by Ord. No.
683; 11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 719]
B. Other personnel of the Police Department may, in the discretion of the
Mayor and Council, include probationary police officers, special police
officers, school marshals, police matrons, dispatchers, clerical
employees, secretaries and others.
C. All permanent members and officers and all other personnel of the
Police Department shall be subject to all laws enacted for the conduct of
permanent members and officers or employees of police departments in
the State of New Jersey and shall abide by the provisions of the Police
Rules and Regulations.
§ 66-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-7
1:61
a sufficient appropriation has been provided in the annual budget and tax
ordinance) may be appointed. All such appointees shall have complied with
the requirements as set forth in the laws of the State of New Jersey applying
to police departments and shall be appointed on probation for a term not
exceeding one year from the date of said appointment, during which term of
probation their appointments may be revoked in the discretion of the Mayor
and Council.
§ 66-7.1. Appointment and promotion of officers. [Added
11-18-2019 by Ord. No. 742]
A. Promotion of officers: Captain, Lieutenant and Sergeant.
(1) Goals. The Borough of Harrington Park desires to promote the most
qualified candidates to the ranks of Captain, Lieutenant and
Sergeant. This section establishes the eligibility requirements and
the process for promotion to those ranks. In accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129, promotion of any officer shall be made from
the membership of the Harrington Park Police Department.
(2) Eligibility requirements.
(a) Sergeant. For promotion to Sergeant, no person shall be
eligible for such promotion unless he or she:
[1] Shall have served as a full-time police officer in the
Harrington Park Police Department for at least three
years;
[2] Shall be graded on all Harrington Park Police Department
performance standards in his or her three most recent
annual performance evaluations conducted by his or her
superiors; and
[3] Shall possess an associate's degree, or 64 college credits.
This education requirement shall not apply to officers
employed by the Harrington Park Police Department as of
the date of the adoption of this section.
(b) Lieutenant. For promotion to Lieutenant, no person shall be
eligible for such promotion unless he or she:
[1] Shall have served as a full-time officer on the Harrington
Park Police Department for at least five years;
[2] Shall be graded on all Harrington Park Police Department
performance standards in his or her three most recent
annual performance evaluations conducted by his or her
superiors; and
[3] Shall possess a bachelor's degree or higher. This education
requirement shall not apply to officers employed by the
§ 66-7 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 66-7.1
1:62
Harrington Park Police Department as of the date of the
adoption of this section.
(c) Captain. For promotion to Captain, no person shall be eligible
for such promotion unless he or she:
[1] Shall have served at least five years as a full-time officer on
the Harrington Park Police Department;
[2] Shall be graded on all Harrington Park Police Department
performance standards in his or her three most recent
annual performance evaluations conducted by his or her
superiors; and
[3] Shall possess a bachelor's degree or higher. This education
requirement shall not apply to officers employed by the
Harrington Park Police Department as of the date of the
adoption of this section.
(3) Process.
(a) In creating the list of eligible candidates for promotion, the
Interview Committee (comprised of the Borough Police
Committee and the Chief of Police) shall score/rank each such
candidate as follows:
[1] Each eligible candidate shall construct, write and provide
an original essay, on a topic to be provided by the Chief of
Police, which will be scored by the Interview Committee.
The results of such written essay shall constitute 35% of
the overall total score for each eligible candidate based on
the score accorded to each eligible candidate arrived at
averaging the total scores the individual members of the
Essay Committee. The total possible points for this essay
shall be 100 points. For example, a candidate whose
average score for the essay is 90 points shall receive 31.5
points towards his/her overall total score (90 x 35% = 31.5
points).
[2] Each eligible candidate shall be interviewed by the
Interview Committee. All candidates so interviewed by the
Interview Committee shall be asked the same questions.
The results of such oral interview by the Interview
Committee, and its consideration of the candidate's past
performance based upon evaluations conducted during the
preceding three years, shall constitute 65% of the overall
total score for each eligible candidate based on the score
accorded to each eligible candidate arrived at by
averaging the total scores of the individual members of the
Interview Committee for such interview. The total possible
points for this oral interview shall be 100 points. For
example, a candidate who receives a total of 90 points for
§ 66-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-7.1
1:63
this oral interview shall receive 58.5 points towards his/
her overall total score (90 x 65% = 58.5 points).
Assessment of any candidate by the Interview Panel shall
include at least the following: employee evaluations;
knowledge of police procedure and supervisory skills;
merit; productivity; demonstrated ability and
accomplishments; in-service education and specialized
training; specialized assignments; attitude and demeanor,
comportment and interpersonal skills; reputation within
the Department for fairness, lack of bias and cooperative
policing; professional and civic commendations; seniority.
(b) Candidates shall not discuss any of the questions or disclose
any information about the process.
(c) The candidate(s) receiving the highest total combined score(s)
as calculated by reference to Subsection A(3)(a)[1] and [2]
above shall be deemed the first candidate recommended to the
Council for promotion.
(d) Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the
Borough of Harrington Park reserves the right to waive the
essay and/or oral interview components of the promotional
process when the number of eligible candidates for a particular
position is equal to or less than the number of vacant positions
and the Borough intends to fill all vacant positions, or create a
position by ordinance. If the Borough elects to so waive the
essay and/or oral interview components, all other components
of the promotional process within this section not so waived
shall remain in effect.
(e) Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the
Borough of Harrington Park reserves the right to relax and/or
waive the eligibility requirements for a particular position(s) if
the number of eligible candidates for such position(s) is less
than the number of vacant positions and the Borough intends
to fill all vacant positions. If the Borough so elects to relax or
waive the eligibility requirements, all candidates for the
particular position(s), including those who are eligible as a
result of the waiver or relaxation of such requirements, shall
not be required to undergo or participate in the applicable
process set forth hereinabove.
(f) Nothing herein shall be construed as conferring a right upon
any candidate to promotion; the decision of the Mayor and
Council with respect to such appointment/promotion shall be
absolute and the Mayor and Council in its sole and absolute
discretion may determine not to create and/or fill any vacancy
within the ranks of the Police Department.
(4) Announcement of promotional opportunity.
§ 66-7.1 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 66-7.1
1:64
§ 66-8. Salaries.
The salaries to be paid to the Chief of Police, as well as the permanent
members and other personnel of the Police Department, shall, subject to
collective negotiations where applicable, be determined annually by the
Salary Ordinance.
§ 66-9. Suspension and removal of members and officers;
complaint; hearing.
(a) Based on an existing vacancy and after approval by the
governing body, which may be withdrawn at any time, the
Chief will announce when a promotional opportunity occurs in
a given position through an announcement posted at police
headquarters. The announcement shall state the position
which is open, eligibility requirements, and a request that each
officer submit a letter of intent, along with a standard businesstype
resume, within 10 days of the date of the posting. It shall
also state that the process requires:
[1] A written essay on a topic to be provided by the Chief that
will be assessed by the Chief and the Essay Committee;
and
[2] An oral interview by the Interview Committee.
(b) For any eligible officer who does not wish to be considered,
such officer shall provide a letter of declination declining to be
considered. If a letter of intent or letter of declination is not
received within the ten-day period, such officer shall be
deemed to have declined to be considered. The ten-day
deadline may be extended by the Chief for good cause.
(5) Duration of eligibility list.
(a) A list of the results will be posted and an eligibility list will only
remain in effect for each announced vacancy, and shall not be
maintained once said announced vacancy is filled. Candidates
may review their individual results through the Chief of Police.
(b) After the expiration of the eligibility list, candidates will be
required to reapply for any subsequent promotional process.
B. Promotion of officers: Chief of Police. The Chief of Police and Deputy
Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the governing body. The process for Captains, Lieutenants
and Sergeants shall not apply.
A. Except as otherwise provided by law, and as provided in N.J.S.A.
40A:14-147, no permanent member or officer of the Police Department
or force shall be removed from his/her office, employment or position
for political reasons or for any cause other than incapacity, misconduct
§ 66-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-9
1:65
or disobedience of the Police Rules and Regulations, nor shall any
such member or officer be suspended, removed, fined or reduced in
rank from or in office, employment, or position therein except for just
cause as hereinbefore provided and then only upon a written complaint
setting forth the charge or charges against such member or officer.
B. Said complaint shall be signed by the Chief of Police or in his/her
absence the Deputy Chief of Police or Director, or in their absence, the
officer in charge, and filed in the office of the Borough Clerk, except
where the complaint is against the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of
Police or Director, in which case the complaint shall be signed by the
Police Chair or any member of the Police Committee or the Mayor and
filed in the office of the Borough Clerk. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord.
No. 653; 10-21-2013 by Ord. No. 68323]
C. After the filing of the complaint, it shall be reviewed by the Police
Committee, which shall report thereon to the Mayor and Council. If the
Mayor and Council deem it appropriate, they shall cause a copy of the
complaint to be served upon the member or officer charged, together
with a notice of a designated hearing thereon by the Mayor and
Council, which hearing shall be commenced not less than 10 nor more
than 30 days from the date of service of the complaint. A failure to
comply with the foregoing provisions as to the service of the complaint
shall require a dismissal of the complaint.
D. As provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-149.1, any police officer of the Police
Department or force charged under the laws of the State of New Jersey,
another state or the United States with an offense may be suspended
with pay by resolution of the Mayor and Council until: i) the case
against him/her is disposed of at trial; ii) the complaint is dismissed; or
iii) the prosecution is terminated; provided, however, that if a grand
jury returns an indictment against him/her, or he/she is charged with an
offense which is the equivalent of a high misdemeanor (as the phrase
"high misdemeanor" is used in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-149.1) or which involves
moral turpitude or dishonesty, he/she may be suspended without pay
until: i) the case against him/her is disposed of at trial; ii) the complaint
is dismissed; or iii) the prosecution is terminated.
E. As provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122, the Mayor and Council may, by
resolution, permanently terminate the employment of any permanent
member or officer of the Police Department and force who shall be
absent from duty without just cause or leave of absence for a
continuous period of five days.
F. Although the Mayor and Council shall be the sole authority for the
imposition of any discipline against permanent members and officers
and other personnel of the Police Department, the Mayor and Council
may, in their sole discretion, to be exercised by resolution, either
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 66-9 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 66-9
1:66
constitute themselves as a committee of the whole to hear a complaint
brought pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147 or delegate the hearing
function to; i) the Police Committee; ii) the Chief of Police or Director;
iii) an independent hearing officer or tribunal; or iv) one or more
members of the Mayor and Council designated as a hearing officer or
tribunal; provided, however, that all charges deemed by the Mayor and
Council to be of a serious nature and any charge made against the
Chief of Police or Director shall be heard by either: i) the Mayor and
Council; ii) the Police Committee; or iii) an independent hearing officer
or tribunal. In deciding who shall conduct a hearing on a complaint, the
Mayor and Council may consider, among other factors, the nature and
severity of the charges, the possible bias and lack of impartiality of one
or more members of the Mayor and Council, and the like. [Amended
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 653]
G. At the hearing on the complaint, the matter may be presented by the
Chief of Police, Deputy Police Chief, Director, or officer in charge, alone
or, in the discretion of the Mayor and Council, by the Chief of Police,
Deputy Police Chief, Director, or officer in charge, with the assistance of
special counsel appointed by the Mayor and Council. [Amended
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 653; 10-21-2013 by Ord. No. 68324]
H. The person charged shall be afforded due process, including but not
limited to the right to be represented by an attorney of his/her choice at
his/her own expense, the ability to present evidence and witnesses on
his/her behalf, the right to face and question under oath the accuser(s)
and witness(es), and the right to discovery. The burden of proof shall
rest with the charging party, and, as in all civil matters, the standard of
proof shall be proof by a preponderance of the evidence. The hearing
officer or tribunal may, in the discretion of the Mayor and Council, be
represented and advised at, and in connection with, the hearing by the
office of the Borough Attorney.
I. The hearing officer or tribunal shall make and deliver to the Mayor and
Council findings of fact and shall present to the Mayor and Council
recommended determinations of innocence or guilt as to each of the
specified charges. The Mayor and Council shall have the sole and final
authority to impose discipline, which may include a fine, reduction in
rank, suspension or removal.
J. The Mayor and Council shall cause the hearing to be recorded verbatim
either stenographically or through audio-electronic means. The
stenographic notes shall be transcribed. The transcripts or tapes of the
hearing shall be preserved so that they shall be available for review by
the members of the Mayor and Council. Prior to imposing any discipline
upon a permanent member or officer or other employee of the Police
Department, each member of the Mayor and Council voting on the
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 66-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-9
1:67
§ 66-10. Repealer; continuance of proceedings for prior offenses.
All prior ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with any term
of this article are hereby superseded and repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency; provided, however, that the adoption of this article shall not
prevent or bar the continuance or institution of any proceedings for offenses
heretofore committed in violation of preexisting ordinances of the Borough
or any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 66-11. Chain of authority. [Added 7-19-2004 by Ord. No. 572]
matter shall, unless he/she was physically present throughout the
entire hearing, review either the transcripts or the tapes of the hearing.
K. After conducting the hearing, or after reviewing the transcripts or tapes
of the hearing and the findings of fact and recommendations of the
hearing officer or tribunal, the Mayor and Council shall, by resolution,
specify what discipline, if any, shall be imposed upon the person or
persons charged.
L. All charges of a criminal nature shall be referred to the appropriate law
enforcement authority.
A. The police force shall be comprised of such number of personnel as the
Mayor and Council shall resolve to employ but not to exceed 11 patrol
officers, four Sergeants, two Lieutenants, one Captain, one Deputy
Chief of Police and one Chief or Director. [Amended 2-22-2011 by
Ord. No. 653; 10-21-2013 by Ord. No. 68325]
B. The chain of authority and reporting shall be as follows: the Chief or
Director shall have authority over all lesser rank, followed by the
Deputy Chief of Police, the Captain, followed by the Lieutenants,
followed by the Sergeants, followed by the patrol officers assigned as
"Senior Officer, officer in charge," and if no such designation, then in
the absence of personnel with greater rank, the most senior patrol
officer. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 653; 10-21-2013 by Ord.
No. 68326]
C. (Reserved)27
D. The entire regulation of the Police Department is subject to and
specifically incorporates by reference all Attorney General guidelines
as to conduct and discipline, all statutes and decisions of the court that
in any way relate to the operation of this Police Department, any other
regulation or guide that may be enacted by law enforcement agencies
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
27.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding salaries, was repealed 2-22-2011 by Ord.
No. 653.
§ 66-9 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 66-11
1:68
that pertains to the operation of this Police Department and the
regulations and guidelines established by any state, county or
superseding authority and this the provision of Ordinance No. 387, as
amended or modified.28
28.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 387 forms the basis of this article. See history under article
title. Original Subsection E, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658.
§ 66-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-11
1:69

ARTICLE II
Mutual Aid
[Adopted 6-20-1977 by Ord. No. 294 (Ch. 31A of the 1967 Code)]
§ 66-12. Authorization to enter into agreements.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Harrington Park are hereby
authorized to enter into reciprocal agreements with other communities for
providing police assistance and to receive similar police assistance from
said communities.
§ 66-13. Response to calls. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 653]
The Police Department of the Borough of Harrington Park shall respond to
such calls for assistance when so ordered by the Chief of Police or Director
or his/her designee and shall provide such personnel or equipment as
requested to the extent possible without endangering persons or property
within the Borough of Harrington Park.
§ 66-14. Casualties or deaths.29
If any member or officer of the Harrington Park Police Department, while
rendering such assistance in other communities, shall suffer a casualty or
death, he/she or his/her designee or legal representative shall be entitled
to all salary, pension rights, workers' compensation and other benefits as if
such casualty or death occurred in the performance of duty in the Borough
of Harrington Park, where such duties are normally carried on.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 66-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-14
1:71
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 85
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
§ 85-1. General program purposes; procedure; definitions.
A. Affordable housing obligation.
(1) This chapter sets forth regulations regarding the low- and
moderate-income housing units in the Borough of Harrington Park
consistent with the provisions known as the "Substantive Rules of
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing," the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls ("UHAC"), N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.,
and the Borough's constitutional obligation to provide a fair share
of affordable housing for low- and moderate-income households. In
addition, this chapter applies requirements for very-low-income
housing established in P.L. 2008, c. 46 (the "Roberts Bill").30
(2) This chapter is intended to assure that low- and moderate-income
units ("affordable units") are created with controls on affordability
over time and that low- and moderate-income households shall
occupy these units. This chapter shall apply except where
inconsistent with applicable law.
(3) The Borough of Harrington Park Planning Board has adopted a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal
Land Use Law at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The Fair Share Plan has
been endorsed by the governing body. The Fair Share Plan
describes the ways Harrington Park Borough shall address its fair
share for low- and moderate-income housing as determined by the
Superior Court and documented in the Housing Element.
(4) This chapter implements and incorporates the Fair Share Plan and
addresses the requirements of the Act and regulations thereunder,
as may be amended and supplemented.
(5) The Borough shall file monitoring reports with the Superior Court
and place the reports on its municipal website. Any plan evaluation
report of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and monitoring
prepared by the Special Master shall be available to the public at
the Borough of Harrington Park Municipal Building, 85 Harriot
Avenue, Harrington Park, New Jersey.
B. Definitions. The following terms when used in this chapter shall have
the meanings given in this section:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A second dwelling unit on a lot containing
a single-family dwelling, which existed at the time of the adoption
30.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1 et seq.
§ 66-14 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-1
1:72
of this chapter, which second unit may be located within a principal
structure, added to a principal structure or located in a separate
accessory building. The creation of such a dwelling unit shall be clearly
incidental to the primary use of the property as a single-family dwelling
and shall in no way confer upon the property owner any future rights to
subdivide the existing lot in order to place each unit on a separate lot
unless such a subdivision and the structures involved could conform to
all municipal zoning standards. Accessory apartments shall conform to
the requirements of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for the
administration of affordable units in accordance with this chapter,
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median
income at which restricted units in an affordable housing development
are affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household; in the case of an ownership unit, that the
sales price for the unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6, as may be amended and supplemented, and, in the case of a
rental unit, that the rent for the unit conforms to the standards set forth
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE DEVELOPMENT — A housing development all or a
portion of which consists of restricted units.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is
not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a 100% affordable development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a
municipal Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a
municipality's fair share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act, and/or funded through an affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that:
All the residents of the development where the unit is situated are
62 years or older; or
(1)
§ 85-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-1
1:73
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which
households live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing
facilities, central heat and common areas. Alternate living
arrangements include, but are not limited to: transitional facilities for
the homeless, Class A, B, C, D, and E boarding homes, as regulated
by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs; residential health
care facilities as regulated by the New Jersey Department of Health;
group homes for the developmentally disabled and mentally ill as
licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey Department of Human
Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living
services are available when needed for four or more adult persons
unrelated to the proprietor and that offers units containing, at a
minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and
a lockable door on the unit entrance.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Harrington Park, Bergen County, New
Jersey.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, which is in, but not
of, the Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey,
that was established under the New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.).
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Community Affairs.
CONSTRUCTION — New construction and additions, but does not
include alterations, reconstruction, renovations, and repairs as those
terms are defined under the State Uniform Construction Code
promulgated pursuant to the State Uniform Construction Code Act, P.L.
1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.).
COUNCIL — The Council on Affordable Housing, established pursuant
to P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et al.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
At least 80% of the units are occupied by one person that is 55
years or older; or
(2)
The development has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for
older persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing
Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
(3)
§ 85-1 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-1
1:74
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety
code violations that require the repair or replacement of a major
system. A "major system" includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including
septic systems), lead paint abatement and/or load-bearing structural
systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development including
the holder of an option to contract or purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill,
and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or
land or extension of use of land, for which permission may be required
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for
the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with Sections 1, 5 and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A.
54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not
necessarily limited to, new construction, the conversion of a
nonresidential structure to residential and the creation of new
affordable units through the reconstruction of a vacant residential
structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the median household
income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a lowincome
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include but are not limited to weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including
septic systems), lead paint abatement or load-bearing structural
systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME HOUSEHOLD — The median income by household
size for the applicable county, as adopted annually by COAH or
approved by the New Jersey Superior Court.
§ 85-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-1
1:75
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT — Any development which includes both
a nonresidential development component and a residential
development component, and shall include developments for which:
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the
median household income.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than
the transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of
ownership between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial
decree of divorce or judicial separation, but not including sales to third
parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a result
of inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's deed to
a class A beneficiary and the transfer of ownership by court order.
NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT —
NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT FEE — The fee authorized to be
imposed pursuant to Sections 32 through 38 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7).
There is a common developer for both the residential development
component and the nonresidential development component,
provided that, for purposes of this definition, multiple persons
and entities may be considered a common developer if there is
a contractual relationship among them obligating each entity to
develop at least a portion of the residential or nonresidential
development, or both, or otherwise to contribute resources to the
development; and
(1)
The residential and nonresidential developments are located on
the same lot or adjoining lots, including but not limited to lots
separated by a street, a river, or another geographical feature.
(2)
Any building or structure, or portion thereof, including but not
limited to any appurtenant improvements, which is designated to
a use group other than a residential use group according to the
State Uniform Construction Code promulgated to effectuate the
State Uniform Construction Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq.), including any subsequent amendments or
revisions thereto;
(1)
(2) Hotels, motels, vacation timeshares, and child-care facilities; and
The entirety of all continuing care facilities within a continuing
care retirement community which is subject to the Continuing Care
Retirement Community Regulation and Financial Disclosure Act,
P.L. 1986, c. 103 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-330 et seq.).
(3)
§ 85-1 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-1
1:76
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently
income-eligible households are selected for placement in affordable
housing units such that no preference is given to one applicant over
another except for purposes of matching household income and size
with an appropriately priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES AND COMMUNITY CENTER — Any
indoor or outdoor buildings, spaces, structures, or improvements
intended for active or passive recreation, including but not limited
to ball fields, meeting halls, and classrooms, accommodating either
organized or informal activity. "Senior center" means any recreational
facility or community center with activities and services oriented
towards serving senior citizens.
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each
housing region affordable to a four-person household with an income
at 80% of the regional median as defined by approved regional income
limits.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or
reconstruction of any building or structure, pursuant to the
Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-6.
RELATING TO THE PROVISION OF HOUSING — Shall be liberally
construed to include the construction, maintenance, or operation of
housing, including but not limited to the provision of services to such
housing and the funding of any of the above.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including
the rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid
utilities computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA
for its Section 8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not
include charges for food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, but does not include
a market-rate unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
SPECIAL MASTER — An expert appointed by a judge to make sure
that judicial orders are followed. A master's function is essentially
investigative, compiling evidence or documents to inform some future
action by the court.
SPENDING PLAN — A method of allocating funds collected and to
be collected pursuant to an approved municipal development fee
ordinance, or pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1 et al.)
for the purpose of meeting the housing needs of low- and moderateincome
individuals.
TREASURER — The Treasurer of the State of New Jersey.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
§ 85-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-1
1:77
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income equal to 30% or less of the median household
income.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
very-low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and
crawl space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm
windows, replacement storm doors, replacement windows and
replacement doors, and is considered a major system for rehabilitation.
C. Accessory apartment program.
(1) All accessory apartments shall comply with the following:
(a) Accessory apartments shall be a permitted accessory use in the
R-1, R-2 and R-3 zones.
(b) Accessory apartments shall conform to the bulk requirements
of the zone in which they are located, except for minimum lot
size. For the purposes of this chapter, detached accessory
apartments shall be considered structures, and accessory
apartments attached to a principal dwelling shall be
considered a principal structure.
(c) The minimum lot size for accessory apartments in all zones
shall be 7,500 square feet, except that where a property which
is less than 7,500 square feet already contains an existing
accessory structure which can be converted into an accessory
apartment without increase in its building footprint, such a
unit can be counted as a qualifying accessory apartment,
subject to all of the provisions and limitations specified herein.
(d) Accessory apartments shall comply with all applicable codes
and standards of the State of New Jersey and the Borough of
Harrington Park. Each apartment shall contain at least 500
square feet of gross floor area, a minimum of two rooms and
shall also contain a bathroom and kitchen facilities. Accessory
apartments shall also have a separate entrance and, where
attached to a principal structure, shall not have direct internal
access.
(e) Accessory apartments shall be rented only to a household
which is either a low- or moderate-income household in
accordance with the rules of the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing (COAH) at the time of initial occupancy.
Rents shall be affordable to low- and moderate-income
households and include appropriate utility allowances, in
accordance with COAH regulations. One-half of the accessory
apartments created shall be for low-income households; the
other half shall be for moderate-income households.
§ 85-1 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-1
1:78
(f) Properties containing accessory apartments shall be deed
restricted to ensure that the accessory apartment shall be
rented only to a low- or moderate-income household for a
period of at least 10 years. Said deed restriction shall run with
the land and shall be assignable to all successors or heirs.
(g) Each accessory apartment shall be connected to adequate
potable water and sewage disposal systems.
(h) Accessory apartments shall be affirmatively marketed in
accordance with COAH regulations within the housing region
of the Borough of Harrington Park.
(i) The maximum height of any detached accessory structure
containing an accessory apartment shall not exceed the
maximum height permitted for principal structures in the zone.
(j) In no case shall a detached accessory structure containing an
accessory apartment be located closer to a public street than
the principal structure, except in the case of an existing
accessory structure where no expansion is required.
(k) A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided
for an accessory apartment, in addition to the off-street
parking already provided on site for the principal structure.
(l) No accessory apartment created as a result of this section or
these regulations shall exceed the gross floor area of the
existing principal dwelling on the lot.
(2) Administrative requirements for accessory apartment program.
(a) The Borough of Harrington Park shall designate an
administrative entity to administer the accessory apartment
program.
[1] The Borough or its assignee shall administer the accessory
apartment program, including advertising, incomequalifying
prospective renters, setting rents and annual
rent increases, maintaining a waiting list, distributing the
subsidy, securing certificates of occupancy, qualifying
properties, handling application forms, filing deed
restrictions and monitoring reports and affirmatively
marketing the accessory apartment program.
[2] The Borough shall only deny an application for an
accessory apartment if the project is not in conformance
with COAH regulations, the municipal development
ordinances or this section.
[3] In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.931 of the COAH
regulations, the Borough shall provide $10,000 to
subsidize the physical creation of an accessory apartment
§ 85-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-1
1:79
conforming to the requirements of this chapter and all
other COAH requirements. Prior to the grant of such a
subsidy and prior to the issuance of a building permit,
the owner shall enter into a written agreement with the
Borough of Harrington Park ensuring that:
[a] The subsidy will be used to create the accessory
apartment; and
[b] The apartment shall meet the requirements of this
section and COAH regulations.
(b) Applicants seeking to create an accessory apartment shall
submit the following prior to the issuance of a building permit:
[1] A sketch showing floor plans depicting the size and
location of the rooms within the accessory structure and
its relationship to the principal structure.
[2] A site plan on a current survey depicting the location of all
existing and proposed structures on site, parking and
driveways, and clearly indicating all dimensions.
[3] Building elevations showing all exterior building
modifications proposed, including specifying materials,
colors and window locations.
(c) The Borough hereby appoints the Harrington Park Affordable
Housing Commission as the agency responsible for the
administration, marketing, advertising and implementation of
this section pursuant to COAH regulations.
(3) Sunset clause for accessory apartment program. The provisions of
this chapter permitting accessory apartments shall become null
and void, having no further force or effect upon the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for the sixth accessory apartment in the
Borough of Harrington Park. The administrative provisions shall
remain in full force and effect, unless otherwise modified by COAH
regulations, until the last deed restriction expires.
D. Borough-wide mandatory set-aside.
(1) A multifamily or single-family development providing a minimum of
five new housing units created through any future development
application, municipal rezoning or Zoning Board action, use or
density variance, redevelopment plan, or rehabilitation plan is
required to include an affordable housing set-aside of 20% if the
affordable units will be for sale and 15% if the affordable units will
be for rent. This requirement does not give any developer the right
31.Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B-5.1b, Chapter 93, Substantive Rules of
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period Beginning June 6, 1994,
expired on 10-16-2016.
§ 85-1 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-1
1:80
to any such rezoning, variance or other relief, or establish any
obligation on the part of Harrington Park Borough to grant such
rezoning, variance or other relief. No subdivision shall be permitted
or approved for the purpose of avoiding compliance with this
requirement.
(2) The requirement of § 85-1D(1) above shall not apply to any sites or
specific zones otherwise identified in the Borough's Settlement
Agreement with Fair Share Housing Center dated November 6,
2017, or in the Borough's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
adopted by the Borough Planning Board and endorsed by the
Borough Council, for which density and set-aside standards shall be
governed by the specific standards set forth therein.
E. New construction. The following general guidelines apply to all newly
constructed developments that contain low- and moderate-income
housing units, including any currently unanticipated future
developments that will provide low- and moderate-income housing
units:
(1) Phasing. Final site plan or subdivision approval shall be contingent
upon the affordable housing development meeting the following
phasing schedule for low- and moderate-income units:
Maximum Percentage of
Market-Rate Units
Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25% 0%
25%+1 10%
50% 50%
75% 75%
90% 100%
(2) Design. In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, lowand
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market
units.
(3) Utilities. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating
source as market units within the affordable development.
(4) Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units.
(a) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between lowand
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd
number of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a
low-income unit.
§ 85-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-1
1:81
(b) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted
units within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income
units.
(c) Within rental developments, of the total number of affordable
rental units, at least 13% shall be affordable to very-lowincome
households.
(d) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such
that:
[1] The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and
moderate-income units;
[2] At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
[3] At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
[4] The remaining units may be allocated among two- and
three-bedroom units at the discretion of the developer.
(e) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be
structured such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the
number of age-restricted low- and moderate-income units
within the inclusionary development. The standard may be met
by having all one-bedroom units or by having a two-bedroom
unit for each efficiency unit.
(5) Accessibility requirements.
(a) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be
subject to the technical design standards of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
(b) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units
in other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit
is attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the
following features:
[1] An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
[2] An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
[3] An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor;
[4] An interior accessible route of travel shall not be required
between stories within an individual unit;
§ 85-1 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-1
1:82
[5] An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a
door, or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first
floor; and
[6] An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that the Borough has
collected funds from the developer sufficient to make 10%
of the adaptable entrances in the development accessible:
[a] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[b] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Borough's affordable housing trust
fund sufficient to install accessible entrances in 10%
of the affordable units that have been constructed
with adaptable entrances.
[c] The funds deposited under Subsection E(5)(b)[6][b]
above shall be used by the Borough for the sole
purpose of making the adaptable entrance of any
affordable unit accessible when requested to do so by
a person with a disability who occupies or intends to
occupy the unit and requires an accessible entrance.
[d] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a
design plan and cost estimate for the conversion from
adaptable to accessible entrances to the Construction
Official of Harrington Park Borough.
[e] Once the Construction Official has determined that
the design plan to convert the unit entrances from
adaptable to accessible meet the requirements of the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the
cost estimate of such conversion is reasonable,
payment shall be made to Harrington Park's
affordable housing trust fund in care of the Municipal
Treasurer who shall ensure that the funds are
deposited into the affordable housing trust fund and
appropriately earmarked.
[f] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall
not be required where an entity can demonstrate that
it is impracticable to meet the requirements.
Determinations of site impracticability shall be in
compliance with the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-7.
(6) Maximum rents and sales prices.
§ 85-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-1
1:83
(a) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing
units, the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set
forth in UHAC and by the Superior Court, utilizing the regional
income limits established.
(b) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 60% of median income, and the average
rent for restricted low- and moderate-income units shall be
affordable to households earning no more than 52% of median
income.
(c) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental
units shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for
both low-income and moderate-income units. At least 13% of
all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 30% of median income.
(d) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within
each affordable development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 70% of median income, and each
affordable development must achieve an affordability average
of 55% for restricted ownership units; in achieving this
affordability average, moderate-income ownership units must
be available for at least three different prices for each bedroom
type, and low-income ownership units must be available for at
least two different prices for each bedroom type.
(e) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance
with the affordability average requirements for restricted units
other than assisted living facilities, the following standards
shall be used:
[1] A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
[2] A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-onehalf-
person household;
[3] A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
[4] A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-onehalf-
person household; and
[5] A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(f) In determining the initial rents for compliance with the
affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities, the following standards shall be used:
[1] A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
§ 85-1 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-1
1:84
[2] A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-onehalf-
person household; and
[3] A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(g) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units
shall be calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the
unit, including principal and interest (based on a mortgage
loan equal to 95% of the purchase price and the Federal
Reserve H.15 rate of interest), taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner
association fees do not exceed 28% of the eligible monthly
income of the appropriate size household as determined under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented;
provided, however, that the price shall be subject to the
affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(h) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so
as not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the
appropriate household size as determined under N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented; provided,
however, that the rent shall be subject to the affordability
average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may be amended
and supplemented.
(i) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units
may increase annually based on the percentage increase in the
regional median income limit for each housing region. In no
event shall the maximum resale price established by the
administrative agent be lower than the last recorded purchase
price.
(j) The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the percentage increase in the Housing
Consumer Price Index for the United States. This increase shall
not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units constructed
pursuant to low-income housing tax credit regulations shall be
indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low-income
housing tax credits.
(k) Tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility allowance
shall be so stated in the lease and shall be consistent with the
utility allowance approved by DCA for its Section 8 program.
F. Condominium and homeowners' association fees. For any affordable
housing unit that is part of a condominium association and/or
homeowners' association, the Master Deed shall reflect that the
association fee assessed for each affordable housing unit shall be
established at 100% of the market rate fee.
§ 85-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-2
1:85
§ 85-2. Administration.
A. Municipal Housing Liaison.
(1) The position of Municipal Housing Liaison (MHL) for Harrington
Park Borough is established by this section. The MHL shall be
appointed by the Borough Manager.
(2) The MHL must be either a full-time or part-time employee of
Harrington Park Borough.
(3) The Municipal Housing Liaison must meet the requirements for
qualifications, including initial and periodic training, as required by
state law or regulation.
(4) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight
and administration of the affordable housing program for
Harrington Park Borough, including the following responsibilities
which may not be contracted out to the administrative agent:
(a) Serving as the municipality's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents and interested households;
(b) The implementation of the affirmative marketing plan and
affordability controls;
(c) When applicable, supervising any contracting administrative
agent;
(d) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Harrington
Park's Fair Share Plan;
(e) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual reports as required
by the Superior Court;
(f) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable; and
(g) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by the Superior Court.
B. Administrative agent.
(1) The Borough shall designate by resolution of the Borough
Committee one or more administrative agents to administer newly
constructed affordable units in accordance with state law or
regulation and UHAC.
(2) The administrative agent shall perform the duties and
responsibilities of an administrative agent as are set forth in UHAC,
including those set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14, 5:80-26.16 and
5:80-26.18 thereof, which includes:
§ 85-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-2
1:86
(a) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by the Superior Court.
(b) Affirmative marketing and conducting an outreach process to
ensure affirmative marketing of affordable housing units in
accordance with the affirmative marketing plan of the Borough
and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15.
(c) Household certification.
[1] Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
[2] Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient
documentation of gross income and assets upon which to
base a determination of income eligibility for a low- or
moderate-income unit;
[3] Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
[4] Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as
applicable, of either the ownership or rental certificates
set forth in Appendixes J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et
seq.;
[5] Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible
applicant households living in the housing region and
eligible applicant households with members working in the
housing region where the units are located; and
[6] Employing the random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the Borough when referring
households for certification to affordable units.
(d) Affordability controls.
[1] Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
[2] Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for
its control period, including the recorded deed with
restrictions, recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
[3] Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and
properly filed with the appropriate county's register of
deeds or county clerk's office after the termination of the
affordability controls for each restricted unit;
§ 85-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-2
1:87
[4] Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosure; and
[5] Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of
occupancy or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.10.
(e) Records retention.
(f) Resale and re-rental.
[1] Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of
restricted units for resale or rental; and
[2] Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or re-rental.
(g) Processing requests from unit owners.
[1] Reviewing and approving requests from owners of
restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership;
[2] Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling
price, such authorizations to be limited to those
improvements resulting in additional bedrooms or
bathrooms and the cost of central air-conditioning
systems; and
[3] Processing requests and making determinations on
requests by owners of restricted units for hardship
waivers.
(h) Enforcement, though the ultimate responsibility for retaining
controls on the units rests with the municipality.
[1] Ensure that all restricted units are identified as affordable
within the tax assessors' office and upon notification to the
administrative agent of change in billing address, payment
delinquency of two consecutive billing cycles, transfer of
title, or institution of a writ of foreclosure on all affordable
units, notifying all such owners that they must either move
back to their unit or sell it;
[2] Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted
units, at the earliest point of contact in the processing of
the project or development, written acknowledgment of
the requirement that no restricted unit can be offered, or
§ 85-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-2
1:88
in any other way committed to any person, other than a
household duly certified to the unit by the administrative
agent;
[3] The posting annually in all rental properties, including
two-family homes, of a notice as to the maximum
permitted rent together with the telephone number of the
administrative agent where complaints of excess rent can
be made;
[4] Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable
dwelling units, reminding them of the notices and
requirements outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
[5] Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent
payments to the municipality's affordable housing trust
fund or other appropriate municipal fund approved by the
DCA;
[6] Establishing a rent-to-equity program;
[7] Creating and publishing a written operating manual
setting forth procedures for administering such
affordability controls; and
[8] Proving annual reports as required.
(i) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its
responsibilities hereunder.
C. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
(1) Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations
governing the affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the
municipality shall have all remedies provided at law or equity,
including but not limited to foreclosure, tenant eviction, municipal
fines, a requirement for household recertification, acceleration of
all sums due under a mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a
sale in violation of the regulations, injunctive relief to prevent
further violation of the regulations, entry on the premises, and
specific performance.
(2) After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer
or tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the
municipality may take the following action against the owner,
developer or tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a
period of 60 days after service of the written notice:
(a) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation, or violations, of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer
§ 85-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-2
1:89
or tenant is found by the court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units, the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the
following penalties, at the discretion of the court:
[1] A fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day that the
violation continues or exists shall be considered a separate
and specific violation of these provisions and not as a
continuing offense.
[2] In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment into the
Harrington Park Borough affordable housing trust fund of
the gross amount of rent illegally collected.
[3] In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment of an
innocent tenant's reasonable relocation costs, as
determined by the court.
(b) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment, which would result in the termination of
the owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of
a mortgage foreclosure. Any judgment shall be enforceable as
if the same were a judgment of default of the First Purchase
Money Mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the lowand
moderate-income unit.
(3) Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which
time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating owner shall
be sold at a sale price which is not less than the amount necessary
to fully satisfy and pay off any First Purchase Money Mortgage and
prior liens and the costs of the enforcement proceedings incurred
by the municipality, including attorney's fees. The violating owner
shall have the right to possession terminated as well as the title
conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(4) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the
First Purchase Money Mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the
low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied
to reimburse the municipality for any and all costs and expenses
incurred in connection with either the court action resulting in the
judgment of violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that the
proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are insufficient to reimburse the
municipality in full as aforesaid, the violating owner shall be
personally responsible for and to the extent of such deficiency, in
addition to any and all costs incurred by the municipality in
§ 85-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-2
1:90
connection with collecting such deficiency. In the event that a
surplus remains after satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if
any, shall be placed in escrow by the municipality for the owner and
shall be held in such escrow for a maximum period of two years
or until such earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such balance
within the two-year period shall automatically result in a forfeiture
of such balance to the municipality. Any interest accrued or earned
on such balance while being held in escrow shall belong to and
shall be paid to the municipality, whether such balance shall be
paid to the owner or forfeited to the municipality.
(5) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units shall not extinguish the
restrictions of the regulations governing affordable housing units
as the same apply to the low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall
be conveyed to the purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the
restrictions and provisions of the regulations governing the
affordable housing unit. The owner determined to be in violation of
the provisions of this plan and from whom title and possession were
taken by means of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any
right of redemption.
(6) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the First Purchase Money Mortgage and
any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the low- and
moderate-income unit by satisfying the First Purchase Money
Mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating owner
with an amount equal to the difference between the First Purchase
Money Mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the enforcement
proceedings, including legal fees and the maximum resale price for
which the low- and moderate-income unit could have been sold
under the terms of the regulations governing affordable housing
units. This excess shall be treated in the same manner as the excess
which would have been realized from an actual sale as previously
described.
(7) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold at
the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall obligate the
owner to accept an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser
which may be referred to the owner by the municipality, with such
offer to purchase being equal to the maximum resale price of the
low- and moderate-income unit as permitted by the regulations
governing affordable housing units.
(8) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions governing affordable
housing units until such time as title is conveyed from the owner.
D. The Borough may contract with or authorize a consultant, authority,
government or any agency charged by the Borough Council, which
§ 85-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-2
1:91
entity shall have the responsibility of administering the affordable
housing program of the Borough. If the Borough contracts with another
entity to administer all or any part of the affordable housing program,
including the affordability controls and affirmative marketing plan,
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting
administrative agent. The administrative agent shall have authority
to take all actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its
responsibilities hereunder.
E. The cost for administering the affordable housing program for
Harrington Park Borough, including affirmative marketing, household
certification, affordability controls, resale and rentals, communicating
with unit owners and enforcement, shall be the responsibility of
developers or owners of affordable housing units in accordance with
the following fee schedule, as may be amended from time to time:
(1) Annual fee for consulting, list maintenance and responding to
inquiries: $50 per affordable unit.
(2) Resales of existing affordable housing units: $1,000 per resale
certification (payable by seller upon transfer of title).
(3) Re-rentals of existing affordable housing units: $550 pre
reoccupancy certification (payable by landlord upon occupancy of
new tenant).
(4) Sale of new affordable housing units: $200 per unit setup, plus
$1,000 per unit certification fee, plus $3,000 minimum project fee
(payable at least 180 days prior to the issuance of a temporary or
permanent certificate of occupancy, whichever first occurs).
(5) Rental of new affordable housing units: $400 per unit setup, plus
$500 per unit certification fee, plus $3,000 minimum project fee
(payable at least 180 days prior to the issuance of a temporary or
permanent certificate of occupancy, whichever first occurs).
(6) Refinancing: $200 to be paid by unit owner.
(7) Lien satisfaction: no charge.
(8) Other programs. The cost to provide compliance services for
programs, such as accessory apartments, market to affordable,
etc., are subject to the number of units and the scope of services
required for each.
(9) Additional services. In the event additional services are requested
or required to comply with the affirmative marketing requirements,
the rate for such services shall be determined prior to
implementation.
(10) Reimbursement of expenses. In addition to the foregoing fees, cost
of postage, printing of notices, copying costs, and advertising shall
be paid by the developer or owner.
§ 85-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-3
1:92
§ 85-3. Affirmative marketing within inclusionary development.
A. Adoption of an affirmative marketing plan.
(1) Harrington Park Borough hereby adopts the within an affirmative
marketing plan in compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be
amended and supplemented.
(2) The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and
minority groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin,
ancestry, marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual
orientation, disability, age or number of children to housing units
which are being marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of
affordable housing. The affirmative marketing plan is also intended
to target those potentially eligible persons who are least likely to
apply for affordable units in that region. It is a continuing program
that directs all marketing activities toward COAH Housing Region
1 and covers the period of deed restriction.
B. The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in COAH Housing Region 1
comprised of Bergen, Hudson, Passaic, and Sussex counties.
C. The administrative agent designated by Harrington Park Borough shall
assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units consistent with
the affirmative marketing plan for the municipality.
(1) All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for
applications for low- and moderate-income units will appear in the
following newspapers/publications: The Star-Ledger, The Record,
Northern Valley Suburbanite, Bergen News, and Avance (Spanish).
(2) The primary marketing will take the form of at least one press
release sent to the above publications and a paid display
advertisement in each of the above newspapers. Additional
advertising and publicity will be on an as-needed basis.
(3) The advertisement will include:
(a) The street address and location of units.
(b) Directions to the housing units.
(c) The size, as measured in the number of bedrooms, of the
housing units.
(d) A range of prices/rents for the housing units.
(e) The maximum income permitted to qualify for the housing
units.
(f) The location of applications for the housing units.
§ 85-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-3
1:93
(g) The business hours when interested households may obtain an
application for a housing unit.
(h) The name of the rental manager and/or sales agent for the
housing units.
(4) All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for
applications for low- and moderate-income housing will appear in
publications circulated within the housing region that are likely to
be read by low- and moderate-income households, such as
neighborhood-oriented weekly newspaper, religious publications
and organizational newsletters.
(5) Regional radio and/or cable television station(s) will also be used.
(6) Applications, brochure(s), sign(s) and/or poster(s) used as part of
the affirmative marketing program will be provided to specific
employment centers within the region and to the municipal clerks
of all municipalities in the region.
(7) Applications for low- and moderate-income housing shall be
available in several convenient locations within the Borough of
Harrington Park, including, at a minimum, Borough Hall, the
Harrington Park Public Library, and the developer's sales/rental
office. The following is a listing of community contact persons and/
or organizations in Harrington Park that will administer the
program and will aid in the affirmative marketing program, with
particular emphasis on contacts that will reach out to groups that
are least likely to apply for housing within the region: the Fair
Share Housing Center, New Jersey State Conference of the NAACP,
the Latino Action Network, Bergen County NAACP, Urban League
of Bergen County, Bergen County Housing Coalition, and
Supportive Housing Association.
(8) Quarterly flyers and applications will be sent to each of the
following agencies for publication in their journals and for
circulation among their members: Board of Realtors in Bergen,
Hudson, Passaic and Sussex counties.
(9) Applications will be mailed to prospective applicants upon request.
Additionally, quarterly informational circulars and applications will
be sent to the chief administrative employees of each of the
following agencies in the counties the Borough of Harrington
Park's region: Welfare or Social Service Board, Rental Assistance
Office (local office of DCA), Office on Aging, libraries and housing
agency or authority.
(10) The affirmative marketing program will meet the following
requirements:
§ 85-3 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-3
1:94
(a) The affirmative marketing process for available affordable
units shall begin at least four months prior to the expected date
of occupancy.
(b) A random selection method will be used to select occupants of
low- and moderate-income housing.
(c) Low- and moderate-income households who live or work in the
housing region in which the Borough of Harrington Park is
located shall be given preference for sales and rental units
constructed within the Borough of Harrington Park. Applicants
living outside the housing region will have an equal
opportunity for units after regional applicants have been
initially serviced.
(d) Low- and moderate-income households residing or working
within the Borough of Harrington Park shall be provided a
preference for low- and moderate-income units created within
the Borough of Harrington Park that respond to Harrington
Park's rehabilitation component.
(e) All developers of low- and moderate-income housing units will
be required to assist in the marketing of the affordable units in
their respective developments.
(f) The cost of advertising and administrating low- and moderateincome
units shall be the responsibility of the developer and/or
owner of low- and moderate-income housing units within the
Borough of Harrington Park.
(g) The marketing program will commence at least 120 days
before the issuance of either temporary or permanent
certificates of occupancy. The marketing program will continue
until all low- and moderate-income housing units are initially
occupied and for as long as affordable units are deed restricted
and occupancy or reoccupancy of units continues to be
necessary.
(h) Households that apply for low- and moderate-income housing
shall be screened for preliminary income eligibility by
comparing their total income to the low- and moderate-income
limits pursuant to state law and regulations. Applicants shall
be notified as to their eligibility status.
(i) Having screened applicants for preliminary income eligibility,
the Borough may analyze the income and household sizes of
applicants to determine which applicants have the assets and/
or income necessary to purchase or rent each available low- or
moderate-income unit.
(j) The Borough shall conduct a process and interview each
applicant to verify the applicant's income and household size;
§ 85-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-3
1:95
§ 85-4. Affordable unit controls and requirements.
The following general guidelines apply to all developments that contain lowand
moderate-income housing units, including any currently unanticipated
future developments that will provide low- and moderate-income housing
units.
determine the applicant's asset availability; and review the
applicant's credit history. Applicants shall be required to
submit income verification for each household member 18
years or older. This process shall be utilized in establishing the
final certified applicant group.
(k) The process described in Subsection C(10)(j) through (l) above
may begin no sooner than one month after the advertising
program begins. Households shall be selected to proceed
through the process described in Subsection C(10)(j) through
(l) above through a method of random selection. Households
shall be certified for low- and moderate-income units. The
process described in Subsection C(10)(j) through (l) shall be
continued until all the low- and moderate-income units are
occupied.
(l) Continuing marketing activities shall be undertaken after the
completion of initial occupancy of sales and rental units in
order to fill vacancies resulting from normal turnover which
shall include:
[1] Insuring a sufficient supply of income-eligible applicants
by continuing to implement the marketing plan throughout
the housing region. At a minimum, the Borough shall
maintain a current pool of at least five income-eligible
applicants for each low- and moderate-income unit.
[2] Contacting each income-eligible applicant annually to
request updated information regarding income and family
size.
[3] As units become available, the municipal entity shall select
eligible applicants for the units until the units are occupied
by low- and moderate-income households.
D. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
E. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner,
unless otherwise determined or agreed to by Harrington Park Borough.
§ 85-3 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-4
1:96
A. Occupancy standards.
(1) In referring certified households to specific restricted units, to the
extent feasible, and without causing an undue delay in occupying
the unit, the administrative agent shall strive to:
(a) Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
(b) Provide children of different genders with separate bedrooms;
and
(c) Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single
bedroom.
B. Selection of occupants of affordable housing units.
(1) The administrative agent shall use a random selection process to
select occupants of low- and moderate-income housing.
(2) A waiting list of all eligible candidates will be maintained in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
C. Control periods for restricted ownership units and enforcement
mechanisms.
(1) Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and
supplemented, and each restricted ownership unit shall remain
subject to the requirements of this section until Harrington Park
Borough elects to release the unit from such requirements;
however, and prior to such an election, a restricted ownership unit
must remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as
may be amended and supplemented, for at least 30 years.
(2) The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to
the unit.
(3) Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine
the nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an
appraisal or the unit's equalized assessed value.
(4) At the time of the first sale of the unit, the purchaser shall execute
and deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note obligating
the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors and
assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt sale after the unit's
release from the requirements of this section, an amount equal to
the difference between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value
and its restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by
§ 85-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-4
1:97
a recapture lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the
unit.
(5) The affordability controls set forth in this section shall remain in
effect despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of
foreclosure with respect to restricted ownership units.
(6) A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the
Construction Official stating that the unit meets all code standards
upon the first transfer of title that follows the expiration of the
applicable minimum control period provided under N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
(7) Deeds of all real property that include restricted ownership units
shall contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall
have priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed
restriction shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records
office of the County of Bergen. A copy of the filed document shall be
provided to the administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt
of a certificate of occupancy. The deed restriction shall be subject
to the approval of the administrative agent and shall be
substantially in the form set forth in Schedule B,32 annexed hereto
and made part of this chapter.
D. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units, homeowner
association fees and resale prices.
(1) Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, including:
(a) The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall
be approved by the administrative agent.
(b) The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in
writing and in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with
the foregoing standards.
(c) The method used to determine the condominium association
fee amounts and special assessments shall be indistinguishable
between the low- and moderate-income unit owners and the
market unit owners.
(d) The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for
the unit on the basis of capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a
larger household or the addition of a bathroom.
32.Editor's Note: Schedule B, Mandatory Deed Form for ownership Units, is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 85-4 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-4
1:98
E. Buyer income eligibility.
(1) Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than or
equal to 50% of median income and moderate-income ownership
units shall be reserved for households with a gross household
income less than 80% of median income.
(2) The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the
unit, and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner association
fees, as applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's
certified monthly income.
F. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit; subordination.
(1) Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the administrative agent shall determine in writing
that the proposed indebtedness complies with the provisions of this
section.
(2) With the exception of original purchase money mortgages, during a
control period neither an owner nor a lender shall at any time
cause or permit the total indebtedness secured by a restricted
ownership unit to exceed 95% of the maximum allowable resale
price of that unit, as such price is determined by the administrative
agent in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
G. Control periods for restricted rental units.
(1) Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented,
and each restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the
requirements of this section until the Borough of Harrington Park
elects to release the unit from such requirements pursuant to
action taken in compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be
amended and supplemented, and prior to such an election, a
restricted rental unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, for at
least 30 years.
(2) Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed
restriction shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records
office of the County of Bergen. A copy of the filed document shall be
provided to the administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt
§ 85-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-4
1:99
of a certificate of occupancy. The deed restriction shall be subject
to the approval of the administrative agent and shall be
substantially in the form set forth in Schedule B,33 annexed hereto
and made part of this chapter.
(3) A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability
controls of this section, despite the occurrence of any of the
following events:
(a) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(b) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit;
or
(c) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure.
H. Price restrictions for rental units; leases.
(1) A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units,
except for units in an assisted living residence, and tenants shall be
responsible for security deposits and the full amount of the rent as
stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each restricted
rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
(2) No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover
the customary charges for food and services) without the express
written approval of the administrative agent.
(3) Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall
not exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit
and shall be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to
the costs of administering the controls applicable to the unit as set
forth in this section.
I. Tenant income eligibility.
(1) Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(a) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of
median income.
(b) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
33.Editor's Note: Schedule B, Mandatory Deed Form for ownership Units, is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 85-4 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-4
1:100
§ 85-5. Affordable housing development fees.
(c) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than 80% of median
income.
(2) The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income,
low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's
eligible monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.16, as may be amended and supplemented; provided,
however, that this limit may be exceeded if one or more of the
following circumstances exists:
(a) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross
household income for rent, and the proposed rent will reduce
its housing costs;
(b) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(c) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded
living conditions;
(d) The household documents the existence of assets with which
the household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(e) The household documents proposed third-party assistance
from an outside source such as a family member in a form
acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of the
unit.
(3) The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsection I(2)(a) through (e)
above with the administrative agent, who shall counsel the
household on budgeting.
A. Purpose. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121
N.J. 550 (1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that
mandatory development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of
1985, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
COAH developing rules as amended from time to time and/or in
accordance with the enacted legislation and/or in accordance with
directives from the courts. The purpose of this section is to establish
standards for the collection, maintenance and expenditure of
development fees pursuant to the above. Fees collected pursuant to this
section shall be used for the sole purpose of providing low- and
moderate-income housing.
§ 85-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-5
1:101
B. Development fees.
(1) Residential development fees.
(a) Within all zone districts, unless invalidated by state statute or
court order, developers of residential housing, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee of 1 1/2% of the equalized assessed value
for residential development, when no increased density is
permitted.
(b) When an increase in residential density has been permitted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d (known as a "d" variance) or
pursuant to zoning amendment or pursuant to the adoption of a
redevelopment plan pursuant to the New Jersey Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.),
developers shall be required to pay a residential development
fee of a maximum of 6% of the equalized assessed value for
each additional unit that may be realized.
(c) Affordable housing developments and residential
developments where the developer is providing for the
construction of affordable units elsewhere in the municipality
shall be exempt from residential development fees.
(d) Residential developments that have received preliminary or
final site plan approval prior to the adoption of a municipal
residential development fee shall be exempt from residential
development fees, unless the developer seeks a substantial
change in the approval or the developer has accepted
responsibility to pay a residential development fee. Where a
site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building
permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan
approval for this purpose. A development fee shall be based on
the percentage that applies on the date that a building permit
is issued, regardless of the time of collection of the fee.
(e) Owner-occupied residential structures demolished and
replaced as a result of a fire, flood, or natural disaster shall be
exempt from paying a residential development fee.
(f) Residential development fees shall be imposed and collected
when an existing structure undergoes a change to a more
intense use. The development fee shall be calculated on the
increase in the equalized assessed value of the improved
structure.
(g) A developer of an addition to an existing single-family
residential unit which constitutes less than a 50% increase in
the gross floor area of the unit shall be exempt from the
development fee.
§ 85-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-5
1:102
(2) Nonresidential development fees.
(a) Within all zoning districts, unless invalidated by state statute
or court order, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted,
shall pay a nonresidential development fee equal to 2 1/2% of
the equalized assessed value of the land and improvements for
all new nonresidential construction.
(b) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types
of development specifically exempted, shall also pay a
nonresidential development fee equal to 2 1/2% of the increase
in equalized assessed value resulting from any additions to
existing structures to be used for nonresidential purposes.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure is demolished and replaced. Whenever
nonresidential development is situated on real property that
has been previously developed with a building, structure, or
other improvement, the nonresidential development fee shall
be equal to 2 1/2% of the equalized assessed value of the land
and improvements on the property where the nonresidential
development is situated at the time the final certificate of
occupancy is issued, less the equalized assessed value of the
land and improvements on the property where the
nonresidential development is situated, as determined by the
tax assessor of the municipality at the time the developer or
owner, including any previous owners, first sought approval for
a construction permit, including, but not limited to, demolition
permits, pursuant to the State Uniform Construction Code, or
approval under the Municipal Land Use Law, P.L. 1975, c. 291
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). If the calculation required under
this section results in a negative number, the nonresidential
development fee shall be zero.
(d) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or
market-rate development shall be subject to the 2 1/2%
development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
(e) The 2 1/2% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized
assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use within
existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(f) Exemptions.
[1] All nonresidential construction of buildings or structures
on property used by churches, synagogues, mosques, and
other houses of worship, and property used for educational
purposes, which is tax-exempt pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:4-3.6, shall be exempt from the imposition of a
nonresidential development fee pursuant to this section,
provided that the property continues to maintain its tax-
§ 85-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-5
1:103
exempt status under that statute for a period of at least
three years from the date of issuance of the certificate of
occupancy. In addition, the following shall be exempt from
the imposition of a nonresidential development fee:
[a] Parking lots and parking structures, regardless of
whether the parking lot or parking structure is
constructed in conjunction with a nonresidential
development, such as an office building, or whether
the parking lot is developed as an independent
nonresidential development;
[b] Any nonresidential development which is an amenity
to be made available to the public, including, but not
limited to, recreational facilities, community centers,
and senior centers, which are developed in
conjunction with or funded by a nonresidential
developer;
[c] Nonresidential construction resulting from a
relocation of or an on-site improvement to a nonprofit
hospital or a nursing home facility;
[d] Projects that are located within a specifically
delineated urban transit hub, as defined pursuant to
Section 2 of P.L. 2007, c. 346 (N.J.S.A. 34:1B-208);
[e] Projects that are located within an eligible
municipality, as defined under Section 2 of P.L. 2007,
c. 346 (N.J.S.A. 34:1B-208), when a majority of the
project is located within a one-half-mile radius of the
midpoint of a platform area for a light rail system; and
[f] Projects determined by the New Jersey Transit
Corporation to be consistent with a transit village plan
developed by a transit village designated by the
Department of Transportation.
[2] Any exemption claimed by a developer shall be
substantiated by that developer.
(g) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from
the nonresidential development fee shall be subject to it at
such time the basis for the exemption no longer applies and
shall make the payment of the nonresidential development fee,
in that event, within three years after that event or after the
issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(h) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit
§ 85-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-5
1:104
the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of
the termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
nonresidential development fees under these circumstances
may be enforceable by the Borough of Harrington Park as a
lien against the real property of the owner.
(3) Collection procedures.
(a) Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval for a development, the applicable approving authority
shall direct its staff to notify the Construction Official
responsible for the issuance of a building permit.
(b) For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also
be provided with a copy of Form N-RDF, State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption, to be
completed as per the instructions provided. The developer of a
nonresidential development shall complete Form N-RDF as per
the instructions provided. The Construction Official shall verify
the information submitted by the nonresidential developer as
per the instructions provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax
Assessor shall verify exemptions and prepare estimated and
final assessments as per the instructions provided in Form NRDF.
(c) The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the
issuance of the first building permit for a development which is
subject to a development fee.
(d) Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax
Assessor, based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of
the equalized assessed value of the development.
(e) The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local Assessor of any and
all requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property
which is subject to a development fee.
(f) Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a
final inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify
the previously estimated equalized assessed value of the
improvements of the development, calculate the development
fee and thereafter notify the developer of the amount of the
fee.
(g) Should the Borough of Harrington Park fail to determine or
notify the developer of the amount of the development fee
within 10 business days of the request for final inspection, the
developer may estimate the amount due and pay that
estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set forth
in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A.
§ 85-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-5
1:105
40:55D-8.6). Upon tender of the estimated nonresidential
development fee, provided the developer is in full compliance
with all other applicable laws, the municipality shall issue a
final certificate of occupancy for the subject property.
(h) A developer of a mixed use development shall be required to
pay the statewide nonresidential development fee relating to
the nonresidential development component of a mixed use
development subject to the provisions of P.L. 2008, c. 46
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1 et al.).
(i) Nonresidential construction which is connected with the
relocation of the facilities of a for-profit hospital shall be
subject to the fee authorized to be imposed under this section
to the extent of the increase in equalized assessed valuation in
accordance with regulations to be promulgated by the Director
of the Division of Taxation, Department of the Treasury.
(j) The payment of nonresidential development fees required
pursuant to Sections 32 through 38 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7) shall be made prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such development. A
final certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any
nonresidential development until such time as the fee imposed
pursuant to this section has been paid by the developer. A
nonresidential developer may deposit with the appropriate
entity the development fees as calculated by the municipality
under protest, and the local code enforcement official shall
thereafter issue the certificate of occupancy, provided that the
construction is otherwise eligible for a certificate of occupancy.
(4) Appeal of development fees.
(a) A developer may challenge residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the County Board of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Board,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow
account by the Borough of Harrington Park. Appeals from a
determination of the Board may be made to the Tax Court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Uniform Tax
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(b) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division
of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the
Director, which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the
challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing
escrow account by the Borough of Harrington Park. Appeals
from a determination of the Director may be made to the Tax
§ 85-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-5
1:106
Court in accordance with the provisions of the State Uniform
Tax Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days
after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(5) Retention of fees. Any fees collected prior to the adoption or
amendment of this section shall be retained by the Borough of
Harrington Park.
C. Housing trust fund.
(1) There is hereby created a separate interest-bearing housing trust
fund to be maintained by the Borough's Chief Financial Officer and
proceeds from the sale of units with extinguished controls.
(2) The following additional funds shall be deposited in the affordable
housing trust fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source
and amount:
(a) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(b) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(c) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(d) Recapture funds;
(e) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(f) Any other funds collected in connection with the Borough of
Harrington Park's affordable housing program.
(3) Use of funds.
(a) Money deposited in a housing trust fund may be used for any
activity approved for addressing the Borough of Harrington
Park's low- and moderate-income housing obligation in
accordance with Harrington Park's Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan, spending plan or any directives from the courts.
Such activities may include, but are not necessarily limited to:
housing rehabilitation; new construction; the purchase of land
for low- and moderate-income housing; preservation or
purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or
implementing affordability controls, including the extension of
controls, accessory apartment, market to affordable, or
regional housing partnership programs, conversion of existing
nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units,
extensions and/or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
low- and moderate-income housing sites; assistance designed
to render units to be more affordable to low- and moderateincome
households; and administrative costs necessary to
§ 85-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-5
1:107
implement the Borough of Harrington Park's Housing Element.
The expenditure of all money shall conform to a spending plan
approved by the courts.
(b) At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest
earned shall be used to provide affordability assistance to lowand
moderate-income households in affordable units included
in the municipal Housing Element and Fair Share Plan. Onethird
of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance
to those households earning 30% or less of median income by
region.
[1] Affordability assistance programs may include down
payment assistance, security deposit assistance, lowinterest
loans, rental assistance, assistance with
homeowners' association or condominium fees and special
assessments, and assistance with emergency repairs.
[2] Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less
of median income may include buying down the cost of
low- or moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share
Plan to make them affordable to households earning 30%
or less of median income.
[3] Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site
and funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls
shall be exempt from the affordability assistance
requirement.
D. The Borough of Harrington Park may contract with a private or public
entity to administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including but not limited to salaries and
benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the
case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues
collected from development fees shall be expended for such
administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income
qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental
units, and compliance with the courts' monitoring requirements. Legal
or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or
objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses
of the affordable housing trust fund.
F. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Borough of Harrington
Park for housing activities carried out prior to the establishment of the
affordable housing trust fund.
§ 85-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 85-5
1:108
Chapter 90
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131. Fire prevention — See Ch. 173.
G. Monitoring. The Borough of Harrington Park shall complete and return
to the courts all monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements
related to the collection of development fees from residential and
nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable
units on site, funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls,
barrier-free escrow funds, rental income, repayments from affordable
housing program loans, and any other funds collected in connection
with the Borough of Harrington Park's housing program, as well as to
the expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan certified
the courts. All monitoring reports shall be completed on forms designed
by the courts.
H. This section is intended to be interpreted and applied consistent with
the Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1
et seq.). In the event of any inconsistency, this section shall be read so
as to comply with the Act.
§ 85-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-5
1:109

ARTICLE I
False Fire Alarms
[Adopted 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 701]
§ 90-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
FALSE FIRE ALARM — Any transmission, either directly or indirectly, to
the Harrington Park Fire Department of any automatic fire alarm, smoke
alarm, carbon monoxide alarm, fire sprinkler water flow alarm, which was
not caused by an actual fire, smoke condition, or other condition requiring
the response of the Harrington Park Fire Department.
§ 90-2. Investigation of false arms.
The Harrington Park Fire Department shall investigate and determine the
cause of any false alarm, as it is defined in this article, and shall maintain
a list of all false alarms. Said list shall identify the location of each false
alarm, the number of false alarms at the location, and the reason for the
false alarm.
§ 90-3. Violation notice.
Upon the determination that a false alarm has occurred, the Fire Chief or
his designated representative shall promptly notify the Fire Marshal, who
shall issue a violation notice to the alarm user or proprietor advising that
all subsequent false alarms shall be a violation of this article subject to an
excessive false alarm fine.
§ 90-4. Free false alarm.
An alarm user, at a single site, will receive one free false alarm per year.
If the alarm user changes (e.g., sale of business) the new alarm user will
receive one free false alarm during the current year.
§ 90-5. Serving of penalty notices.
If it becomes necessary to assess an excessive false alarm fine, the Fire
Marshal shall serve upon the user in person or send a penalty notice to the
alarm user by mail. The notice shall include:
§ 90-6. Payment of false alarm fee.
Payment of the false alarm fee must be received within 14 calendar days
from the date of delivery as listed on the certified mail receipt.
A. The date, time, and location of the false alarm.
B. The amount of the fine.
§ 90-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-7
1:111
§ 90-7. Uniform Fire Code.
All provisions of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code34 with respect to the
maintenance of fire alarms shall continue to apply.
§ 90-8. Violations and penalties.
A. The following penalties shall apply to false alarms at commercial
properties. These penalties shall reset and start anew on January 1 of
each year.
False Alarm Number Fine
1st Warning only
2nd $200
3rd $300
4th $500
5th or more $1,000
B. All penalties assessed for violations of this article shall be paid into the
Harrington Park Fire Department penalty account.
34.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:70
§ 90-7 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 90-8
1:112
Chapter 93
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages in parks — See Ch. 230,
§ 230-6.
§ 90-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-8
1:113

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Fees
Adopted 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 368 (Ch. 4 of the 1967 Code)]
§ 93-1. Fees for licenses. [Amended 1-18-2005 by Ord. No. 577;
6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 67235]
Fees for the following licenses shall be as provided in the fee schedule:
§ 93-2. Number of licenses limited.
The licenses listed in § 93-1 shall not exceed one of each kind.
§ 93-3. Hours of sale under plenary retail consumption license.
§ 93-4. Hours of sale under plenary retail distribution license.
[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 65836]
Plenary retail distribution license hours of sale of alcoholic beverages are
governed by the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control of the State of New
Jersey, except for the club license, which hours are the same as provided in
§ 93-3.
§ 93-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties in Chapter 164, Fines and
Penalties, in the discretion of the court.
A. Plenary retail consumption license upon renewal.
B. Plenary retail distribution license upon renewal..
C. Club license upon renewal.
A. The hours between which the sales of alcoholic beverages under a
plenary retail consumption license may be made are as follows:
(1) Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays: 11:00
a.m. to 2:00 a.m. of the following morning.
(2) Sundays: 12:00 noon to 2:00 a.m. of the following morning.
(3) Saturdays 11:00 a.m. to 3:00 a.m. of the following morning.
B. The aforementioned hours shall be the local time in use, whether
Eastern standard time or daylight saving time.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 93-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-5
1:115

ARTICLE II
Consumption by Minors on Private Property
[Adopted 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 568]
§ 93-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underage
person pursuant to a testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling or
any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 93-7. Possession and consumption prohibited.
It is hereby unlawful for any person under the legal age to, without legal
authority, knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage
on private property.
§ 93-8. Exceptions.
Nothing contained in this article is intended, nor shall it be construed, to
prohibit an underage person from consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in connection with a religious observance, rite or ceremony, or
consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with
the permission of a parent, guardian or relative who has attained the legal
age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
§ 93-9. Additional exceptions.
Nothing in this article is intended nor shall be construed to prohibit
possession of alcoholic beverages by any underage person while actually
engaged in the performance of employment by a person who is licensed
under New Jersey Statutes Title 33, or while actively engaged in the
preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management
program at a county vocational school or post-secondary education
institution; provided, however, that this article shall not be construed to
preclude the imposition of a penalty under this article, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81 or
any other section of law against a person who is convicted of unlawful
alcoholic beverage activity on or at the premises licensed for the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
§ 93-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine
of $250 for the first offense and a fine of $350 for any subsequent offense.
§ 93-11. Exemption from prosecution.37
§ 93-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-11
1:117
A. An underage person and one or two other persons acting in concert
with the underage person shall be immune from prosecution under this
article if:
(1) One of the underage persons called 9-1-1 and reported that another
underage person was in need of medical assistance due to alcohol
consumption;
(2) The underage person who called 9-1-1 and, if applicable, one or two
other persons acting in concert with the underage person who
called 9-1-1 provided each of their names to the 9-1-1 operator;
(3) The underage person was the first person to make the 9-1-1 report;
and
(4) The underage person and, if applicable, one or two other persons
acting in concert with the underage person who made the 9-1-1 call
remained on the scene with the person under the legal age in need
of medical assistance until assistance arrived and cooperated with
medical assistance and law enforcement personnel on the scene.
B. The underage person who received medical assistance as provided in
Subsection A of this section also shall be immune from prosecution
under this article.
37.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. III).
§ 93-11 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 93-11
1:118
Chapter 99
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131.
Fines and penalties — See Ch. 164.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 173.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 248.
§ 93-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-11
1:119

ARTICLE I
Events, Shows and Establishments
[Adopted 4-21-1969 by Ord. No. 230 (Ch. 23 of the 1967 Code)]
§ 99-1. License required.
It shall not be lawful to conduct, maintain or operate for the public within
the Borough, without first having had and obtained for that purpose a
license therefor, to be issued by and in the name of the Borough, any show
or performance or other place of business wherein amusement is provided
and to which an entrance fee or other fees are charged, including circuses;
carnivals; traveling shows; amusement places operating exhibitions and
roller coasters, scenic railways, merry-go-rounds, Ferris wheels or other
similar rides; concerts; plays; motion-picture shows; theaters; open-air
bathing pools; skating rinks; and pool or billiard parlors. It shall not be
lawful to conduct or carry on street parades within the Borough without
first having had and obtained for that purpose a license therefor, to be
issued by and in the name of the Borough.
§ 99-2. Application for license; issuance; fees.
A. Application for licenses as provided for in § 99-1 of this article shall be
made in writing by the person or persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations conducting such shows, performances, places of business
or street parades. Applications shall set forth the nature of the show,
performance, place of business or street parade, location of the place or
places in which it is to be maintained and conducted, name or names of
the owners thereof and the name of the manager or operator in charge
thereof. The fees, as hereinafter provided for, shall be accompanied by
such applications. Any such application shall be filed with the Borough
Clerk at least 10 days prior to the next regular meeting of the Borough
Council and upon such filing shall be immediately reported to the
Borough Council for action thereon at its next regular meeting or at any
regular or special meeting thereafter.
B. If the application is granted by the Borough Council, the Borough Clerk
shall issue a license in writing in the name of the Borough. All licenses,
unless otherwise provided for, shall be for the balance of the calendar
year, all licenses terminating as of December 31 of each year unless
sooner canceled and revoked for cause. The Borough Clerk shall keep a
proper record of any license issued by him under the direction of the
Borough Council, containing the name of the party to whom it was
issued, the date of issue and the purpose for which the same was
issued. Each license, when received, shall set forth the name of the
person to whom it was issued, the place where it was issued, the
amusement designated and the length of time that said license is to run.
Each license shall be good only for the place or places designated
therein, for the amusement or street parade designated and the party
or parties as set forth in said license. No license shall be transferred
except by consent of the Borough Council.
§ 99-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-2
1:121
§ 99-3. Compliance required; revocation of license.
All licenses shall be issued subject to all existing ordinances of the Borough
and to such other ordinances, rules or regulations which may hereafter
be passed or adopted by the Borough Council. Any license issued may be
revoked for cause upon written notice and after hearing the party to whom
such license was issued.
§ 99-4. Religious and charitable organizations.
In the event that any religious, charitable or other nonprofit organization
shall make application for a license for any purpose specified in § 99-1 of
this article which is to be conducted for a religious, charitable or community
purpose, a license may be granted by the Borough Council for such purpose
without requiring payment of the prescribed license fee. Such religious,
charitable or other nonprofit organizations shall be required, however, to
comply with the terms of this article in all other respects.
§ 99-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Each and every person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as set forth in Chapter 164,
Fines and Penalties.
C. The fees for such licenses shall be as provided in the Borough Fee
Schedule.38
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 99-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 99-5
1:122
ARTICLE II
Amusement Devices
[Adopted 2-16-1982 by Ord. No. 331 (Ch. 5 of the 1967 Code)]
§ 99-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish that a person may conduct a
business which provides amusement devices for public use or play within
the Borough of Harrington Park in a manner consistent with the public
safety, good morals and the general welfare of the community and to ensure
that all persons involved in such business can reasonably be expected
to operate the business in accordance with law and free from gambling
and other illegal or immoral conduct and from unwarranted noise and
commotion.
§ 99-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any amusement machine or
device operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token or similar
object for the purpose of amusement or skill and for the operation, use,
playing or exhibition of which a fee is charged. Also included within this
definition are coin-operated mechanical or electronic musical devices which
are commonly referred to as "jukeboxes."
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who leases, rents or places under any kind
of arrangement within the Borough of Harrington Park one or more coinoperated
amusement devices.
LICENSED PREMISES — Unless otherwise stated, any place of business
or premises in which a coin-operated amusement device licensed in
accordance with this article is located, operated, used, played or exhibited.
OPERATOR — Any person in whose place of business or on whose premises
any coin-operated amusement device is placed or kept for operation, use,
play or exhibition.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership or
association.
§ 99-8. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of a distributor or operator of
coin-operated amusement devices within the Borough of Harrington Park
without first having obtained a proper license therefor. No license shall be
issued to any person under 18 years of age.
§ 99-9. Application for license.
§ 99-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-9
1:123
A. Each application for a license hereunder shall be filed in duplicate with
the Borough Clerk, together with the appropriate license fee, and shall
specify:
(1) The type of license, distributor or operator, requested.
(2) The name, age, address, social security number (or employer
identification number) and telephone number of the applicant and,
if the applicant is a corporation or association, of each principal
officer thereof. The name, age, address, social security number (or
employer identification number) and telephone number of each
partner and each stockholder holding a ten-percent or more
interest in a firm, corporation, partnership or association, if
applicable, shall also be specified.
(3) The addresses of the premises where the licensed coin-operated
amusement devices are to be operated, used, played or exhibited,
together with a description of the character of the business
conducted, or to be conducted, on such premises.
(4) The name, age, address, social security number and telephone
number of the manager, supervisor or senior operator, or the
applicant, who shall be in charge of the applicant's business in the
Borough of Harrington Park.
(5) Whether the applicant has been previously licensed by any public
or governmental authority to operate, use, play or exhibit coinoperated
amusement devices and, if so, the name of the authority
approving the license and the date of issuance of said license, or
whether the applicant has applied for such a license and such
application is pending or has been denied, revoked or suspended
and the reason therefor.
(6) All criminal convictions, fully disclosing the offense for which the
applicant was convicted and the circumstances thereof.
(7) With respect to each natural person whose name appears on the
application, voluntarily submit to the taking of his fingerprints so
that a proper investigation may be expedited. The fingerprints so
taken shall be retained on file by the Chief of Police or his
authorized representative.
(8) For each coin-operated amusement device to be licensed, the trade
name and general description, the name of the manufacturer, the
serial number, the location within the Borough of Harrington Park
where said device will be placed and the terms of any agreement
governing the acquisition, installation, operation, use, playing or
exhibition of said device.
B. The application shall contain a certification made under oath by the
applicant to the effect that the information contained in the application
is complete, accurate and truthful to the best of his knowledge and
§ 99-9 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 99-9
1:124
§ 99-10. License fees; expiration of license; transferability; renewal.
§ 99-11. Exceptions.
The licensing requirements of this article shall not apply to any church,
fraternal or veterans' organization or other religious, charitable or nonprofit
organization which operates, uses, plays or exhibits a coin-operated
amusement device exclusively for the use of its members and their guests
on premises owned or controlled by it, but such organizations shall remain
subject to all other provisions of this article.
belief. The Borough of Harrington Park, its agents or its employees shall
be expressly authorized by the applicant to seek information and to
conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the
application.
A. The fee for the initial license for each distributor shall be $200. In
addition, each distributor shall pay an annual license fee of $50 for each
coin-operated amusement device leased, rented or placed under any
kind of arrangement with an operator.
B. The annual license fee for each operator shall be $100 for each coinoperated
amusement device operated, used, played or exhibited in the
operator's place of business or on the operator's licensed premises.
C. All licenses issued under this article (other than the initial license for a
distributor) shall be for a term commencing on the date of issuance and
expiring on December 31 of the year of issuance. In the event any such
license is issued after January 1 in any year, the license fee therefor
shall be prorated according to the number of days remaining in the year
in question.
D. A license may be transferred from one coin-operated amusement device
to another by giving notice to the Borough Clerk to that effect and
giving a description of the device as set forth in § 99-9A(8) herein.
There shall be a fee for all such transfers of licenses from one device to
another in the amount of $25 per transfer.
E. A license may be transferred from one place to another by giving notice
to the Borough Clerk to that effect and supplying the required
information as to the new premises as set forth in § 99-9A(3). The
Borough Clerk shall promptly forward a copy of the notice to the Chief
of Police and the Construction Code Official for review to establish that
the transfer is in accordance with all provisions of this article. There
shall be a fee for all such transfers from one place to another in the
amount of $25 per transfer.
F. A license shall be renewed by submission to the Borough Clerk no later
than November 1 of an application therefor prepared in accordance
with the provisions of § 99-9 of this article.
§ 99-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-12
1:125
§ 99-12. Review of application; issuance or denial of license;
hearing.
§ 99-13. Display of license; assignability.
A. The Borough Clerk shall promptly forward a copy of the application to
the Chief of Police and the Construction Code Official for investigation
and review.
B. The purpose of any investigation shall be to establish that the applicant
is capable of conducting the proposed business of distributing or
operating coin-operated amusement devices within the Borough of
Harrington Park in a manner consistent with the public safety, good
morals and the general welfare of the community and that all those
persons involved in such business can reasonably be expected to
operate the business in accordance with law and free from gambling
and other illegal or immoral conduct and from unwarranted noise and
commotion.
C. No operator's license shall be granted unless the licensed premises
shall meet all requirements of the fire, housing, building, health,
electrical and plumbing codes of the Borough of Harrington Park.39
D. The Chief of Police and Construction Code Official may, upon
completion of their inspections, review or investigations, prepare
appropriate written reports and attach their reports to said application.
Upon receipt of an application and said reports, if any, the Mayor and
Council shall proceed to consider the same and shall either approve or
disapprove the issuance of a license to said applicant.
(1) If the application is approved, the Mayor and Council shall
authorize the Borough Clerk to issue the necessary license, and the
fee or fees submitted with the application shall be remitted by the
Borough Clerk to the Borough Treasurer.
(2) If the license is denied, the grounds therefor shall be set forth in
writing, 75% of the fee or fees shall be returned to the applicant
and the balance remitted to the Borough Treasurer to offset the
administrative costs of processing the application, and the
applicant shall be notified in writing that he may, within 20 days
after the date of such notice, request in writing a hearing before
the Mayor and Council. The applicant, if he requests a hearing,
shall be given 10 days' written notice of the date, time and place of
such hearing. At the hearing before the Mayor and Council, the
applicant may submit pertinent information on his own behalf.
A. In the case of operators, the license shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in the licensed premises of the licensee. Where an operator owns
a coin-operated amusement device, the license number assigned to said
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Construction Codes, Uniform; Ch. 173, Fire Prevention; Ch.
248, Property Maintenance; and Part III, Health Code.
§ 99-12 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 99-13
1:126
§ 99-14. General regulations.
§ 99-15. Enforcement.
All members of the Borough of Harrington Park Police Department are
authorized to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 99-16. Revocation of license.
device shall be permanently affixed to said device so that it can easily
be ascertained.
B. In the case of distributors, the license number assigned to each coinoperated
amusement device shall be permanently affixed to said device
so that it can be easily ascertained.
C. All licenses shall be nonassignable and nontransferable except as
provided in § 99-10 of this article.
A. The operator shall not permit any person to bet or gamble on the
licensed premises.
B. The operator shall at all times maintain good order and shall not permit
any disturbance, congestion or loitering upon the licensed premises.
C. No jukebox or coin-operated amusement device shall be operated in a
manner such as will enable it to be heard out-of-doors.
D. No licensed premises shall be without adequate sanitary facilities or
contain any fire, safety or health hazard.
E. Each distributor and/or operator shall, within five days, report in
writing to the Borough Clerk any change, during the term of any license
or renewal thereof, in the information previously furnished on the
license application or subsequent renewal application.
F. No distributor or operator shall refuse to cooperate fully with the
Borough Clerk or any law enforcement officer or agency.
G. Each coin-operated amusement device shall be located at least 10 feet
from the entranceway to the premises in which it is located, and each
device shall be placed so that it does not obstruct or interfere with the
free passage of patrons or users of the licensed premises.
H. The maximum number of coin-operated amusement devices per
licensed premises shall be two, and there shall be at least 1,000 square
feet of floor area provided for each such device.
A. Every license issued hereunder is subject to revocation by the Borough
Clerk for the violation of any of the provisions of this article. Any
information misstated or omitted in the license application or any
license renewal application shall constitute sufficient grounds for
revocation.
§ 99-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-16
1:127
§ 99-17. Violations and penalties.
B. If a license granted hereunder is revoked, the grounds therefor shall be
set forth in writing, and the licensee shall be notified in writing that he
may, within 20 days after the date of such notice, request in writing a
hearing before the Mayor and Council. The licensee, if he requests a
hearing, shall be given 10 days' written notice of the date, time and
place of such hearing. At the hearing before the Mayor and Council, the
licensee may submit pertinent information on his own behalf.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and
Penalties. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. [Amended
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
B. Upon such conviction, no licensee shall thereafter be licensed to
transact the business of distributing or operating coin-operated
amusement devices in the Borough of Harrington Park.
§ 99-16 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 99-17
1:128
Chapter 105
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs in parks — See Ch. 230, Art. I.
§ 99-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-17
1:129

ARTICLE I
Dog Licensing and Control
[Adopted 4-21-1969 by Ord. No. 230 (Ch. 14 of the 1967 Code)]
§ 105-1. Definitions. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
The definitions in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 shall apply in this article.
§ 105-2. Regulations established. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
The following regulations are hereby established for keeping dogs in the
Borough pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq. and the
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 105-3. Licenses for individual dogs.
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall, in
the month of January of each year, apply for and procure from the Borough
Clerk a license and official metal registration tag for each such dog so
owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon each such dog a collar or
harness with the registration tag securely fastened thereto.
§ 105-4. Fees. [Last amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
A. The person applying for the license and registration tag shall pay a
license fee of $13.20 for a neutered or spayed dog, a license fee of
$16.20 for a dog which is not neutered or spayed, the sum of $1 for the
registration of each dog, and the sum of $0.20 for a pilot clinic fee. For
each annual renewal, the same fee for the license and registration tag
as for the original license and tag shall be paid. Said licenses,
registration tags and renewals shall expire on the last day of December
of each year. (All licenses are subject to renewal during January of each
year, and rabies vaccination is compulsory.) [Amended 6-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 67240]
B. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "seeing
eye" dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly
known as "service dogs" and dogs used to assist deaf persons and
commonly known as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered
as other dogs hereinabove provided for, except that the owner or
keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any fee therefor.
C. A license fee not paid by February 1 of the year payable shall be
increased by $10 a month, or part thereof, until paid up to a maximum
late charge of $50, plus the license fee payable. If not paid a summons
shall be issued by the Municipal Court Administrator.41
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 105-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-5
1:131
§ 105-5. License forms and tags.
License forms and uniform official metal registration tags designed by the
State Department of Health shall be issued and shall be numbered serially
and shall bear the year of issuance and the name of the Borough.
§ 105-6. Application for license.
§ 105-7. Removal of tags.
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 105-8. License for pet shop.
A. The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog
which attains the licensing age, as provided for in this article, shall
make application for a license and registration tag for such dog within
10 days after such acquisition or age attainment. Said application shall
state the breed, sex (and if a female, whether it is spayed or unspayed),
age, color and markings of the dog for which license and registration
are sought, and whether it is of a long- or short-haired variety; also the
name and street and post office address of the owner and the person
who shall keep or harbor such dog. The information on said application
and the registration number issued for the dog shall be preserved for a
period of three years by the Borough Clerk. In addition, the Borough
Clerk shall forward to the State Department of Health each month, on
forms furnished by said Department, an accurate account of
registration numbers issued or otherwise disposed of. Registration
numbers shall be issued in the order of application.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough any
dog licensed in another state for the current year and bearing a
registration tag, and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept
within the Borough for a period of more than 90 days, shall immediately
apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog unless such
dog is licensed under this article.
C. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough any
unlicensed dog of licensing age, and shall keep the same or permit the
same to be kept within the Borough for a period of more than 10 days,
shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such
dog unless such dog is licensed under this article.
A. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a pet shop in
the Borough shall apply to the Borough Clerk for a license entitling him
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 105-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 105-8
1:132
§ 105-9. Expiration or revocation of license for pet shop.
All licenses issued for a pet shop shall state the purpose for which the
establishment is maintained, and all such licenses shall expire on the last
day of January of each year and be subject to revocation by the municipality,
on recommendation of the State Department of Health or Board of Health
of the Borough, for failure to comply with the rules and regulations of the
State Department of Health or Board of Health of the Borough, after the
owner has been afforded a hearing by either the state department or local
board.
§ 105-10. License fee for pet shop.
The annual license fee for a pet shop shall be $10.42
§ 105-11. Annual canvass.
The Chief of Police of the Borough or such other person appointed for the
purpose by the governing body of said Borough shall cause a canvass to be
made of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the Borough
and shall report, on or before May 1 of each year, to the Borough Clerk
and to the Board of Health of the Borough and to the State Department of
Health the results thereof, setting forth in separate columns the names and
addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring unlicensed dogs and
the number of unlicensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each of said
persons, together with a complete description of each of said unlicensed
dogs.
§ 105-12. Actions prohibited.
to keep or operate such establishment. Such application shall describe
the premises where the establishment is located or is proposed to be
located and the purpose or purposes for which it is to be maintained
and shall be accompanied by the written approval of the Board of
Health of the Borough showing compliance with the local and state
rules and regulations governing the location of and sanitation at such
establishment.
B. Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at such
establishment; such licenses shall not be transferable to another owner
or different premises.
C. No dog kept in a pet shop shall be permitted off such premises except
on leash or in a crate or other safe control.
A. No person shall own, operate or maintain a kennel.
42.Editor's Note: Original § 14-11, Disposition of fees, and § 14-12, List of licenses, which
immediately followed this section, were repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658.
§ 105-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-12
1:133
§ 105-13. Animal Control Officer.
B. No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit, suffer or
allow, with or without that person's actual knowledge, said dog to do
the following things:
(1) Run at large within the limits of the Borough.
(2) Be off the premises of such owner or person so harboring said dog,
or upon a street or other public place in the Borough, except when
restrained by a leash or when otherwise under the strict control of
some responsible person able to control said dog.
(3) Cause any injury to any person.
(4) Do any damage to any shrub, tree or other property in any street,
park or other public place in the Borough or upon the private
property of others.
(5) No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall
cause, suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit
any nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway,
bypath, play areas, park or any place where people congregate or
walk, or upon any private property without the permission of the
owner of said property. The restriction in this subsection shall not
apply to that portion of the street lying between the curblines,
which shall be used to curb such dog under the following
conditions: [Amended 12-20-1976 by Ord. No. 284]
(a) The person who so curbs such dog shall immediately remove
all feces deposited by such dog by any sanitary method.
(b) The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area
shall be disposed of in a sanitary manner by the person owning,
harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog curbed in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
(6) Habitually bark, howl or cry. The habitual barking, howling or
crying of a dog or dogs in the Borough is hereby declared to be a
disturbing noise, within the meaning of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1(8), and a
nuisance.
(7) Be or become a public nuisance or create a condition hazardous to
safety and health.
A. The Mayor of the Borough, with the consent of the Council, is hereby
empowered to appoint an Animal Control Officer to enforce the
provisions of this article.
B. The Council may by resolution enter into a contract with any humane
society, animal shelter or similar association or with one or more
persons, either individual or corporate, to exercise the duties of Animal
Control Officer and to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 105-12 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 105-13
1:134
§ 105-14. Disposal of dogs.
C. All members of the Police Department of the Borough, regular and
special, are hereby given full power and authority and are charged with
the duty to enforce the provisions of this article.
A. The Animal Control Officer of the Borough or, if said Animal Control
Officer has not been directly appointed by the governing body or is
incapacitated, then the Chief of Police of the Borough or any member of
the Police Department or the designated agent of any humane society
or animal shelter appointed for the purpose by the governing body shall
take into custody and impound, or cause to be taken into custody and
impounded, and thereafter destroy or dispose of, as provided in this
section:
(1) Any dog running at large, or any dog off the premises of the owner
or of the person keeping or harboring said dog, contrary to any of
the provisions of § 104-12 of this article, or which is committing a
nuisance or doing any injury or damage in violation thereof.
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog, without a current registration tag on its collar.
B. If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon
the name and address of any person, or a registration tag, or if the
owner or the person keeping or harboring said dog is known, the
aforesaid Animal Control Officer of the Borough or, if said Animal
Control Officer has not been directly appointed by the governing body
or is incapacitated, then the Chief of Police of the Borough or any
member of the Police Department or the designated agent of any
humane society or animal shelter appointed by the governing body shall
forthwith serve on the person whose address is given on the collar, or
on the owner or the person keeping or harboring said dog, if known, a
notice, in writing, stating that the dog has been seized and will be liable
to be disposed of or destroyed or offered for adoption if not claimed
within seven days after the service of the notice. [Amended 4-18-2011
by Ord. No. 658]
C. A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it
personally to the person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at
said person's dwelling house or usual place of abode with some
competent member of said person's family of the age of 14 years or over
then residing therein, or by mailing, registered mail, return receipt
requested, said notice to said person at said person's dwelling house or
usual place of abode.
D. If any dog so seized has been detained for seven days after notice,
where notice was given as set forth above, or has been detained for
seven days after seizure, where the identity of the owner or the person
keeping or harboring said dog is not known and is not reasonably
ascertainable, and if the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog
§ 105-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-14
1:135
§ 105-15. Enforcement.
The Board of Health of the Borough shall enforce the rules and regulations
of the State Department of Health governing the sanitary conduct and
operation of pet shops, to preserve sanitation therein and prevent the
spread of rabies and other diseases of dogs within and from such
establishments. The provisions of this article or of the statute referred to
herein shall be enforced by the Animal Control Officer of the Borough or
Board of Health of the Borough or its designated agent or the Chief of
Police of the Borough or any member of the Police Department or by the
designated agent of any humane society or animal shelter under contract
with the municipality for the enforcement of this article or provisions of said
statute. No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized
or empowered to perform any duty under this article.
§ 105-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-18-2005 by Ord. No.
584]
has not claimed said dog and paid all expenses incurred by reason of
its detention, including maintenance not exceeding $4 per day, and if
the dog is unlicensed at the time of the seizure and the person keeping
or harboring said dog has not produced a license and registration tag
for said dog, the aforesaid Animal Control Officer of the Borough or,
if said Animal Control Officer has not been directly appointed by the
governing body or is incapacitated, then the Chief of Police of the
Borough or any member of the Police Department or the designated
agent of any humane society appointed by the governing body shall
either place the dog with a responsible new owner or give it to a
humane society for placement in a new home or may cause the dog
to be destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible. Under
no circumstances shall such dog be released to a dog dealer unless
such dealer holds a valid license issued by the United States Secretary
of Agriculture under and pursuant to the terms of Public Law 89-544,
7 U.S.C.A. § 2131 et seq., or any amendments thereof. Under no
circumstances shall such dog be released to a research facility unless
such research facility is registered with the United States Secretary
of Agriculture under and pursuant to Public Law 89-544, 7 U.S.C.A.
§ 2131 et seq., or any amendments thereof, and unless such dog is
released to such research facility by a person holding a valid license as
a dealer issued by the United States Secretary of Agriculture under and
pursuant to the terms of Public Law 89-544, 7 U.S.C.A. § 2131 et seq.,
or any amendments thereof. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
A. Any person who violates any provisions of this article or who fails or
refuses to comply with the provisions of the statute referred to herein
or any rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department of
Health pursuant to said statute shall be liable to a penalty of not less
than $50 nor more than $500, the exact amount to be determined by the
Municipal Court Judge.
§ 105-14 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 105-16
1:136
§ 105-17. Construal of provisions.
No provision of this article shall be construed as giving any authority for the
compulsory inoculation of dogs with anti-rabic vaccines.
B. Any person who violates the requirement that a dog shall have a valid
license shall be required to appear in court. The fines for unlicensed
dogs and the court appearance costs shall be set by the Municipal Court
Judge.43
43.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. III).
§ 105-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-17
1:137
Chapter 112
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131.
Fines and penalties — See Ch. 164.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 248.
§ 112-1. Numbering required. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
All dwelling houses, stores or other buildings erected within the Borough of
Harrington Park shall be numbered in conformity with the street numbers
on the Tax and Assessment Maps of the Borough filed in the Tax Assessor's
office.
§ 112-2. Furnishing of numbers. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Upon application by the owner of any property in the Borough, the Tax
Assessor shall furnish such owner with the correct number of such property.
§ 112-3. Incorrect numbering. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
The owner of any dwelling house, store or other building incorrectly or
improperly or insufficiently numbered shall be notified in writing by the
Tax Assessor, or such other person so designated by the governing body, to
change or replace such incorrect or improper number, or to affix a number
where one is lacking, within 10 days after date of such notice.
§ 112-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and
Penalties.
Chapter 118
CERTIFICATES OF CONTINUED OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 131, § 131-2.
Fines and penalties — See Ch. 164.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 248.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 105-17 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 112-4
1:138
ARTICLE I
Commercial or Industrial Property
[Adopted 7-16-1990 by Ord. No. 429]
§ 118-1. Legislative findings.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough find as a fact that there exists a
potential threat and danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens
of the Borough when a change in or a transfer of ownership, tenancy,
occupation or use of a commercial or industrial property takes place and
when such change or transfer results in a new occupation or use different
from that of the business, occupation or use previously inspected as a
condition precedent to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, which new
use may involve procedures, fabrications or the storage of materials which
present a fire, health or other danger. The Mayor and Council recognize
this potential danger and deem it desirable, in the best interests of fulfilling
their governmental responsibility and in the best interests of the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the community, to correct said problem.
§ 118-2. Certificate of continued occupancy required.
From the effective date of this article, no commercial or industrial premises,
or portion thereof, whether in a commercial or industrial zone or in a
different zone by reason of being a nonconforming use, shall be sold, re-let
or re-rented and thereafter occupied by a new owner, tenant or subtenant
without the issuance, pursuant to an appropriate application therefor, of a
certificate of continued occupancy.
§ 118-3. Application for certificate.44
The owner, tenant or subtenant of commercial or industrial premises about
to be newly occupied by such owner, tenant or subtenant, or his/her
respective agent, shall apply to the Construction Code Official of the
Borough for a certificate of continued occupancy and shall supply as
required information on said application all facts relating to the nature of
the business, occupation or industry to be conducted on the premises, the
manufacturing or other processes involved and the nature of all materials
to be stored in or on the premises as part of or pertinent to said business,
occupation or use. Upon receipt of said application, the Construction Code
Official shall review the same within 10 days with the Fire Protection
Subcode Official, Health Officer and other subcode officials as deemed
necessary by the Construction Code Official and shall either issue a
certificate of continued occupancy or a written statement of the reason or
reasons for a denial of the same.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 118-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-4
1:139
§ 118-4. Responsibilities of owners.
The owner, tenant or subtenant of commercial or industrial premises about
to be newly occupied by such owner, tenant or subtenant shall be
responsible for notification to the Building Subcode Official of the pendency
of any new ownership, tenancy or subtenancy.
§ 118-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Any person or persons violating any portion or provision of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as set forth in
Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties. Each day of violation shall be considered
a separate offense.
§ 118-4 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 118-5
1:140
ARTICLE II
Residential Property
[Adopted 6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 670]
§ 118-6. Residential certificate required.45
No person shall occupy, rent, lease, transfer title, or inhabit as a tenant or
tenants or occupy as an new owner any residential use until the current
owner or representative of such owner (including an attorney representing
the owner or prospective purchaser of such property) has applied for and
secured a certificate of continued occupancy from the Construction
Department of the Borough of Harrington Park.
§ 118-7. Conditions.46
An inspection shall be conducted to ensure that applicable municipal
ordinances affecting the use and occupancy of the premises have been
reasonably enforced and that there are no outstanding violations of
applicable Borough ordinances, including ordinances governing sidewalks
and redirection/removal of sump pumps out of sanitary sources. Any
construction work for which a Uniform Construction Code permit was
issued shall be inspected and closed. A certificate of smoke detector
installation shall be issued by the Harrington Park Fire Prevention Bureau
before a certificate of continued occupancy may be issued.
§ 118-8. Responsibility of owner for application.47
The current owner, landlord, prospective buyer/tenant or any agent of any
residential premises about to be sold, transferred or newly occupied shall
apply for a certificate of continued occupancy provided by the Harrington
Park Construction Department.
§ 118-9. Temporary certificate of continued occupancy.
A temporary certificate of continued occupancy may be issued at the
request of the owner, landlord, prospective buyer/tenant or any agent
thereof, provided that a suitable escrow is established to cover any and
all requested conditions for the issuance of a certificate of continued
occupancy. Escrow monies will be held in the account of either of the
respective attorneys for the seller or buyer (or if no attorney is involved then
with the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough). No temporary certificate
of continued occupancy shall exceed 90 days unless extenuating
circumstances are shown.
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 118-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-10
1:141
§ 118-10. Enforcement.48
Upon receipt and review of a complete application by the Construction Code
Official or his lawful designee, an inspection shall be conducted within 21
days of the property and a certificate of continued occupancy shall issue or
a written report stating the reasons for its denial shall issue.
§ 118-11. Fee.49
The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy shall be as provided in the
Borough Fee Schedule. This fee shall be in addition to any other fees that
may be required for fire inspection purposes.
§ 118-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who or which violates any of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and
Penalties.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 118-10 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 118-12
1:142
Chapter 127
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 331. Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 127-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle used primarily or intended to be
used in commerce or business (whether bearing a commercial registration
or not) and weighing in excess of four tons.
§ 127-2. Parking prohibited.
The parking of commercial vehicles is hereby prohibited in the Borough
of Harrington Park unless garaged and completely out of view, allowed
pursuant to specific zoning approval or parked pursuant to transient service
to a particular property.
§ 127-3. Violations and penalties.
Every person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during
which such violation continues. Upon conviction of violation of any such
offense, such person, firm or corporation shall be punished as set forth in
Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties.
Chapter 131
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 112.
Certificates of continued occupancy — See
Ch. 118.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 173.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 179.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 248.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 291.
§ 118-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-3
1:143

ARTICLE I
Enforcing Agency; Fees
§ 131-1. Enforcing agency established; subcode officials designated.
A. Establishment. There is hereby established, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq., in the Borough of Harrington Park, a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcement agency to be known as the
"Construction Department," consisting of the following officials:
(1) Construction Code Official, who shall be the chief administrator of
the Construction Department.
(2) Building Subcode Official.
(3) Plumbing Subcode Official.
(4) Electrical Subcode Official.
(5) Fire Protection Subcode Official.
(6) Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Official.50
B. Qualification of officials.
(1) Each official position created by Subsection A shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119
et seq., as amended, and the regulations adopted thereunder, as
amended,51 provided that, in lieu of the appointment of any
subcode official, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Harrington Park may retain by contract a qualified on-site
inspection agency pursuant to said regulations.
(2) More than one official position created by Subsection A may be
held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified for
each such position pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. and the
regulations adopted thereunder.
C. Appointment. Except as may hereafter be provided, the Construction
Code Official and the various subcode officials shall be appointed by the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Harrington Park. The
Construction Code Official and each such subcode official shall be
appointed for a term of four years. Nothing herein shall be deemed to
constitute the granting of tenure to any such official appointed;
however, for any official appointed who shall be under tenure at that
time, such tenure shall continue, and for any such official appointed
who shall subsequently gain tenure under any other ordinance or
statute, such tenure shall continue.
50.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. III).
51.Editor's Note: "The regulations" refers to the regulations established by the Commissioner
of the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 131-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-1
1:145
§ 131-2. Fee schedule.5253
The current fee schedule is available at the office of the Borough Clerk and
on the Borough's website at harringtonparknj.gov.
D. Removal. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Harrington Park
may remove any such appointed official for cause after written notice of
intention to remove, after a hearing has been given to such official and
after a hearing before the Mayor and Council has been held.
E. Personnel. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Harrington Park
shall by resolution hire personnel or transfer personnel, either on a fullor
part-time basis, for the purpose of the administration of the Uniform
Construction Code and the regulations in connection therewith or shall
by resolution authorize the Construction Code Official to so hire or
transfer personnel.
F. Responsibility.
(1) In the event that any subcode official or any administrative
personnel hired or transferred on a full- or part-time basis is an
employee of, holds any other office or position in or is employed by
the Borough of Harrington Park, such personnel shall, for purposes
of the Uniform Construction Code and its enforcement, be subject
to the procedures and policies of the Construction Department and
shall be primarily responsible to the Construction Code Official.
(2) Irrespective of any dispersal of personnel as mentioned above, the
public shall have the right, unless in the case of emergencies or
unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances, to do business with
respect to the Uniform Construction Code at one location in the
Borough of Harrington Park.
G. Rules and regulations. The Construction Code Official is hereby
authorized to promulgate such written rules and regulations governing
the Construction Department and its officials and employees as may be
necessary to establish and provide day-to-day office procedure,
provided that such rules and regulations do not conflict with and are in
accordance with the Uniform Construction Code and the regulations in
connection therewith. No such rules and regulations or amendments
thereto shall become effective until approved by resolution of the
Mayor and Council.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
53.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 673, adopted 6-19-2012, provided as follows: "Section 131-2
of Chapter 131 of the Code of the Borough of Harrington Park is hereby deleted in its
entirety and is hereby superseded by the fee schedule annexed hereto."
§ 131-1 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 131-3
1:146
§ 131-3. Fire limits.54
The Construction Code Official shall prepare and submit to the Mayor and
Council, biannually, a report for use in delineating or reevaluating the
delineation of the fire limits. This report shall indicate the recommendations
of the Construction Code Official, the Building Subcode Official and the
Fire Protection Subcode Official regarding those areas which should be
designated as within fire limits, with the reasons therefor.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 131-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-3
1:147

ARTICLE II
Elevator Inspections
[Added 11-20-1978 by Ord. No. 302]
§ 131-4. Establishment of position of Elevator Inspector.
There is hereby created and established in the office of the Construction
Code Official the position of Elevator Inspector for the Borough of
Harrington Park.
§ 131-5. Qualifications of Elevator Inspector. [Amended 4-18-2011
by Ord. No. 658]
The qualifications of the Elevator Inspector shall be as established by the
Construction Code Official until such time as licensing requirements are
adopted pursuant to the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C.
5:23-5.5.
§ 131-6. Inspections and certifications by Elevator Inspector.
All elevators within the Borough of Harrington Park shall be inspected and
certified in conformity with the regulations and requirements of the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.4. Such inspections and
certifications shall be conducted by the Elevator Inspector under direction
of the office of the Construction Code Official.
§ 131-7. Inspections by other than Elevator Inspector.
In lieu of the inspections set forth in § 131-6, a certification by an authorized
elevator company or responsible and liable insurance company providing
liability coverage for such elevator, conforming to the requirements of
§ 131-6, may be accepted by the Construction Code Official.
§ 131-8. Inspections pursuant to malfunction. [Amended 4-18-2011
by Ord. No. 658]
Any inspection requiring immediate attention by the office of the
Construction Code Official or his qualified and authorized Elevator
Inspector due to malfunction of the elevator or improper service shall result
in an additional charge as per the fee schedule in § 131-2 of this chapter.
§ 131-9. Fees to be liens on property.
All fees and charges set forth herein shall be liens against the property in
question.
§ 131-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-9
1:149
Chapter 150
EXCAVATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fines and penalties — See Ch. 164.
Noise — See Ch. 219.
Rodent extermination — See Ch. 256.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 297.
Soil removal — See Ch. 350, Art. XI.
§ 150-1. Title. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Excavation Ordinance
of the Borough of Harrington Park."
§ 150-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person filing an application pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter or performing any work which is regulated by the provisions
hereof and his agents, employees and/or servants.
APPROPRIATE BOROUGH OFFICIAL — For a major street opening, the
Borough Engineer; for a minor street opening, the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Harrington Park.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Harrington
Park.
EMERGENCY — Such combination of circumstances as may constitute a
threat to life, health or property and which shall be determined as such by
the Mayor or appropriate Borough official or their designees.
LEGAL HOLIDAY — Such legal holidays as may be established from time to
time by the State of New Jersey.
MAJOR STREET OPENING — Any excavation or tunnel which is not a minor
street opening.
MINOR STREET OPENING — Any excavation or tunnel which extends less
than 30 linear feet and is less than six feet in depth.
PERSON — Any person or persons, partnership, firm or corporation
ROAD or STREET —
Any road, street, curb, sidewalk or other public place dedicated to,
designed or accepted by the Borough or any portion thereof.
A.
§ 131-9 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 150-2
1:150
§ 150-3. Permit required.
§ 150-4. Application for permit.
The paved area of the public right-of-way, including the sidewalks,
curbs, gutters, catch basins and manholes.
B.
A. No person shall make an excavation in or tunnel under any street
without first obtaining a permit issued through the Borough Clerk's
office following review of the street opening (major or minor) by the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works and the Borough
Engineer. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 65855]
B. A tunnel or excavation may be commenced without a permit when an
emergency has arisen which makes it necessary to commence work
immediately; provided, however, that prior to such commencement, the
application for a permit shall have been filed with the Borough Clerk,
together with an estimate of the requisite fees and of the performance
guaranty; provided further, however, that the filing of such application
and estimates may be deferred until the next business day following the
commencement of work when the emergency arises after closing of the
office of the Borough Clerk. The permit, when issued, shall be
retroactive to the date on which the work commenced.
C. Such permit shall remain in effect for 30 days, provided that such time
may be extended, upon application made to the Borough Clerk within
said thirty-day period, for an additional 30 days upon good cause being
demonstrated to the appropriate Borough official for the noncompletion
of the work within the initial period.
A. All applications for street opening permits shall be made through and
filed with the Borough Clerk's office on forms provided by such office
and shall recite the following information: [Amended 4-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 65856]
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) Name, address and telephone number of the party to be reached in
the event of an emergency.
(3) Street address of premises adjacent to the proposed opening.
(4) The Tax Map lot and block numbers of properties abutting and
lying adjacent to that portion of the street to be opened.
(5) Name, address and telephone number of the property owner for
whose benefit the opening is to be performed.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 150-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-4
1:151
§ 150-5. Fees; exceptions.
§ 150-6. Bond requirement.
(6) Classification of the street opening, i.e., major or minor.
(7) Character and purpose of the proposed work.
(8) Estimated time when the work is to be commenced and completed.
(9) Plans and specifications, in quadruplicate, showing exact locations
and dimensions with respect to major street openings only.
(10) Name, address and telephone number of the person who is to
perform the work.
(11) An acknowledgement that the applicant agrees to replace, at his
own cost and expense, the street, curb, gutter, bike path, sidewalk,
catch basins, manholes and all other disturbed areas, so as to
restore said area to such state and condition as complies with
Borough standards, within 90 days of the street opening; provided,
however, that within 24 hours of such opening, the area shall be
temporarily restored by the placement of a stabilized base course,
maintained as determined in the reasonable judgment of the
appropriate Borough official until the final surface has been laid.
The final surface shall not be installed between November 15 and
April 15 unless otherwise permitted by a written authorization
signed by the Mayor.
(12) A certification by the applicant that he has followed the mark-out
procedure for determining the locations of utilities and
obstructions within the area of the proposed work and submission
of a mark-out reference number.
B. Application hereunder shall be filed not less than two days in advance of
any excavation, except that in case of emergency, the application shall
be filed pursuant to § 150-3.
A. Each applicant for a permit shall, before its issuance, pay to the
Borough Clerk minor street opening or major street opening fees in
accordance with the Borough Fee Schedule.57
B. In the event that a public utility company shall be exempted by statute
from payment of fees as required by the preceding subsection, the
utility company shall nevertheless file with the Borough Clerk annually
a surety bond, approved as to form by the Borough Attorney, in the
penal sum of not less than $25,000, conditioned upon the complete
restoration of the disturbed surface to such condition as complies with
Borough standards.
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 150-4 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 150-6
1:152
§ 150-7. Inspection and engineering fees.
Each applicant shall deposit in trust with the Borough Clerk an amount
as determined by the appropriate Borough official which is an estimate of
all anticipated inspection and engineering costs and fees. In the event that
such actual costs and fees are less than the amount deposited in trust, then
the Borough shall refund the difference between the amount deposited in
trust and the actual costs and fees charged to the applicant. In the event
that such actual costs and fees exceed the amount deposited in trust, then
the difference between the actual costs and fees and the amount deposited
in trust shall be payable from the bond required by the terms of § 150-6.
§ 150-8. Release of bond.
A. No permit shall be issued until the applicant has filed with the Borough
Clerk a cash bond in an amount equal to 120% of the estimated cost of
closing the road in a manner as is herein provided and completing any
work incidental thereto as estimated by the appropriate Borough
official. The Borough Council may, in its discretion, upon appropriate
application by a public utility, require the posting of a surety bond or
waive the bond requirement of this section upon the presentation of
satisfactory proof that the utility is capable of meeting any claim
against it arising out of the work anticipated to be performed. Such
bond shall be executed by the applicant as principal and by a surety
company in good standing and licensed to do business in the State of
New Jersey as surety and shall be conditioned as follows:
(1) To indemnify and hold harmless the Borough from all losses,
damages, claims and expenses, including expenses incurred in the
defense of any litigation arising out of injury to person or property
resulting from any work done by the applicant under the permit.
(2) To indemnify the Borough for any expense incurred in enforcing
any of the provisions of this chapter.
(3) To indemnify any person who shall sustain personal injuries or
damages to his property as a result of any act or omission of the
applicant, his agents, employees or subcontractors in the course of
any work under the permit.
(4) Upon the applicant's restoring the surface and foundation of the
street for which the permit is granted in a manner acceptable to the
appropriate Borough official.
B. A single bond may be accepted to cover a number of excavations by the
applicant. Bonds shall remain in force for a period of 12 months after
the date the last work is performed to guarantee the integrity of the
street closing.
C. A bond may be waived by the appropriate Borough official if it is already
provided for in a subdivision or developer's agreement.
§ 150-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-8
1:153
§ 150-9. Limitations.
Except in the case of an emergency, the following limitations shall be
applicable to all roads and streets within the Borough:
§ 150-10. Barricades.
A. No bond shall be released unless the surface and foundations of the
road or street shall have been satisfactorily restored in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. Any determination as to whether or not
such road or street shall have been so restored shall be made solely by
the Borough Council after receiving the advice and recommendation of
appropriate Borough officials, and the determination of the Borough
Council shall be final and conclusive.
B. The bond shall also secure the Borough against damage to, removal of
or interference with Borough property.
C. Upon written notification to the applicant by the appropriate Borough
official that Borough property has been damaged, removed or
interfered with, the applicant shall correct such condition within a
reasonable time thereafter as determined by the appropriate Borough
official or the cost of such correction shall be payable from such bond.
The bond shall also secure the Borough for the costs of engineering and
inspection fees, as specified in § 150-7.
A. No excavation or backfilling shall be undertaken from November 15
through March 31, and no restoration or pavement construction shall
be undertaken prior to April 15 except upon special written approval
signed by the Mayor, upon written advice of the appropriate Borough
official. Such special approval may be granted if weather conditions
permit and suitable materials are available; provided, however, that no
such special approval will be granted if ambient temperatures below
40° F. are anticipated during the course of the work or where frozen
subgrade exits. No such special approval shall relieve the applicant
from compliance with all other provisions of this chapter.
B. No street or road which has been paved with macadam or bituminous
concrete surface shall be excavated or otherwise opened for a period of
three years from the date of completion thereof except upon prior
approval granted by the Mayor.
A. During the course of any work for which application is required
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the applicant shall at all
times provide and maintain suitable and sufficient barricades with
warning lights, danger signals and signs. Barricades with warning signs
shall be placed at all roads or streets closed to traffic. Warnings and
detour signs shall be placed at all closures and intersections and along
detour routes such as to clearly mark the same. All barricades and
warning lights shall be illuminated from sunset until sunrise. Wherever
necessary for adequate protection of the public, a watchman and/or
§ 150-8 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 150-10
1:154
§ 150-11. Insurance. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
Each applicant shall furnish proof at the time of application that it maintains
sufficient public liability insurance with an insurance company licensed to
transact business in the State of New Jersey, in an amount of not less than
$1,000,000/$3,000,000. Said policy of insurance shall specifically designate
the Borough and its employees and agents as named insured and shall
require 10 days' written notice to the Borough prior to termination thereof.
Policies shall also provide motor vehicle liability coverage in identical
amounts and shall have X, C and U exclusions deleted.
§ 150-12. Entry upon private property.
No applicant shall enter upon or make use of any private property without
the written permission of the owner thereof.
§ 150-13. Limitation of hours.
Except in case of emergency, no work for which application is required
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be performed or undertaken
on Sundays or legal holidays or between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m.
§ 150-14. Time limit for completion.59
Notice of commencement of work for which application is required pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter shall be given to the appropriate Borough
official not less than two days in advance thereof, and such work shall
be completed within the time limits specified hereinafter. Thereafter, the
Borough may cause such work to be completed, and the costs thereof shall
be payable from the applicant's bond.
§ 150-15. Specifications and procedures for excavation and
trenches.
The following specifications and procedures shall be applicable to all
excavations and trenches:
flagman will be provided by the applicant, as determined by the Chief
of Police.58
B. No person shall remove, displace, break or change any sign or lights or
signals set up or placed in any street or public place as a warning of
danger or indicating an excavation or obstruction or showing that any
street or public place is closed to traffic, and no person shall, between
the hours of sunset and sunrise, extinguish any light used for any of the
purposes aforesaid. [Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 150-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-15
1:155
§ 150-16. Specifications and procedures for backfilling.
Trenches and excavations above pipe grade shall be backfilled within 24
hours after subsurface work is completed, unless written approval is
obtained from the appropriate Borough official. Backfill shall be approved
granular material, free of organic matter, clay, silts, cinders or other
deleterious materials. Backfill shall be placed in maximum nine-inch layers
and mechanically tamped after placement of each layer such as to achieve a
density equal to preexcavation conditions. Backfill shall be sufficiently moist
to achieve proper compaction.
§ 150-17. Specifications and procedures for pavement.
The following specifications and procedures shall be applicable to all
pavement on roads and streets:
A. The applicant shall determine the exact location of all underground
structures, known or unknown, and shall take appropriate measures for
protection of adjacent piping or utilities. The applicant shall be
responsible for any damages to pipelines or utilities and shall give
notice to any utility concerned prior to repair or backfill.
B. The pavement shall be cut by saw or pavement cutters in straight lines.
Trenches shall be dug so that pipe can be laid to the alignment and
depth required. Minimum depth of cover from the surface of the ground
to the top of the pipe barrel shall be as shown on drawings. Trenches
shall be braced and drained so that the workers may work safety and
efficiently; the applicant shall comply with requirements of the State
Construction Code and the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Act.
C. Discharge from trench dewatering pumps, free of soil materials, shall
be conducted to natural drainage channels or drains.
D. Trenches shall be excavated to a depth required to provide a uniform
and continuous bearing and support for pipe on solid and undisturbed
ground. Any portion of trench excavated below specified grade shall be
corrected with approved material and thoroughly compacted. Where
the bottom of trench at subgrade is unstable or includes ashes, cinders,
refuse, vegetable or fragments of inorganic material, the applicant shall
excavate and remove such unsuitable material.
E. Hand methods of excavation shall be employed in locations designated
on drawings. Otherwise, the applicant may utilize trench digging
machinery or hand methods of excavation.
A. For openings of less than 100 square feet in surface area, the upper 7 1/
2 inches of trench shall be filled by the applicant with graded one-andone-
half-inch stone equal to Division 3, Section 2, of State Specification,
with dust, compacted by a five-ton roller. After 24 hours of traffic, or
other period as stipulated by the appropriate Borough official, the
edges of the trench shall be saw cut parallel to the street center line
§ 150-15 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 150-17
1:156
and six inches outside the widest trench limits, after which the upper
3 1/2 inches of stone shall be removed and final pavement shall be
constructed. After 30 days, and after six months, the applicant shall
place fine aggregate bituminous concrete in depressed areas to form a
smooth, even street surface.
B. For openings of greater than 100 square feet in surface area, the upper
7 1/2 inches of trench shall be filled by the applicant with five inches of
graded one-and-one-half-inch stone equal to Division 3, Section 20, of
State Specification, with dust, and 1 1/2 inches of stabilized base
material equal to Division 3, Section 2A, of State Specification,
compacted by a ten-ton roller. The surface shall be maintained by the
applicant for not less than 30 days and, at the discretion of the
appropriate Borough official, to a maximum of 90 days, such that
maximum surface depression is one inch. Thereafter, the edges of the
trench shall be saw cut parallel to the street center line and six inches
outside the widest trench limits, after which the upper 3 1/2 inches of
material shall be removed and final pavement shall be constructed.
After six months, the applicant shall place fine aggregate bituminous
concrete in depressed areas to form a smooth, even street surface.
C. For emergency openings from November 15 through March 31, the
procedure shall be as for openings greater than 100 square feet, except
that temporary paving material may be approved cold patching
compound, if hot material is not available.
D. Final pavement, in all cases, shall be four inches of graded one-and-onehalf-
inch stone, equal to Division 3, Section 20, of State Specification,
with dust, two inches of stabilized base material equal to Division 3,
Section 2A, of State Specification, 1 1/2 inches of fine aggregate
bituminous concrete equal to Division 3, Section 12, Type SM-1 of State
Specification, feathered over a twelve-inch width of tack coat, to meet
adjacent surfaces. All thickness shall be as measured after compaction
by a ten-ton roller.
E. Where a trench exceeds 100 feet in length, a one-and-one-half-inch
surface course shall be placed from curb to street center line on deadend
streets and from curb to curb on through streets. Where a trench
exceeds six feet in width, is skewed to street center line or is connected
to spur trenches, a one-and-one-half-inch surface course shall be placed
from curb to curb. In all cases surface shall be cleaned end tack coat
placed before application of surface course, which shall be feathered
toward each curb.
F. Where excavations total and/or exceed 100 square feet in area over a
six-month time period within a continuous, 400-linear-foot roadway
section, a one-and-one-half-inch surface course shall be placed from
curb to curb on all streets in accordance with current NJDOT
Specifications. The surface shall be cleaned and tack coat placed before
application of surface course, which shall be feathered toward each
curb. [Added 10-10-2017 by Ord. No. 71660]
§ 150-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-17
1:157
§ 150-18. New streets and roads.
Pavement in new streets or roads shall be in accordance with specifications
and procedures specified in § 150-17D.
§ 150-19. Specifications and procedures for curbs.
Curbs damaged by excavations shall be restored and curbs in new streets
and roads shall be installed in accordance with the following specifications
and procedures:
§ 150-20. Specifications and procedures for sidewalks.
Sidewalks damaged by excavations shall be restored and sidewalks on
new streets and roads shall be installed in accordance with the following
specifications and procedures:
G. Upon prior approval of the appropriate Borough official, subgrade stone
may be replaced with an equivalent thickness of stabilized base
material.
A. Curbs shall be six inches wide at the top, nine inches wide at the bottom
and 20 inches deep, of which six inches shall extend above finished
grade at gutter.
B. Foundations under curbs shall be undisturbed, compacted, nonorganic
material. If placed on fill, such material shall be granular, nonorganic
and compacted in nine-inch layers.
C. Curbs shall be poured in approved forms, using four-thousand-poundsper-
square-inch concrete with maximum stump of four inches. Forms
shall be inspected before pouring, and concrete shall be thoroughly
vibrated and cured as approved. No concrete shall be poured except in
dry weather, at ambient temperatures between 50° F. and 90° F.
D. Curb sections shall not exceed 10 feet in length and shall be separated
by contraction joint material.
E. Depressed curb sections shall be poured at driveways and barrier-free
ramps. Breaking of full curbs to create depressed curbs is prohibited.
A. Sidewalks shall be 48 inches thick, set to approved grades.
B. Foundations under sidewalks shall be undisturbed, compacted,
nonorganic material. If placed on fill, such material shall be granular,
nonorganic and compacted in nine-inch layers.
C. Sidewalks shall be poured in approved forms, using three-thousandpounds-
per-square-inch concrete with maximum slump of four inches.
No concrete shall be poured except in dry weather, at ambient
60.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection F as Subsection G.
§ 150-17 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 150-20
1:158
§ 150-21. Noncompliance; right of Borough to remedy.
If the applicant does not satisfactorily comply with the provisions of
§§ 150-16, 150-17, 150-18, 150-19 and 150-20, then the Borough may give
notice to the applicant that the applicant must comply with the specified
provisions within 48 hours, weather permitting. Satisfactory compliance is
to be determined by the appropriate Borough official. If the applicant fails
to satisfactorily comply within the forty-eight-hour period, then the Borough
may remedy said noncompliance without further notice to the applicant at
the sole cost of the applicant. Such cost shall be charged against the bond
as specified in § 150-6.
§ 150-22. Cleanup procedures.
The applicant shall, at all times, maintain the excavated street or road in
a clean condition. All dirt, rubbish and excess materials shall be regularly
removed by the applicant, and backfill shall be mounded within the limits of
the excavation. All tools and temporary structures shall be removed by the
applicant upon completion of work.
§ 150-23. Approvals and special procedures.
All materials and subcontractors shall be subject to the approval of
appropriate Borough officials, who shall be authorized to order such special
maintenance, pavement procedures and safety requirements as
circumstances may require.
§ 150-24. Special conditions.
§ 150-25. Rules and regulations.
The Borough Engineer may make any reasonable rules and regulations
which he considers necessary for the administration and enforcement of
this chapter, but no regulation shall be inconsistent with, alter or amend
any provision of this chapter or impose any requirement which is in addition
to those expressly or by implication imposed by this chapter. No regulation
temperatures between 50° F. and 90° F. and concrete shall be cured in
approved fashion. [Amended 11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 719]
D. Sidewalk sections shall be separated by contraction joints at four-foot
intervals and by construction joints at twelve-foot intervals. Surfaces
shall be troweled to approved finish.
A. The Borough Council may impose such conditions in any case it deems
necessary and appropriate.
B. Under extraordinary conditions not covered by this chapter, the
Borough Engineer shall receive a copy of the plan of the permittee and,
after an evaluation, set a fee commensurate with the circumstances in
the exercise of his reasonable judgment.
§ 150-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-25
1:159
shall be effective unless it shall have been approved by resolution of the
Borough Council. Copies of all current rules and regulations shall be
furnished to each permittee at the time of the issuance of the permit.
§ 150-26. Utility companies.
§ 150-27. Waiver of provisions.
In the event of an emergency as hereinabove defined, application for waiver
of specific provisions of this chapter may be made to the Mayor or to
the appropriate Borough official who is authorized in such cases to permit
waiver of requirements and impose additional conditions as required to
protect the public interest and Borough property.
§ 150-28. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in
Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties.
Chapter 153
FEES
A. Utility companies, including those engaged in the installation of gas,
water and electric lines, shall report to the Department of Public Works,
quarterly, their intentions with regard to prospective work requiring
future street openings in the community, for the purpose of
coordinating such activity with pavement projects anticipated by the
Borough.
B. Except in the case of emergency, the Borough shall have the right to
schedule street openings with utility companies in a manner which will
create the least disturbance to pavement courses, in furtherance of
which purpose the Borough shall provide to the utilities a schedule of
expected street construction and resurfacing.
§ 150-25 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 150-28
1:160
ARTICLE I
Zoning Board of Adjustment Escrow Accounts
[Adopted 11-18-1996 by Ord. No. 487]
§ 153-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PROFESSIONAL PERSONNEL or PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Includes
the services of a duly licensed engineer, surveyor, planner, attorney, realtor,
appraiser or other expert and consultants who would provide professional
services to ensure an application meets performance standards set forth in
the ordinance and other experts whose testimony is in any area in which the
applicant has presented expert testimony.
§ 153-2. Charge to Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2 and 40:55D-53.3, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall, in addition to other fees, provide (but not by way of
limitation) as follows.
§ 153-3. Establishment and replenishment of escrow account.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may collect the fees later provided for
herein by way of establishing an escrow account and reasonable rules and
regulations with respect to the maintenance and establishment of such
account. The Board may require that an initial escrow fund be established
and when that fund having been duly charged for items and expense
incurred by the Board is reduced by more than 50%, then the Board may
require supplemental escrow payments to replenish the fund.
§ 153-4. Conformity to statute required.
In any event, the rules and regulations promulgated with respect to holding
of deposits, collection of interest and establishment of escrow accounts
shall in all manner comply with the applicable New Jersey statutes.
§ 153-5. Adoption of certain charges by resolution authorized.
To the fullest extent permitted by law, this article shall allow the Board to
provide, by resolution, the fees, charges and escrows to be charged for any
application or matter coming before the Board and further provide that no
approval, permit or certificate of occupancy be issued until said fees have
been paid.
§ 153-6. Responsibility of applicant.
An applicant shall be responsible for all fees, charges and expenses of
professional personnel incurred and paid by it necessary to process an
application before a municipal agency, such as, but not by way of limitation:
§ 153-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-6
1:161
A. Charges for reviews by professional personnel of applications and
accompanying documents.
B. Issuance of reports by professional personnel to the municipal agency
setting forth recommendations resulting from the review of any
documents submitted by the applicant.
C. Charges for any telephone conference or meetings with the applicant,
his attorney or any of his experts.
D. Review of additional documents submitted by the applicant and
issuance of reports relating thereto.
E. Review or preparation of easements, developers' agreements, deeds,
resolutions or other supporting or necessary documentation.
F. Preparation and attendance at meetings.
G. Such other expenses (actual or otherwise) actually incurred by the
professional.
§ 153-6 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 153-6
1:162
ARTICLE II
Smoke and Carbon Monoxide Detector Inspections
[Adopted 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 557; amended in its entirety at time
of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III)]
§ 153-7. Fee for inspection.
The fee for smoke detector/carbon monoxide detector inspections shall be
as provided in the Borough Fee Schedule.61
§ 153-8. Fee for expedited inspection.
The fee for expedited smoke detector/carbon monoxide detector inspections
(less than five business days' notice) shall be as provided in the Borough
Fee Schedule.
§ 153-9. Fee for reinspection.
A. The fee for inspection of a single-family home and/or commercial
premises for a certificate of continued occupancy shall be paid as per
the salary ordinance and fee schedule established by ordinance.
B. The fee for a reinspection shall be as provided in the Borough Fee
Schedule.
61.Editor's Note: Borough fees are also posted on the Borough website.
§ 153-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-9
1:163

ARTICLE III
Miscellaneous Fees
[Adopted 1-18-2005 by Ord. No. 577]
§ 153-10. Bad checks. [Amended 6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 67262]
The fee for a bounced, dishonored or returned check is $20.63
§ 153-11. Vital statistics. [Amended 12-27-2007 by Ord. No. 622]
Certified copies of all vital statistic records (marriages, domestic
partnership agreements, civil unions, births, corrections, and deaths) shall
be $20.
§ 153-12. Late fee for animal licenses.
Any animal license fee not paid by February 1 in any calendar year shall be
late and subject to penalty and assessment as provided otherwise in these
ordinances.64
§ 153-13. Administrative fee for special duty police. [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 67265]
In addition to normal overtime duty paid to a Harrington Park police officer
by a private contractor when required to use special duty police presence,
a fee of 20% of the hourly overtime rate paid to such police officer shall
be assessed and added to the cost of such special duty police officer and
represents that administrative fee incurred by the Borough of Harrington
Park for administering the payment of such services; in addition, such
private contractor shall pay the rate of $200 for each Harrington Park police
vehicle/Borough vehicle used by such special duty police officer during the
course of his employment.
§ 153-14. Minimum escrow for engineering and legal fees. [Added
7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 67466]
For any type of construction requiring engineering and legal fees, including
minor and major soil moving, the minimum escrow established for
administration by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
be $1,000.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
63.Editor's Note: The section listing alcoholic beverage license fees which immediately
followed this section was repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658. See now § 93-1.
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 105, Animals, Art. I, Dog Licensing and Control.
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 153-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-15
1:165
§ 153-15. Raffle license. [Added 6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 672]
Raffle license fee shall be $10.
§ 153-15 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 153-15
1:166
Chapter 162
FILMING
§ 162-1. Request for permit.
The film company will request a permit, in writing, directed to the Borough
of Harrington Park, which shall be reviewed by the Mayor and Council, at
least 10 days prior to the date of filming at a regularly scheduled Council
meeting. In such notification, the film company shall advise of the filming
dates, exact location, and name and contact information of the person in
charge of filming, and name of insurance carrier.
§ 162-2. Permit fee; period of validity; permit extension.
The cost of the permit shall be $75. The permit shall be valid for up to two
consecutive days of filming. No filming is permitted for more than two days
without a permit extension, and no more than two permits will be issued
to any one property in any twelve-month period for purposes of the filming
referenced herein.
§ 162-3. Fee for filming.
The fee for filming in Harrington Park shall be $1,500 per event, payable to
the Borough of Harrington Park before filming begins.
§ 162-4. Police presence required; compensation; police review
form.
If it is required that one or more officers from the Harrington Park Police
Department be present on or near the filming location, then the film
company will compensate the Borough for overtime pay for any police
officer (at their respective, contracted overtime rate of pay) posted in the
vicinity due to filming for the period of time the crew is on site. The
production company shall file with the Chief of Police a copy of the attached
Film Permit Police Review form.67 If after review the Chief determines that
police presence will be required, the Chief shall so note on the form, and
an escrow as established by the Chief for that purpose shall be deposited
with the Chief Financial Officer before any filming is to begin. In the event,
after filming begins, the Chief of Police determines that police presence
is required, then he shall immediately amend the permit, requiring the
appropriate escrow, and post the necessary police personnel.
§ 162-5. Notification of property owners near film site.
Five days before any filming begins, the production company or owner of
the property to be utilized shall notify all neighbors on the block and all
properties within 200 feet of the location of the date and times of the
67.Editor's Note: The Film Permit Police Review form is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 153-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-5
1:167
proposed filming. Such notice shall be by regular mail posted seven days
before the date of filming or by personal service effective as of the date of
delivery. Before any work is done, the filming company must provide the
Borough with proof of insurance.
§ 162-6. Restricted hours.
There is to be no work and/or noise before 7:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m.
§ 162-7. Cleanup required.
The entire area is to be cleaned up of food, litter, etc., before the crew leaves
each day, including the street where any of the vehicles belonging to the
company or crew have been parked.
§ 162-8. Storage and parking restrictions.
There is to be no overnight storage of any film company or crew vehicles
on Harrington Park streets; in addition, the film company shall not, without
the written authorization of the Borough of Harrington Park, use any public
property for storage or parking of vehicles or equipment. At all times streets
shall remain unimpeded, and no parking shall be allowed in any manner that
would impede access to the streets by any emergency vehicle or vehicle of
a resident.
§ 162-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Violation of this chapter shall subject the production company to the
penalties as set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties, per violation.
Chapter 164
FINES AND PENALTIES
§ 164-1. General penalty.
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the maximum penalty for
violation of any provision of this Code shall, upon conviction, be a fine
not exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 164-2. Housing and zoning violations.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 164-1, should the Borough chose to
impose a fine in an amount greater than $1,250 upon an owner for violations
of housing or zoning codes, in such event the Borough shall provide a thirtyday
period in which the owner shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing
before a court of competent jurisdiction for an independent determination
concerning the violation. Subsequent to the expiration of the thirty-day
§ 162-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 164-2
1:168
period, a fine greater than $1,250 may be imposed if a court has not
determined otherwise or, upon reinspection of the property, it is determined
that the abatement has not been substantially completed.
Chapter 167
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fines and penalties — See Ch. 164.
§ 167-1. Discharge of firearms restricted.
The discharge of any firearms, bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot, air gun,
spring gun, gas gun or any other device which impels a projectile through
the use of force is prohibited in the Borough of Harrington Park.
§ 167-2. Exceptions
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 167-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties as set forth in
Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties.
Chapter 173
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 33.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 112.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131.
Fees for smoke and carbon monoxide
detectors — See Ch. 153, Art. II.
Hazardous materials cleanup — See Ch. 189.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 248.
A. Any duly appointed law officer in the course of his or her official duty.
B. The use of firearms when necessary for the preservation of human life.
C. The use of firearms when hunting in conformity with the applicable
laws and regulations of the State of New Jersey.
D. Use of a firearm on a licensed pistol, rifle or firearm range and under
the supervision of the Police Department.
§ 164-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-3
1:169
§ 173-1. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383),68
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq.) shall be locally
enforced in the Borough of Harrington Park.
§ 173-2. Agency designation.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Harrington Park Fire Department
through its Bureau of Fire Prevention which is hereby created therein. The
Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be hereinafter known as the "local enforcing
agency."
§ 173-3. Duties of enforcing agency.
§ 173-4. Organization.
§ 173-5. Appointments; qualifications; term of office; removal.
A. The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Code in all
buildings, structures and premises within the established boundaries of
the Borough of Harrington Park other than one- and two-unit owneroccupied
dwellings used exclusively for dwelling purposes and
buildings, structures, and premises owned or operated by the federal
government, interstate agencies or the state.
B. The local enforcing agency shall faithfully comply with all pertinent
requirements of the International Fire Code, New Jersey Edition.
A. The Bureau of Fire Prevention established by § 173-2 of this chapter
shall be under the direct supervision and control of the Fire Official who
shall report to the Chief of the Fire Department.
B. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have at least one paid inspector.
A. Appointment and qualifications of Fire Official. The Fire Official shall be
certified by the state and appointed by the governing body from a list of
three names submitted by the Chief of the Fire Department.
B. Appointment and qualifications of inspectors and other employees.
Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency shall be
appointed by the governing body upon recommendation of the Fire
Official. All life-hazard use inspectors shall be certified by the state.
C. Appointment of legal counsel. The governing body shall specifically
appoint legal counsel to assist the agency in enforcing the Uniform Fire
Code.
68.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
§ 167-3 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 173-5
1:170
§ 173-6. Life-hazards uses.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention established by § 173-2 of this chapter shall
carry out the periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the
Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs.
§ 173-7. Non-life-hazard uses.
In addition to the registration required by the Uniform Fire Code, the
following non-life-hazard uses shall register with the Bureau of Fire
Prevention. These uses shall be inspected once per year at an annual fee of
$75.
D. Term in office. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of a minimum of
one year. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
E. Removal from office. The Fire Official, inspectors and other employees
of the agency shall be subject to removal by the governing body for just
cause. Before removal from office, all persons shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard by the governing body or the hearing officer
designated by it.
A. A Assembly.
(1) A-1: eating establishment under 50.
(2) A-2: take-out food service (no seating).
(3) A-3: houses of worship.
B. B Business/professional.
(1) B-1: professional use, one- and two-story less than 5,000 square
feet per floor.
(2) B-2: one- and two-story more than 5,000 square feet and less than
10,000 square feet per floor.
(3) B-3: one- and two-story more than 10,000 square feet.
(4) B-4: three- to five-story less than 5,000 square feet per floor.
(5) B-5: three- to five-story more than 5,000 square feet per floor.
(6) B-6: three- to five-story over 10,000 square feet per floor.
C. C Retail (mercantile).
(1) M-1: one- and two-story less than 5,000 square feet per floor.
(2) M-2: one- and two-story more than 5,000 square feet per floor.
(3) M with the exception that hardware store 3,000 square feet and
retail store over 12,000 square feet are life-hazard uses.
§ 173-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-7
1:171
§ 173-8. Permits and certificate of Fire Code status.
§ 173-9. Technical amendments.
(Reserved)
§ 173-10. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208), any person aggrieved by any action of the
local enforcing agency shall have the right to appeal to the Bergen County
Construction Board of Appeals.
§ 173-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Enforcement and violations and penalties shall be managed in conformity
with the International Fire Code, New Jersey Edition, N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.10 et
seq., and all other laws of the State of New Jersey as may be applicable.
All fines collected shall be deposited to a dedicated account for the purpose
of funding the enforcing agency, as the same may be permitted by law. The
funds not allocated from this account by the Mayor and Council for the
enforcing agency shall become part of the general fund of the Borough.
Chapter 179
D. D Manufacturing (factory).
(1) F-1: one- and two-story less than 5,000 square feet per floor.
(2) F: exception life-hazard uses.
E. S Storage S-1 (moderate hazard S-1; low hazard S-2).
(1) S-1: one- and two-story less than 5,000 square feet per floor.
(2) S: exception life-hazard uses.
F. F Residential (LEA listed with multifamily BHI). Fee is for each building.
(1) R-1: one to six units.
(2) R-2: seven to 12 units.
(3) R-3: 13 to 20 units.
(4) R-4: 21 to 50 units.
(5) R-5: each additional unit: $10.
A. The application for the permits listed in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.7(b) shall be as
provided by state regulations.
B. The cost for the issuance of a certificate of Fire Code status shall be
$35.
§ 173-7 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 173-11
1:172
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 173-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-11
1:173

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization; Findings of Fact; Purpose and Objectives
§ 179-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Harrington Park, of Bergen County, New Jersey, does ordain as follows.
§ 179-2. Findings of fact.
§ 179-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Harrington Park are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 179-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-3
1:175
§ 179-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 179-3 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 179-4
1:176
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 179-5. Definitions and interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Code Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent annual
or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30,
AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30, the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
§ 179-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-5
1:177
ELEVATED BUILDING —
EROSION — The process of gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
A nonbasement building:
Built, in the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard,
to have the top of the elevated floor elevated above the base flood
elevation plus freeboard by means of piling, columns (posts and
piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and
(1)
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood.
(2)
A.
In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls
with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters.
B.
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 179-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 179-5
1:178
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without accumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 179-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-5
1:179
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION —
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
[For other than new construction or substantial improvements under
the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. No. 97-348)] includes
substantial improvements and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such
as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pilings, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation,
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
A.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start
B.
§ 179-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 179-5
1:180
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before damage
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
B.
§ 179-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-5
1:181

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 179-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Harrington Park, Bergen County, New Jersey.
§ 179-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 179-8. Violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough of Harrington
Park from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
§ 179-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 179-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Harrington Park,
Community No. 340040, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report, "Flood Insurance Study,
Bergen County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," dated August 28,
2019.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Bergen County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panels 34003C0113H,
343003C0114H, 34003C0201H and 34003C0202H, whose
effective date is August 28, 2019.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 85
Harriot Ave, Harrington Park, New Jersey.
§ 179-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-10
1:183
§ 179-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Harrington Park, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 179-10 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 179-11
1:184
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 179-12. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 179-7. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Construction Code Official
and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following
information is required:
§ 179-13. Designation of local administrator.
The Construction Code Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 179-14. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
Duties of the Construction Code Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 179-17B; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 179-18A are met.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 179-7,
§ 179-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-14
1:185
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Construction
Code Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer § 179-17, Specific standards, Subsection
A, Residential construction, and Subsection B, Nonresidential
construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 179-12C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control and the Land
Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Substantial damage review.
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 179-17, Specific standards, Subsection A, Residential
construction; Subsection B, Nonresidential construction; and
Subsection C, Manufactured homes.
F. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
§ 179-14 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 179-14
1:186
§ 179-15. Variance procedure.
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 179-15.
A. Appeal Board.
(1) The Zoning Board as established by Mayor and Council shall hear
and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Construction Code Official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court as
provided in N.J.S.A. Const. Art. 6, § 5, par. 4.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board shall consider
all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in
other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
§ 179-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-15
1:187
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Zoning Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Construction Code Official shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing
Subsection A(4)(a) through (k) has been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
§ 179-15 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 179-15
1:188
or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection A(4),
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 179-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-15
1:189

ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 179-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required.
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements, the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
§ 179-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-16
1:191
§ 179-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 179-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard or in § 179-14B, use of other base flood and floodway data, the
following standards are required:
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two at least openings in two exterior
walls of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
or other covering or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, together with the attendant utilities(including
all electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other
service equipment) and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the
more restrictive base flood elevation plus one foot or as required by
ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1.
(2) Require within any AO or AH zone on the municipality's DFIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
§ 179-16 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 179-17
1:192
basement, together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in feet plus
one foot, above the highest adjacent (at least three feet if no depth
number is specified); and require adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE zone
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities as well as all electrical,
heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other service equipment:
either
(1) Elevated at or above the more restrictive base flood elevation plus
one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1; and require
within any AO or AH zone on the municipality's DFIRM to elevate
above the depth number specified in feet plus one foot, above the
highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no depth number is
specified); and require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that below the more restrictive, base flood
elevation plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table
6-1, the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water; have structural components
capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy; and be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the applicable provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall
be provided to the official as set forth in § 179-14C(2)(b).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 179-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage;
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the more restrictive base flood
§ 179-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-17
1:193
§ 179-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 179-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
elevation plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14,
Table 2-1; and
(e) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If Subsection A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for Flood Hazard
Reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 foot at any
point.
§ 179-17 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 179-18
1:194
Chapter 189
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP
§ 189-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Hazardous Waste Costs Recovery
Ordinance."
§ 189-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, or
dumping of a hazardous substance into the air or waters or onto the lands of
the state, or into the air or waters outside the jurisdiction of the state, when
damage may result to the lands, waters, air, or natural resources within the
jurisdiction of the state.
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any items used to extinguish any fire or stop or
contain any leak or spill involving any hazardous material which cannot
be reused or cannot be replenished without cost after that particular fire,
leak or spill. These include but are not restricted to firefighting foam,
chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent material, sand, recovery drums,
and specialized protective equipment, including but not restricted to acid
suits, acid gloves, goggles, and protective clothing.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any substance defined as such pursuant to
Section 3 of the Spill Compensation and Control Act (N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11b).
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment, registered or unregistered,
including but not limited to passenger cars, motorcycles, trucks, tractortrailers,
construction equipment and farm machinery.
VESSEL — Any container, drum, box, cylinder or tank used to hold or
contain or carry or store any hazardous material.
VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATION — A duly incorporated volunteer fire,
ambulance, first aid, emergency or rescue company or squad.
§ 189-3. Purpose.
A. This chapter provides for the reimbursement for or the replacement of
the specialized and sometimes nonreusable equipment required by the
state and federal regulations to be made available in the Borough in
case of fire, leakage or spillage involving any hazardous material.
B. This chapter entitles the Borough of Harrington Park to reimbursement
for any expendable items used by the Borough or any of its agencies in
extinguishing any fires, stopping or containing any leak or controlling
any spill or discharge of hazardous materials.
§ 179-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-4
1:195
§ 189-4. Person responsible for reimbursement.
Any person or entity responsible for causing or allowing an unauthorized
or otherwise negligent discharge of a hazardous substance that requires
emergency action by a unit or volunteer organization of the Borough of
Harrington Park in order to protect the public health, safety or welfare or
the environment is liable, jointly and severally, to the Borough of Harrington
Park or any such unit or organization for the necessary and reasonable costs
incurred in investigating, mitigation, minimizing, removing, and abating the
spill discharge.
§ 189-5. Enforcement.
A. The volunteer organization of the Borough of Harrington Park which is
responsible for responding to the emergency caused by the spill or
discharge of a hazardous substance shall keep a record of the costs
attributable thereto and provide copies of that record to the governing
body of the municipality within which the spill or discharge occurred.69
B. A volunteer organization of the Borough of Harrington Park which is
responsible for responding to the emergency caused by the spill or the
discharge of a hazardous substance may request the Borough Attorney
to bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of
costs permitted pursuant to this chapter against the person and/or
entity responsible for causing or allowing the unauthorized spill or
discharge. Upon receiving such a request, the Borough Attorney shall
submit a written, itemized claim for the total certified costs incurred by
the volunteer organization to the responsible person with a written
demand that those costs be paid. Within a reasonable period of time
before bringing a civil action for recovery of those costs, the Borough
Attorney shall mail written notice to the responsible person and/or
entity informing him or it that, unless the total certified costs are paid
within 30 days after the date of mailing of the notice, the Borough
Attorney shall bring a civil action for that amount.
C. In making a determination of the amount required to be reimbursed
pursuant to this chapter, the status of a person liable pursuant to
§ 189-4 of this chapter as a taxpayer to the Borough of Harrington Park
may be taken into consideration.
D. The volunteer organization responding to the emergency caused by the
spill or discharge of a hazardous substance may compromise and settle
any claim for costs permitted pursuant to this chapter in such amount in
the discretion of the organization as may appear appropriate and
equitable under all of the circumstances.
E. Any recovery of costs shall be credited to the appropriate funds of each
organization from which monies were expended in responding to the
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 189-4 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 189-5
1:196
Chapter 202
LAND USE PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affordable housing — See Ch. 85.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131.
Board of Adjustment escrow account — See
Ch. 153, Art. I.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 286.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
303.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
emergency caused by the spill or discharge of a hazardous substance
as set forth in this chapter.
§ 189-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-5
1:197

ARTICLE I
Planning Board
§ 202-1. Establishment; composition.
There is hereby established, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., in the
Borough of Harrington Park, a Planning Board of seven members consisting
of the following four classes:
A. Class I: the Mayor or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor.
[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
B. Class II: one of the officials of the municipality other than a member of
the governing body to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if there
be an Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as required by
Section 1 of P.L. 1968, c. 245 (N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1), shall be deemed to be
the Class II Planning Board member for purposes of N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 in
the event that there be among the Class IV or alternate members of the
Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a
member of the Board of Education. [Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No.
396]
C. Class III: a member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: four other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
position or employment. No member of the Board of Education may be a
Class IV member of the Planning Board. If there be a Municipal
Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as required by
Section 1 of P.L. 1968, c. 245 (N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1), shall be a Class IV
Planning Board member unless there be among the Class IV or
alternate members of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or Historic Preservation Commission and a
member of the Board of Education, in which case the member common
to the Planning Board and Municipal Environmental Commission shall
be deemed a Class II member of the Planning Board. For the purpose of
this subsection, membership on a municipal board or commission
whose function is advisory in nature and the establishment of which is
discretionary and not required by statute shall not be considered the
holding of municipal office. [Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 396]
E. In addition, there shall be appointed to the Planning Board two
alternate members designated as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2.
One of the alternate members shall be appointed from the Harrington
Park Zoning Board of Adjustment and the other from the Harrington
Park Environmental Commission. Each member so appointed shall
serve for the period prescribed by statute so long as long as they
remain qualified members of their respective boards. The first
§ 202-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-1
1:199
§ 202-2. Lack of quorum. [Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
If the Planning Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular or alternate
members is prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23b or 40:55D-23.1 from acting
on a matter due to the member's personal or financial interest therein,
regular members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be called upon to
serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the Planning Board in
order of seniority of continuous service to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
until there are the minimum number of members necessary to constitute a
quorum to act upon the matter without any personal or financial interest
therein, whether direct or indirect. If a choice has to be made between
regular members of equal seniority, the Chairperson of the Zoning Board
shall make the choice.
§ 202-3. Terms.
appointment of Alternate No. 2 shall be for a one-year term. [Added
1-30-1995 by Ord. No. 46970]
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with the
member's official tenure, or, if the member is the Mayor's designee in
the absence of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor during the Mayor's official tenure. [Amended 4-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 658]
B. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III shall be for
one year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms of
office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member who is also a
member of the Environmental Commission. The term of a Class II or
Class IV member who is also a member of the Environmental
Commission shall be for three years or terminate at the completion of
the member's term of office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever occurs first. [Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 396]
C. As terms of Class IV members holding office on the effective date of this
chapter expire, all subsequent Class IV members shall be appointed for
terms of four years except as otherwise herein provided. The term of a
Class IV member who is also a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, or Board of Education, shall terminate whenever he is no
longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his Class IV
term, whichever occurs first. The terms of all Class IV members first
appointed under this chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest
practicable extent the expiration of such terms shall be distributed
evenly over the first four years after their appointment; provided that
the initial Class IV term of no member shall exceed four years.
Thereafter, the Class IV term of each such member shall be four years.
[Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 396]
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 202-1 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 202-3
1:200
§ 202-4. (Reserved)72
§ 202-5. Organization.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from
the members of Class IV and shall also select a Secretary, who shall be a
member of the Planning Board.
§ 202-6. Attorney; experts and staff.
The Planning Board shall annually appoint legal counsel, other than the
Municipal Attorney, and may employ or contract for other staff and services
as it may deem necessary and shall fix the compensation therefor; provided,
however, that in no case shall the compensation for legal counsel and the
costs of other staff and services exceed the amount appropriated by the
governing body for Planning Board use, exclusive of gifts or grants.
§ 202-7. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its procedural
operation. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
D. The terms of all members of the Planning Board shall run from January
1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
E. If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of the
Planning Board term, it shall be filled by appointment, as above
provided, for the unexpired term. Any member other than a Class I
member, after a public hearing if he requests one, may be removed by
the governing body for cause. [Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 39671]
A. To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the Borough, including any areas outside its
boundaries which in the Board's judgment bear essential relation to the
planning of the Borough.
B. To administer the provisions of Chapter 303, Subdivision and Site Plan
Review.
C. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
D. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
E. If required or directed by the governing body, to prepare an annual
program of municipal capital improvement projects projected over a
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
72.Editor's Note: Former § 202-4, Vacancies, was repealed at time of adoption of Code
revisions (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 202-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-7
1:201
§ 202-8. Advisory committee.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens' Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required by the Planning Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor.
§ 202-9. Environmental Commission. [Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 396]
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to
the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment an index of the
natural resources of the municipality, the Planning Board or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall make available to the Environmental Commission
an informational copy of every application for development submitted to
either Board. Failure of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment
to make such informational copy available to the Environmental
Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
term of six years, and amendments thereto, and recommend the same
to the governing body.
F. To consider and make reports to the governing body within 35 days
after referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it
and also pass upon other matters specifically referred to the Planning
Board by the governing body as provided by law.
G. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant, to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
(1) Variances, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c, from lot area, lot
dimensional, setback and yard requirements. [Amended
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 396]
(2) Authorization for issuance of permits for buildings or structures in
the bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, in a flood control
basin or in a public area reserved on the Official Map.
(3) Authorization for the issuance of permits for buildings or structures
not related to a street.
H. To grant conditional uses in accordance with the provisions of any
appropriate ordinances of the Borough.
I. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the governing body for the aid and assistance of the
governing body or other agencies or officers.
J. To perform such other duties as are assigned to it under Chapter 350,
Zoning.
§ 202-7 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 202-10
1:202
§ 202-10. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations not inconsistent with this
chapter as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes
of this chapter.
§ 202-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-10
1:203

ARTICLE II
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 202-11. Establishment. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
§ 202-12. Lack of quorum. [Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
If the Zoning Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum because any of its regular
or alternate members is prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 from acting on a
matter due to the member's personal or financial interest therein, Class IV
members of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve, for that matter
only, as temporary members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Class
IV members of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve in order
of seniority of continuous service to the Planning Board until there are the
minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon
the matter without any personal or financial interest therein, whether direct
or indirect. If a choice has to be made between Class IV members of equal
seniority, the Chairperson of the Planning Board shall make the choice.
§ 202-13. Terms.
A. There is hereby established in the Borough a Zoning Board of
Adjustment consisting of seven members and up to two alternates
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council.
B. No member may hold an elective office or position under the Borough.
C. All members shall be citizens of the Borough.
D. If more than one alternate is appointed, he or she shall be designated as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" by the Borough Council at the
time of appointment.
A. The term of each member shall be four years.
B. Regular members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment holding office on
the effective date of this chapter shall continue in office until
completion of their terms as provided by law.
C. The term of one additional member who is an alternate member holding
office on the effective date of this chapter shall be for one year, and the
term of the other such additional member who is an alternate member
holding office on the effective date of this chapter shall be for four
years. All other initial appointments made after the effective date
hereof shall be for four years.
D. All terms shall commence on January 1 of the year in which the
appointment is made.
§ 202-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-14
1:205
§ 202-14. Vacancies.
Vacancies occurring other than by expiration of a term shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term by the Mayor with the consent of the
Council.
§ 202-15. Officers.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson from its members and shall also select a Secretary, who is a
member of the Board.
§ 202-16. Attorney; experts and staff.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall annually appoint legal counsel, other
than the Municipal Attorney, and may employ or contract for other staff and
services as it may deem necessary and shall fix the compensation therefor;
provided, however, that in no case shall the compensation for legal counsel
and the costs of other staff and services exceed the amount appropriated by
the governing body for Zoning Board of Adjustment use, exclusive of gifts
or grants.
§ 202-17. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations not inconsistent with this
chapter as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes
of this chapter.
§ 202-18. Powers.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power granted by law
to:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal
made by an administrative officer based on or made in the
enforcement of Chapter 350, Zoning. For the purposes of this
section, "administrative officer" shall be deemed to mean the
Construction Code Official, Zoning Officer, Board or other official
or agency of the Borough.
(2) Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Chapter 350, Zoning, or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which such Board is authorized by the appropriate ordinance
to pass.
(3) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a
specific piece of property or the structures lawfully existing
thereon, the strict application of any regulation in Chapter 350,
Zoning, would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
§ 202-14 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 202-18
1:206
difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner or
developer of such properly, grant, upon an application or an appeal
relating to such property, a variance from such strict application so
as to relieve such difficulties or hardship; where in an application
or appeal relating to a specific piece of property the purposes of
Chapter 350, Zoning, or the purposes of the Educational Facilities
Construction and Financing Act (N.J.S.A. 18A:7G-1 et seq.) would
be advanced by a deviation from the zoning requirements and
the benefits of the deviation would substantially outweigh any
detriment, grant a variance to allow departure from regulations
of the provisions of this section; provided, however, that the fact
that a proposed use is an inherently beneficial use shall not be
dispositive of a decision on a variance under this subsection, and
provided that no variance from those departures enumerated in
Subsection A(4) of this section shall be granted under this
subsection, and provided further that the proposed development
does not require approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision,
site plan or conditional use, in conjunction with which the Planning
Board has power to review a request for a variance pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60; provided, however, that: [Amended
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 396; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
(a) No variance shall be granted under this subsection to allow a
structure or use in a district restricted against such structure
or use.
(b) The proposed development does not require a variance which
can be issued pursuant to § 202-7G of this chapter by the
Planning Board in connection with subdivision review, site plan
review or conditional use approval.
(4) Grant a variance to allow departure from the regulations of
Chapter 350, Zoning, to permit (i) a use or principal structure in a
district restricted against such use or principal structure; (ii) an
expansion of a nonconforming use; (iii) deviation from a
specification or standard pursuant to Section 54 of P.L. 1975, c. 291
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67), pertaining solely to a conditional use; (iv) an
increase in the permitted floor area ratio as defined in Section 3.1
of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4); (v) an increase in the
permitted density as defined in Section 3.1 of P.L. 1975, c. 291
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4), except as applied to the required lot area for a
lot or lots for detached one- or two-dwelling-unit buildings, which
lot or lots are either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting
from a minor subdivision; or (vi) a height of a principal structure
which exceeds by 10 feet or 10% the maximum height permitted in
the district for a principal structure. A variance under this
subsection shall be granted only by affirmative vote of at least five
members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Amended
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 396; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
§ 202-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-18
1:207
§ 202-19. Additional powers.
In addition to the powers specified in § 202-18 of this chapter or Chapter
350, Zoning, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have power to:
B. No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section, including a variance or other relief involving an inherently
beneficial use, without a showing that such variance or other relief can
be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan and
Chapter 350, Zoning. In respect to any airport hazard areas delineated
under the Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act of 1983, P.L. 1983, c.
260 (N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.), no variance or other relief may be granted
under the terms of this section permitting the creation or establishment
of a nonconforming use which would be prohibited under the standards
promulgated pursuant to that Act except upon issuance of a permit by
the Commissioner of Transportation. An application under this section
may be referred to any appropriate person or agency for its report,
provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time within
which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act. [Amended 5-16-1988
by Ord. No. 396; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
A. Grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Planning Board, subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval when
required in connection with a use variance properly before the Zoning
Board of Adjustment pursuant to § 202-18A(4).
B. Grant variances from the requirements of law that no permit shall be
issued for any building or structure in the bed of any street, public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the Official
Map.
(1) Such variances may be approved only if:
(a) Such variance is approved by a majority of the full authorized
membership of the Board.
(b) Unless a variance is granted, the parcel or parcels of land on
which the mapped street, drainageway, flood control basin or
reserved area is located cannot yield a reasonable return to the
owner.
(c) The variance required will cause the least practicable increase
in the cost of opening the street or will tend to cause the least
change in the Official Map.
(2) The Board shall impose such reasonable requirements as
conditions for granting such a variance as will promote the health,
morals, safety and general welfare of the public.
C. Grant variances from the requirements of law that no permit for the
erection of any building or structure be issued unless the lot abuts a
§ 202-18 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 202-19
1:208
§ 202-20. Appeals.
§ 202-21. Power to reverse or modify decisions.
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Zoning Board of Adjustment
may, in conformity with the power granted by law, reverse or affirm, wholly
or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from and make such other requirement, decision or determination
as ought to be made and, to that end, have all the powers of the
administrative officer from whom the appeal was taken.
§ 202-22. Appeals from Zoning Board of Adjustment to governing
body.
An appeal from any decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment granting a
use variance pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17d may be taken
to the governing body, provided that such appeal shall be made within 10
days of the date of publication of such final decision of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
street giving access to the proposed building or structure. Such a
variance shall be granted only if the enforcement of such requirements
of law would entail practical difficulties or undue hardship or where
the circumstances of the case do not require the building or structure
to be related to a street. Such variances may be granted subject to
conditions that will provide adequate access for firefighting equipment,
ambulances and other emergency vehicles necessary for the protection
of health and safety and that will protect any future street layout shown
on the Official Map or on a general Circulation Plan Element of the
Master Plan.
A. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of an administrative officer [as
defined in § 202-18A(1)] of the municipality. Each appeal shall be taken
within the 20 days prescribed by the statute by filing a notice of appeal
with the administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken, together
with three copies of said notice with the administrative officer of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. Said notice of appeal shall specify the
grounds for said appeal. The administrative officer shall forthwith
transmit to the Zoning Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. [Amended
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 396]
B. Completed applications (as defined by § 202-28C) addressed to the
original jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of Adjustment without prior
application to an administrative officer shall be filed with the
administrative officer of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and in
accordance with the requirements of § 202-28.
§ 202-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-23
1:209
§ 202-23. Stay during appeals.
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the governing body, as the
case may be, stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect of
which the decision appealed from was made, unless the Construction Code
Official certifies to the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the governing body,
as the case may be, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with
the Construction Code Official or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the
opinion of the Construction Code Official or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
as the case may be, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the Superior Court
of New Jersey on application or notice to the officer or Board from whom or
which the appeal is taken and on good cause shown.
§ 202-23 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 202-23
1:210
ARTICLE III
Provisions Applicable to Both Boards
§ 202-24. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 202-25. Meetings.
§ 202-26. Minutes.73
Minutes of every meeting shall be kept and shall include the names of the
persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the persons appearing
by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings, if any, made by it
and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made available for
public inspection during normal business hours at the office of the Borough
Clerk. Any interested party shall have the right to compel production of the
minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceeding concerning the subject
matter of such minutes. Such interested party may be charged a fee for
reproduction of the minutes in accordance with the fee schedule as per
ordinance and on file with the Borough Clerk.
A. Regular meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any
meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for
lack of applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson of either Board and
shall be called at the request of any two Board members. Such meetings
shall be held on notice to the members and the public in accordance
with law.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum, except as
otherwise required by any provision of this chapter or of law.
E. All meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of all such meetings
shall be given in accordance with the requirements of the Open Public
Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.).
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 202-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-27
1:211
§ 202-27. Fees. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 314; 5-16-1988 by
Ord. No. 396; 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 397; 3-16-2009 by Ord. No.
638; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658; 6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 672; 74]
Fees shall be charged for services of the boards or their administrative
staffs; the amount of such fees shall be per ordinance, which is on file with
the Borough Clerk. The Fee Schedule is on the Borough website.
§ 202-28. Applications.
A. Planning Board.
(1) Minimum escrow deposits for legal services (unused portion
refundable) for the following items are provided in the Boroughmaintained
Fee Schedule.
(a) Minor subdivision.
(b) Major subdivision.
(c) Site plan.
(2) Minimum escrow deposits for engineering services (unused portion
refundable) for the following items are provided in the Boroughmaintained
Fee Schedule.
(a) Minor subdivision.
(b) Major subdivision.
(c) Site plan.
(3) Escrow fees for legal and engineering services are subject to
increase during the course of the application process in the event
that services rendered in connection with said application exceed
those amounts originally deposited.
(4) Separate checks must be submitted for application fees and escrow
deposits and made payable to the Borough of Harrington Park.
B. The Planning Board and/or the Zoning Board of Adjustment may exempt
according to uniform standards charitable, philanthropic, fraternal and
religious nonprofit organizations holding a tax-exempt status under the
Federal Internal Revenue Code of 1954 [26 U.S.C. § 501(c) or (d)] from
the payment of any fee charged under this section.
A. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, by
resolution, prescribe forms for applications.
B. All applications to the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be filed with the administrative officer of the Board with which the
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 202-27 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 202-28
1:212
§ 202-29. Hearings.
applicant intends to file the application, and the administrative officer
shall stamp the date of filing thereon.
C. An application shall be deemed complete (and shall be referred to as a
"complete application") when:
(1) The application form has been fully completed and the
requirements set forth in the checklist appended thereto have been
complied with to the satisfaction of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment. Both duly executed documents shall be filed
with the proper administrative officer, in the case of a Planning
Board application that person being the Clerk of the Board. For
purposes of this section, only any requirements which have been
waived by the Board are deemed complied with. [Amended
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 395]
(2) All documents in the requisite number and in the form prescribed
by this chapter shall have been filed with the proper administrative
officer.
(3) A certificate from the Tax Collector has been filed with the proper
administrative officer stating whether any taxes or assessments for
local improvements are due or delinquent.
(4) All fees prescribed by this chapter have been paid.
(5) In the event that this chapter shall require that the documents be
referred to other persons or bodies, the affidavit of service thereof
shall have been filed with the proper administrative officer.
(6) The Board to which the application is made, or its designee, shall
have certified, within 45 days after filing thereof with the proper
administrative officer, that the application is a complete
application.
D. The checklist appended to the application before either the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or Planning Board shall contain the following
information and be in the following form which shall be supplied at the
Borough Hall.75 [Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 395]
A. Oaths. The officer presiding at a hearing of the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, or such person as he may designate, shall
have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant evidence,
including witnesses and documents presented by the parties, and the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply to such hearings.
75.Editor's Note: The checklists are on file in the Borough Clerk's office. Application forms
are provided on the Borough website.
§ 202-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-29
1:213
B. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and the number of witnesses.
C. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
D. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof, on request to any interested party at his expense.
E. Qualification. When any hearing before the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall carry over two or more meetings, a member
of the Board who was absent for one or more of the meetings shall be
eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was conducted,
notwithstanding his absence from one or more of the meetings;
provided, however, that such Board member has available to him a
transcript or recording of the meeting from which he was absent and
certifies in writing to the Board that he has read such transcript or
listened to such recording.
F. Findings of fact and conclusions of law. Each Board shall include
findings of fact and conclusions based thereon in each decision on any
application for development and shall reduce the decision to writing.
The Board shall provide the findings and conclusions through (i) a
resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period provided in
this chapter for action by each Board on the application for
development; or (ii) a memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting
held not later than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the
Board voted to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the Board
who voted for the action taken may vote on the memorializing
resolution, and the vote of a majority of such members present at the
meeting at which the resolution is presented for adoption shall be
sufficient to adopt the resolution. An action pursuant to Section 5 of the
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9) (resulting from the failure
of a motion to approve an application) shall be memorialized by
resolution as provided above, with those members voting against the
motion for approval being the members eligible to vote on the
memorializing resolution. The vote on any such resolution shall be
deemed to be a memorialization of the action of the Board and not to be
an action of the Board; however, the date of the adoption of the
resolution shall constitute the date of the decision for purposes of the
mailings, filings and publications required by this chapter. If the Board
fails to adopt a resolution or memorializing resolution as hereinabove
specified, any interested party may apply to the Superior Court in a
summary manner for an order compelling the Board to reduce its
§ 202-29 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 202-29
1:214
§ 202-30. Notice requirements for hearings.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to this chapter, the applicant shall give notice thereof as follows, unless
otherwise provided:
findings and conclusions to writing within a stated time, and the cost of
the application, including attorney fees, shall be assessed against the
Borough. [Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 396]
A. Public notice shall be given by publication in one of the official
newspapers of the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearing. [Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 395]
B. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing, provided
that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to the (i)
condominium association in the case of any unit owner whose unit has a
unit above or below it; or (ii) horizontal property regime in the case of
any co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above or below it and
whether located within or without the municipality in which applicant's
land is located. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on
the owner as shown on said current tax duplicate or his agent in charge
of the property or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the
property owner at his address as shown on said current tax duplicate. A
return receipt is not required. Notice to a partnership owner may be
made by service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be
made by service upon its president, a vice president, secretary or other
person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf
of the corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowners' association because
of its ownership of common elements or areas located within 200 feet of
the property which is the subject of the hearing may be made in the
same manner as in a corporation, without further notice to unit owners
or homeowners on account of such common elements or areas.
[Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 396]
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of such
municipality.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road as shown
on the Official Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
§ 202-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-30
1:215
§ 202-31. List of property owners furnished. [Amended 4-18-2011
by Ord. No. 658]
The Tax Collector or his designee shall, within seven days after receipt
of a request therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee of $0.25 per
name or $10, whichever is greater, make and certify a list from the current
tax duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom an applicant is
required to give notice pursuant to § 202-30B.
§ 202-32. Time limits.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the State
Planning Commission of a hearing on an application for development of
property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. The notice
shall include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file
with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to Subsection b of Section 6 of P.L.
1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10). [Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No.
396]
G. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for the hearing, exclusive of the date of
the hearing, and the applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service
with the Board holding the hearing on the application for development.
H. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
complete upon mailing.
I. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of this chapter
shall state the date, time and place of the hearing; the nature of the
matters to the considered; the sections of this chapter from which the
applicant seeks any relief; identification of the property proposed for
development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block
numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Municipal Tax
Assessor's office; and the location and times at which any maps and
documents for which approval is sought are available as required by
law.
A. Applications to Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall render its decision not later than 120 days after the
date:
(1) An appeal is taken from the decision of an administrative officer; or
(2) A complete application has been filed with the Board for relief.
B. Applications to Planning Board.
§ 202-30 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 202-32
1:216
(1) The Planning Board shall render its decision not later than 45 days
from the filing of a complete application in the following matters:
(a) Minor subdivisions.
(b) Preliminary approval of a major subdivision of 10 or fewer lots
and not involving a conditional use.
(c) Final approval of a major subdivision and not involving a
conditional use.
(d) Preliminary approval of a site plan for 10 acres of land or less
and not involving a conditional use.
(e) Final approval of a site plan for 10 acres of land or less and not
involving a conditional use.
(2) The Planning Board shall render its decision not later than 95 days
from the filing of a complete application in the following matters:
(a) Any subdivision or site plan that involves conditional use
approval.
(b) Preliminary approval of a major subdivision involving more
than 10 lots or of a site plan involving more than 10 acres.
(c) Any subdivision or site plan that involves exercise by the
Planning Board of its power to grant variances or
authorizations pursuant to § 202-7 of this chapter or pursuant
to law.
C. Extension of time. The time within which the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Planning Board is required to act may be extended with
the consent of the developer.
D. Failure of the Board to act within time. Failure of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Planning Board to render its decision within the
applicable time period set forth in this § 202-32 shall constitute an
approval of the application and, at the request of the applicant, a
certificate shall be issued by the Municipal Clerk, or his designee,
certifying that the Board has failed to act.
E. Expiration of approvals.
(1) Minor subdivision. A minor subdivision approval shall expire 190
days from the date of Planning Board approval unless within such
period a plat in conformity with the approval and with the Map
Filing Law76 or a deed clearly describing the approved subdivision
is filed by the developer with the Bergen County Clerk, the Borough
Engineer and the Borough Tax Assessor.
76.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.
§ 202-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-32
1:217
§ 202-33. Decisions.
§ 202-34. Publication of decisions.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the
Clerk of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may
be, without separate charge to the applicant. Said notice shall be sent to
(2) Major subdivision. Final approval of a major subdivision shall
expire 95 days from the date of signing the plat unless within such
period the plat shall have been duly filed by the developer with the
Bergen County Clerk. The Planning Board may, for good cause
shown, extend the period for recording for an additional period not
to exceed 190 days from the date of the signing of the plat.
(3) Variance. Any variance granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment
permitting the erection or alteration of any structure or structures,
or permitting a specified use of any premises, shall expire unless
such construction or alteration shall have been actually
commenced on each and every structure permitted by said
variance, or unless such permitted use has actually been
commenced, within nine months from the date of the determination
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment; except, however, that the
running of the period of limitation herein provided shall be tolled
from the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment to the governing body, or to a court of
competent jurisdiction, until the termination in any manner of such
appeal or proceeding.
A. All decisions of the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment on
an application for development shall be by written resolution which
shall set forth findings of fact and legal conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of the decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his
attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be
mailed to all persons who have filed an open public records request. A
copy of the decision shall also be filed in the office of the Municipal
Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed decision available to any
interested party in the same manner as those established for copies of
other public documents in the municipality.77
C. Any approval or other relief granted by either Board shall be
conditioned upon either the prompt payment of due or delinquent taxes
or assessments or the making of adequate provision for the payment
thereof in a manner that will adequately protect the municipality.
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 202-32 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 202-34
1:218
the official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date of any such
decision.
§ 202-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-34
1:219

ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 202-35. Administrative officers designated.
§ 202-36. Definitions and word usage.
A. Planning Board. The Clerk of the Planning Board is hereby designated
as the administrative officer of said Board.
B. Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Clerk of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment is hereby designated as the administrative officer of said
Board.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning, the following general terms shall be construed as
follows:
(1) The term "shall" has a mandatory connotation, and the term "may"
has a permissive connotation.
(2) A term in the singular number includes the plural, and vice versa.
(3) A term in the present, past or future tense includes either of the
other two tenses.
(4) The verb "use" includes the phrase "or designed, intended or
arranged to be used."
(5) The noun "use" shall include the actual or intended occupancy or
other employment of land or of a structure.
(6) The term "person" shall include individual, firm, joint venture,
association, partnership, syndicate, limited partnership,
corporation, trust and any other form of business organization.
B. Whenever in the administration of this chapter it shall be necessary or
desirable to define a term that has not hereinbefore been defined,
reference shall be made to the definition (if any) of such term in:
(1) The Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
(2) The State Uniform Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et
seq.) and regulations promulgated thereunder.
(3) The Code of the Borough of Harrington Park, as amended from time
to time.
(4) The State of New Jersey Revised Statutes, cumulative supplement,
and New Jersey statutes.
§ 202-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-36
1:221
Chapter 219
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs — See Ch. 105, Art. I.
Filming — See Ch. 162.
Fines and penalties — See Ch. 164.
§ 219-1. Intent and purpose.
It is found and declared that:
§ 219-2. Actions generally prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to make or
continue any loud, unnecessary, unnatural or unusual noise or any noise
which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
morals, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the Borough.
§ 219-3. Actions specifically prohibited.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, unnecessary,
unnatural, unusual or disturbing noises in violation of this chapter:
A. The making, creation or maintenance of such loud, unnecessary,
unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual and
unnatural in their time, place and use affects and is a detriment to
public health, comfort, morals, convenience, safety, welfare and
prosperity of the residents of the Borough of Harrington Park.
B. The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions
hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a matter of legislative
determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the
provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in
pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public
health, comfort, morals, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity
and the peace and quiet of the Borough of Harrington Park and its
inhabitants.
A. Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, truck or other vehicle on
any street or public place of the Borough, except as a danger warning
or for the normal celebrations for weddings, football games and similar
events; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any
unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device
for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
§ 202-36 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 219-3
1:222
B. Radios, phonographs, etc. Using, operating, or permitting to be played,
used or operated any radio, television set, musical instrument,
phonograph or other machine or device for the production or
reproduction of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder
volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or
persons who are in the room, vehicle, chamber or yard in which such
machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto.
The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or
device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. Sunday through 8:00 a.m.
Monday morning, and the same thereafter on Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday and between 11:00 p.m. Friday and 8:00 a.m. Saturday and
11:00 p.m. Saturday and 8:00 a.m. Sunday, in such a manner as to be
plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure,
vehicle or yard in which it is located, shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section.
C. Loudspeakers or amplifiers for advertising. Using, operating, or
permitting to be played, used or operated any radio, television set,
musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other
machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is
cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising
or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure.
D. Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on
the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.78 or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort or peace of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel or
other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity.
E. Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing
frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of
any person in the vicinity.
F. Whistles. The blowing of any power-driven whistle, except to give
notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or
danger, or upon request of the proper Borough authority or as may be
required by general law or ordinance.
G. Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal-combustion engine, motorboat or motor
vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
H. Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud
and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
I. Construction, repairs, excavation, etc. The erection (including
excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, or the
78.Editor's Note: Emphasis requested by Borough.
§ 219-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-3
1:223
§ 219-4. Actions permitted.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit:
excavation of any street or highway, or the removal or trimming of trees
by the use of power equipment, other than between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m.79 on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity
in the interest of public health and safety, and then only as determined
by the Mayor, Chief of Police or other delegated authority. Commercial
activities may be conducted only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. on Saturdays. Commercial activities are strictly prohibited
on Sundays, Memorial Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and New
Year's Day.80
J. Schools, courts, churches and hospitals. The creation of any excessive
noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning or
church, while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital or nursing
home, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such
institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital
or nursing home, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in such
streets indicating that the same is a school or hospital street.
K. Hawkers and peddlers. Shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and
vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood, even
though licensed according to law.
A. The owner or occupant of a dwelling from mowing the lawn or removing
snow around such dwelling with power equipment at a reasonable hour,
or from making minor repairs necessary for normal maintenance of
such dwelling at any time, provided that the making of such minor
repairs is not accompanied by any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise.
B. Bells, chimes or music between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:30 p.m.
from any church.
C. Playing by a band or orchestra in a hall, nonresidential building or in
the public parks for regular concerts or dances or other events
consistent with Chapter 350, Zoning, or by virtue of special permission
of the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Harrington Park.
D. Parades approved by the Mayor and Council according to law.
E. The use of sound trucks or sound-amplification devices by civic,
charitable, religious, political and other nonprofit corporations when
approved according to law or by special permission of the Mayor and
Council, provided that no commercial or advertising material is
programmed, and provided further that the use of the sound truck is
limited to the hours and routes prescribed.
79.Editor's Note: Emphasis requested by Borough.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 219-3 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 219-4
1:224
§ 219-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction for each and every violation thereof and for each and every day
that such violation thereof continues, be punished as set forth in Chapter
164, Fines and Penalties.
Chapter 230
PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND PUBLIC FACILITIES
F. Police, fire, ambulance, air raid or other sirens, or signaling devices
which may be operated by the Borough or civil defense or other
governmental authorities.
§ 219-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-5
1:225

ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 377 (Ch. 29, Art. I, of the 1967
Code); amended in its entirety 10-21-1991 by Ord. No. 440]
§ 230-1. Purpose. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
The purpose of this article is to provide rules and regulations for the use of,
and conduct in, the parks and recreation areas of the Borough of Harrington
Park.
§ 230-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF EDUCATION LANDS — Any real property, including
improvements thereon, which is currently owned or hereafter acquired by
the Board of Education and is used by the public as a park, playground
or recreation area. The Harrington Park Board of Education and the
Harrington Park Police Department shall have concurrent jurisdiction to
enforce this article within the Board of Education lands.
BOROUGH PARKLANDS — Any park, reservoir, playground, recreation
area, green, square or any other similar area in the Borough currently
owned or hereafter acquired by the Borough, including ball fields,
basketball courts, tennis courts, skating areas, roadways and parking
facilities located within such areas. The Harrington Park Recreation
Commission and the Harrington Park Police Department shall have
concurrent jurisdiction to enforce this article within the Borough parklands.
ENCLOSED AREA — All areas between a floor and a ceiling, extending to
the outer perimeter walls of a structure.[Added 6-16-2014 by Ord. No.
689]
MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS — All structures owned, leased, rented and/or
operated by the Borough of Harrington Park and/or occupied by the
employees and used for official business of the Borough of Harrington Park,
including all areas adjacent to such facilities and within 35 feet of such
areas.[Added 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 689]
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Includes, but is not limited to,
all public parks, playgrounds, basketball courts, swim clubs, tennis courts,
ice skating areas, and ball fields publicly owned or leased by the Borough
of Harrington Park and all property owned or leased by the Borough of
Harrington Park upon which the public is invited or upon which the public is
permitted and where individuals gather for recreational activities, including
all areas adjacent to such facilities, including but not limited to any parking
area, driveway or drive aisle, and within 35 feet of such areas.[Added
6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 689]
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
§ 230-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-2
1:227
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking
device.[Added 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 689]
§ 230-3. Curfew affecting Borough parklands.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to be, remain, loiter, idle, wander,
stroll or play in or upon the Borough parklands described in § 230-5A
through G of this article between the hours of 8:00 p.m. or 1/2 hour
after sunset, whichever is later, and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.81
B. Applicability.
(1) The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(a) Persons who are engaged in the performance of duties as an
officer or an authorized agent of the Borough.
(b) Persons in lawful employment when such employment makes it
necessary to be in such places during such time periods.
(c) Persons who are participating in an organized program or
meeting authorized by the Harrington Park Recreation
Commission in accordance with § 230-9 of this article and who
have, pursuant to the provisions of § 230-9 of this article,
obtained from the Recreation Commission a written permit
authorizing an exception.
(2) Whenever any of the following facilities are electrically lighted by
Borough-owned equipment and until 30 minutes following the
extinguishment of Borough-owned lights at each of the following
facilities, the provisions of this section shall also not apply to
persons utilizing, either as a participant or as an observer, any of
the following facilities:
(a) The park facility and attendant parking facility located within
the Borough parklands known as "Pondside Park," which latter
is described in § 230-5A of this article.
(b) The skating rink facility and attendant parking facility located
within the Borough parklands known as "George Street Park,"
which latter is described in § 230-5C of this article.
(c) The basketball court facility, skating rink, ball field(s), and
attendant parking facility located within the Borough
parklands known as "Highland Park," which latter is described
in § 230-5E of this article.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 230-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 230-3
1:228
§ 230-4. Curfew affecting Board of Education lands.
§ 230-5. Designation of affected lands.
The following lands are hereby designated as Borough parklands and/or
Board of Education lands and are subject to the provisions set forth in this
article:
(d) The tennis court facility and attendant parking facility located
within the Borough parklands known as "George Street Park,"
which latter is described in § 230-5C of this article.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to be, remain, loiter, idle, wander,
stroll or play in or upon the Board of Education lands described in
§ 230-5H of this article between the hours of 8:00 p.m. or 1/2 hour after
sunset, whichever is later, and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Persons who are engaged in the performance of duties as an officer
or an authorized agent of the Borough or the Board of Education.
(2) Persons in lawful employment when such employment makes it
necessary to be in such places during such time periods.
(3) Persons who are participating in an organized program or meeting
authorized by the Board of Education in accordance with § 230-10
of this article and who have, pursuant to the provisions of § 230-10
of this article, obtained from the Board of Education oral or written
authority concerning an exception.
A. The Borough parklands, which are known as "Pondside Park," and
which are shown on the Tax Assessment Map of the Borough, and are
accessible as follows:
(1) Lot 1 in Block 107, which lot is accessible from:
(a) Lohs Place over the east side of Lot 1 in Block 107.
(b) Blanch Avenue over the northwest side of Lot 4 in Block 108.
(2) Lot 4 in Block 108, which lot is accessible from:
(a) Lohs Place over the east side of Lot 1 in Block 107.
(b) Blanch Avenue over the northwest side of Lot 4 in Block 108.
(3) Lot 7 in Block 111, which lot is accessible from:
(a) Lohs Place over the east side of Lot 1 in Block 107.
(b) Blanch Avenue over the northwest side of Lot 4 in Block 108.
§ 230-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:229
B. The Borough parklands, which are known as "Beechwood Park," and
which are shown on the Tax Assessment Map of the Borough, and are
accessible as follows:
(1) Lots 1 and 2 in Block 401, which lots are accessible from:
(a) Richard Court over the north side of Lot 1 in Block 401.
(b) Deal Street over Lot 3 in Block 801 (which is privately owned)
and, in turn, over the south side of Lot 2 in Block 401.
(c) Peat Street over Lot 3 in Block 801 (which is privately owned)
and, in turn, over the south side of Lot 2 in Block 401.
(d) Hazel Street over Lot 1 in Block 801 (which is privately owned)
and, in turn, over the south side of Lot 2 in Block 401.
(e) William Street over Lot 1 in Block 805 (which is privately
owned) and, in turn, over Lot 1 in Block 801 (which is privately
owned) and, in turn, over the southwest side of Lot 2 in Block
401.
(f) Nelson Street over Lot 1 in Block 805 (which is privately
owned) and, in turn, over Lot 1 in Block 801 (which is privately
owned) and, in turn, over the southwest side of Lot 2 in Block
401.
C. The Borough parklands, which are known as "George Street Park," and
which are shown on the Tax Assessment Map of the Borough, and are
accessible as follows:
(1) The paper street extension of Florence Road between its
intersection with the north side of Glen Avenue West and its
intersection with the south side of Hackensack Avenue.
(2) Lots 30, 31, 33, 34, 35 and 36 in Block 903, which lots are
accessible from:
(a) Hackensack Avenue (via that portion of Florence Road which is
a paper street and runs south from its intersection with
Hackensack Avenue) over the west sides of Lots 30, 31, 33, 34,
35 and 36 in Block 903.
(b) Glen Avenue West over the south side of Lot 36 in Block 903.
(c) Glen Avenue West (via that portion of Florence Road which is a
paper street and runs north from its intersection with Glen
Avenue West) over the west sides of Lots 30, 31, 33, 34, 35 and
36 in Block 903.
(3) Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 in Block 904, which lots are accessible
from:
§ 230-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 230-5
1:230
(a) Hackensack Avenue (via that portion of Florence Road which is
a paper street and runs south from its intersection with
Hackensack Avenue) over the east sides of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
and 7 in Block 904.
(b) Glen Avenue West over the south side of Lot 7 in Block 904.
(c) Glen Avenue West (via that portion of Florence Road which is a
paper street and runs north from its intersection with Glen
Avenue West) over the east sides of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 in
Block 904.
(4) Lots 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 in Block 904, which lots are
accessible from:
(a) George Street over the west sides of Lots 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13
and 14 in Block 904.
(b) Glen Avenue West on the south side of Lot 8 in Block 904.
D. The Borough parklands, which are shown on the Tax Assessment Map
of the Borough, consist of the triangular area bounded by Harriot
Avenue, Harriot Place and Parkside Road, and are accessible as follows:
(1) Lot 1 in Block 911, which lot is accessible from:
(a) Harriot Avenue over the southwest and west sides of Lot 1 in
Block 911.
(b) Harriot Place over the north side of Lot 1 in Block 911.
(c) Parkside Road over the east side of Lot 1 in Block 911.
E. The Borough parklands, which are known as "Highland Park," and
which are shown on the Tax Assessment Map of the Borough, and are
accessible as follows:
(1) Lot 16 in Block 1001, which lot is accessible from:
(a) Legion Place on the west side of Lot 16 in Block 1001.
(b) Tappen Road on the north side of Lot 16 in Block 1001.
(c) The area known as "Edgewood Court" which is located within
the southwest corner of Lot 16 in Block 1001, which area is
accessible from Edgewood Road.
F. The Borough parklands, which are known as "Green Acres" lands, and
which are shown on the Tax Assessment Map of the Borough, and are
accessible as follows:
(1) Lots 11, 12, 13 and 14 in Block 501 and Lot 7 in Block 604, which
lots are accessible from:
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:231
(a) Lafayette Road over Lot 6 in Block 501 (which is privately
owned) and, in turn, over the northeast corner of Lot 11 in
Block 501.
(b) Kramer Lane (the right-of-way which lies to the east of and
runs from Tappan Road parallel to Arcadia Court) over Lot 1 in
Block 602 (which is privately owned) and, in turn, over Lot 14
in Block 501.
G. The Borough parklands, which are shown on the Tax Assessment Map
of the Borough, consist of the Borough-owned lots which border on the
north and east the Board of Education lands on which is located the
Harrington Park School, and are accessible as follows:
(1) Lots 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17 in Block
901, which lots are accessible from:
(a) Hackensack Avenue on the north sides of Lots 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17 in Block 901.
(b) Harriot Avenue over Lot 42 in Block 901 (which consists of
Board of Education lands) and, in turn, over the south sides of
Lots 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17 in
Block 901.
(2) Lots 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 and 28 in Block 901,
which lots are accessible from:
(a) Lynn Street on the east side of Lots 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23,
24, 25, 26, 27 and 28 in Block 901.
(b) Glen Avenue East on the south side of Lot 28 in Block 901.
(c) Harriot Avenue over Lot 42 in Block 901 (which consists of
Board of Education lands) and, in turn, over the west sides of
Lots 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 and 28 in Block 901.
H. The Board of Education lands, which are the lands on which the
Harrington Park School is located and which include ball fields,
basketball courts and playground facilities operated by the Harrington
Park Board of Education, and which are shown on the Tax Assessment
Map of the Borough and are accessible as follows:
(1) Lot 42 in Block 901, which lot is accessible from:
(a) Harriot Avenue over the south side of Lot 42 in Block 901.
(b) Hackensack Avenue over Lots 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 in Block 901 (which are Borough
parklands) and, in turn, over the north side of Lot 42 in Block
901.
§ 230-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 230-5
1:232
§ 230-6. General regulations regarding use of Borough parklands
and Board of Education lands.
(c) Lynn Street over Lots 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27
and 28 in Block 901 (which are Borough parklands) and, in
turn, over the east side of Lot 42 in Block 901.
(d) The paper street extension of Florence Road (between its
intersection with the north side of Glen Avenue West and its
intersection with the south side of Hackensack Avenue) over
Lot 30, 31, 33, 34, 35 and 36 in Block 903 (which are Borough
parklands) and, in turn, over the west side of Lot 42 in Block
901.
A. While in or upon the Borough parklands or the Board of Education
lands, all persons shall conduct themselves in a proper and orderly
manner, and, in particular, it shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Consume, carry, have in his possession, sell, expose for sale or
serve or give away any alcoholic beverages as defined in N.J.S.A.
33:1-1b.
(2) Throw, deposit or leave any paper, rubbish, refuse or other waste or
other litter material except in receptacles, if any, provided for such
purpose. If there are no such receptacles, the same shall be carried
away and properly disposed of by the person responsible for its
presence. Any litter material of any nature discharged from any
motor vehicle while in or upon the Borough parklands or the Board
of Education lands shall be the responsibility of the owner of said
vehicle, whether the owner shall or shall not be then occupying
said vehicle.
(3) Have in his possession glass containers.
(4) Possess, set off or discharge any explosives, fireworks, or other
hazardous materials.
(5) Picnic or camp without the prior written permission of the
Recreation Commission or the Board of Education or light a fire
other than such as is authorized in advance in writing for barbecue
purposes in such area and under such conditions and restrictions
as may be prescribed in a permit issued in advance by the
Recreation Commission or the Board of Education.
(6) Park or cause to be parked any motor vehicle (including
motorcycles, motor bikes, mopeds, motor scooters, go-carts and
snowmobiles) except in areas designated for that purpose or drive
or operate any motor vehicle (including motorcycles, motor bikes,
mopeds, motor scooters, go-carts and snowmobiles) except on
roadways or parking areas provided for that purpose. These
prohibitions shall not apply to the operation of motor vehicles
owned or operated by the Borough or the Board of Education or
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-6
1:233
their agents, servants, employees or independent contractors in
the course of the business of the Borough or Board of Education,
and it is not intended by these prohibitions to establish any
regulation or prohibition pertaining to the operation of motor
vehicles, which operation is regulated by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
(7) Engage in bicycle riding, street hockey or skateboarding on any
tennis or basketball court or engage in bicycle riding or the flying
of model airplanes or the operation of any other remote-operated
device or kites anywhere within the Borough parklands and the
Board of Education lands in such a manner as to interfere with
another's use or enjoyment of the Borough parklands and/or the
Board of Education lands.
(8) Engage in any aspect of golf or archery.
(9) Engage in swimming or boating in any park, including Pondside
Park.
(10) Ice skate except in George Street Park and/or Highland Park,
weather and ice conditions permitting.
(11) Cause or permit any animal, which is owned by him, in his custody
or under his control, to run, fly or be at large or upon any sports/
playing field, court or rink. Any person who takes a dog into the
Borough parklands or the Board of Education lands shall be subject
to the provisions of Chapter 105, Article I, Dog Licensing and
Control, of the Code of the Borough of Harrington Park, including
§ 105-12 thereof.
(12) Set a trap for any animal.
(13) Mark, deface, disfigure, tamper with, displace, remove, erect or
occupy any buildings, booths, tents, stands, bridges, tables,
benches, notices, signs, placards, advertising devices, monuments,
stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other structures or
equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances
whatsoever, whether the same is temporary or permanent, or sell
or give away from any such booth, tent, stand or other structure
any food, drink or other thing, without the prior written permission
of the Recreation Commission or the Board of Education.
(14) Utter any profane, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent
language or loud outcry; or perform any obscene or indecent act; or
solicit any contribution or subscription; or play or take part in any
competitive sport for money or other thing of value; or play or take
part in any game of chance; or carry or have in his possession any
instrument of chance or gambling whatsoever; or interfere with
another's use or enjoyment of the Borough parklands and/or the
Board of Education lands; or engage in any disorderly conduct or
behavior tending to breach the public peace.
§ 230-6 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 230-6
1:234
§ 230-6.1. Prohibition of smoking in public places; signs. [Added
6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 689]
(15) Use any park or recreation area for the purpose of earning
compensation except when such compensation is authorized in
advance in writing by the Recreation Commission or the Board of
Education in connection with authorized activities.
(16) Solicit alms or contributions without the prior written permission
of the Recreation Commission or the Board of Education.
A. Smoking shall be prohibited in all municipal buildings as defined
herein. "No smoking" signs or the international no-smoking symbol
(consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed
in a red circle with a diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be
clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted at each municipal building
entrance and within each closed area where smoking is prohibited by
this section. The signs shall be clearly visible to the public and shall
contain letters or a symbol, which contrasts in color with the sign,
indicating that smoking is prohibited therein. The sign shall also
indicate that violators are subject to a fine.
B. Smoking shall be prohibited within a thirty-five-foot radius of the front
entrance of all municipal buildings. "No smoking" signs or the
international no-smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a
diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be clearly, sufficiently
and conspicuously posted both on the building and at the thirty-five-foot
perimeter of the front entrance of all municipal buildings where
smoking is prohibited by this section. The sign shall be clearly visible to
the public and shall contain letters or a symbol, which contrasts in color
with the sign, indicating that smoking is prohibited therein. The sign
shall also indicate that violators are subject to a fine.
C. Smoking shall be prohibited in, but not limited to, all public parks,
playgrounds, basketball courts, tennis courts, ice skating areas, ball
fields, and recreation facilities owned or leased by the Borough of
Harrington Park and all property owned or leased by the Borough of
Harrington Park upon which the public is invited or upon which the
public is permitted and where individuals gather for recreational
activities, including all areas adjacent to such facilities, including but
not limited to any parking area, driveway or drive aisle, and within 35
feet of such areas, which have been designated with "no smoking"
signs. "No smoking" signs or the international no-smoking symbol
(consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed
in a red circle with a diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be
clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in all areas regulated by
this section. The signs shall be clearly visible to the public and shall
contain letters or a symbol, which contrasts in color with the sign,
indicating that smoking is prohibited at the designated area. The sign
shall also indicate that violators are subject to a fine.
§ 230-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-6.1
1:235
§ 230-7. Regulations regarding use of George Street Park tennis
courts.
The tennis court facilities located at George Street Park shall be governed
by the following rules and regulations:
§ 230-8. Additional rules and regulations.
Subject to the approval of the Borough Council, which approval may be
in the form of subsequent ratification, the Recreation Commission and/
or the Board of Education may adopt and promulgate reasonable rules
and regulations not inconsistent with statute or any Borough ordinance
or this article which govern the use of the Borough parklands and the
D. Smoking shall be prohibited in any vehicle registered to the Borough of
Harrington Park.
E. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this
section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$200.
A. Usage of the tennis courts shall be restricted to Harrington Park
residents only. Guests may use the tennis courts only when
accompanied by a Harrington Park resident.
B. A valid Harrington Park recreation badge must be displayed by players
at all times. Players without a valid badge must yield to a valid badge
holder.
C. No tennis court is to be occupied by a single player, when other players
are waiting.
D. The maximum court time shall be one hour for singles play and 1 1/2
hours for doubles play.
E. Players must start the time running on clocks when play begins or must
forfeit the court.
F. Tennis sneakers must be worn by all players.
G. Paid tennis lessons shall not be permitted.
H. Any person seeking to use the tennis courts for private instructions or
lessons shall be required to obtain an annual license. Such person shall
provide the Borough and Recreation Commission with appropriate
coverages as determined by the Borough and shall also indemnify and
hold harmless the Borough and Recreation Commission in connection
with such activity. The annual fee for the issuance of such a license shall
be $500. Students receiving instruction shall be required to pay the
applicable fee for a badge. The instructor shall be limited on a daily
basis to one hour for the providing of lessons. Students receiving
lessons shall display a badge indicating their participation in this
activity. [Added 7-18-2011 by Ord. No. 661]
§ 230-6.1 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 230-8
1:236
Board of Education lands and the conduct of persons therein. Such rules
and regulations shall become effective after publication by the Borough
Clerk in a newspaper circulating in the Borough and shall thereafter be
maintained in the office of the Borough Clerk and, if they relate to the
Board of Education lands, the Secretary of the Board of Education for public
inspection between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., prevailing time.
Such rules and regulations shall, to the extent feasible, be set forth on signs
posted in conspicuous places at the park, playground or open space for
which they are effective. Violation of any such rule or regulation shall be
punishable in accordance with § 230-14 of this article.
§ 230-9. Permits issued by Recreation Commission for curfew
exceptions.
All persons who desire to utilize Borough parklands between the hours of
8:00 p.m. or 1/2 hour after sunset, whichever is later, and 6:00 a.m. of the
following day pursuant to the exception in § 230-3B(1)(c) of this article shall
only do so pursuant to a written permit issued in advance by the Harrington
Park Recreation Commission in response to an application therefor filed
with the Borough Clerk or a representative of the Recreation Commission.
§ 230-10. Use authorization issued by Board of Education for
curfew exceptions.
All persons who desire to utilize Board of Education lands between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. or 1/2 hour after sunset, whichever is later, and 6:00 a.m.
of the following day pursuant to the exception in § 230-4B(3) of this article
shall only do so pursuant to a written authority issued in advance by the
Board of Education or any of its authorized representatives in response to
an application therefor filed with the Secretary of the Board of Education or
any other authorized representative of the Board of Education.
§ 230-11. Permits issued by Recreation Commission or Board of
Education for ball field use.
A. All persons who desire to use any ball field located within the Borough
parklands for play between organized teams shall only do so pursuant
to a written permit issued in advance by the Harrington Park
Recreation Commission in response to an application therefor filed
pursuant to § 230-12 of this article with the Borough Clerk or a
representative of the Recreation Commission. Such permit shall be in
the possession of the applicant (or the applicant's agent) at the time of
field usage.
B. All persons who desire to use any ball field located within the Board of
Education lands for play between organized teams shall only do so
pursuant to a written permit issued in advance by the Harrington Park
Board of Education in response to an application therefor filed pursuant
to § 230-12 of this article with the Secretary of the Board of Education
or any other authorized representative of the Board of Education. Such
§ 230-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-11
1:237
§ 230-12. Applications for permit or authorization.
§ 230-13. Enforcement.
permit shall be in the possession of the applicant (or the applicant's
agent) at the time of field usage.
A. A person or group seeking the issuance of a permit or authorization
hereunder shall file an executed application setting forth, in the
discretion of the Recreation Commission or the Board of Education:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the person, if any,
sponsoring the activity.
(3) The relief requested, if the applicant is seeking an exception under
§ 230-3B(1)(c), 230-4B(3) or 230-6A(5), (13) or (15) of this article.
(4) The day and hours for which the permit or authority is requested.
(5) The park or portion thereof for which such permit or authority is
requested.
(6) An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
(7) Any other information which the Recreation Commission or the
Board of Education shall determine to be reasonably necessary to a
fair determination as to whether a permit or authority shall be
issued or granted.
B. In connection with any application for use of ball field, the person or
group shall file with the Borough Clerk or a member of the Recreation
Commission or the Secretary of the Board of Education or any other
authorized representative of the Board of Education, as appropriate, an
executed hold harmless agreement. Nothing in this section or this
article shall be deemed to require the filing of an application for a
permit or authority for organized, officially sanctioned Borough or
Board of Education events.
A. The members of the Borough Police Department, the members of the
Recreation Commission and such other persons as may be designated
by the Recreation Commission shall have authority to enforce this
article and may, pursuant to such authority:
(1) Cause the removal from the Borough parklands of any person
acting in violation of this article; and
(2) Seize and confiscate any article of property brought into the
Borough parklands in violation of this article.
B. The members of the Borough Police Department, the members and
officers and employees of the Board of Education and such other
§ 230-11 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 230-13
1:238
§ 230-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
persons as may be designated by the Board of Education shall have
authority to enforce this article and may, pursuant to such authority:
(1) Cause the removal from the Board of Education lands of any person
acting in violation of this article; and
(2) Seize and confiscate any article of property brought into the Board
of Education lands in violation of this article.
C. Enforcement. The enforcement authority of this article shall be the
police of the Borough of Harrington Park. [Added 6-16-2014 by Ord.
No. 689]
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and
Penalties. A separate offense shall be deemed committed in each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. In addition to any fine or sentence imposed under Subsection A above,
any person causing damage to any property within the Borough
parklands or the Board of Education lands shall be held liable for the
cost of repair or replacement necessitated by such damage.
§ 230-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-14
1:239

ARTICLE II
Signs
[Adopted 11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 575]
§ 230-15. Permission to sell and display advertisements. [Amended
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
The Recreation Commission shall be permitted to sell and display pennants
and advertisements on a temporary basis for use on all fields, playgrounds
and parks referred to in this chapter.
§ 230-16. Screening for appropriateness.
The Recreation Commission shall screen all such displays and
advertisements for appropriateness considering the community norms and
standards.
§ 230-17. Sign restrictions; size; removal.
No sign shall be affixed to other than the temporary baseball fencing. No
sign shall be larger than such fencing, and all signs shall be removed at the
conclusion of the season.
§ 230-18. Remittance of funds.
All funds shall be remitted to the Borough Treasurer who shall keep and
maintain such funds for the benefit of the Recreation Commission.82
§ 230-19. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable as set forth in
Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties.
82.Editor's Note: Original § 5, dealing with supersession of conflicting ordinances, and § 6,
dealing with the right to amend the ordinance, which immediately followed this section,
were repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658.
§ 230-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-19
1:241
Chapter 237
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fines and penalties — See Ch. 164. Noise — See Ch. 219.
§ 230-19 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 230-19
1:242
ARTICLE I
Peddlers, Solicitors, Canvassers and Transient Merchants
[Adopted 9-16-1963 by Ord. No. 199 (Ch. 24 of the 1967 Code)]
§ 237-1. Definitions. [Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 376]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LICENSEE — A peddler, hawker, vendor, transient merchant, canvasser,
solicitor, poll taker or survey taker, which, as used herein, shall include any
person who:
PERSON — Includes the singular and plural and shall also mean and include
any person, firm, corporation or partnership.
SOLICIT, CANVASS, POLL-TAKE AND/OR SURVEY-TAKE FOR TRADE
PURPOSES — To solicit, canvass, poll-take and/or survey-take for profitmaking
purposes.
§ 237-2. License required. [Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 376]
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, as hereinabove defined, to engage in
such activity within the Borough of Harrington Park without first obtaining
a license therefor, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
For himself/herself or for another person, firm, corporation or
partnership travels by foot, wagon, motor truck, motor vehicle or any
other type of conveyance from place to place, house to house or street
to street within the Borough, and within the Borough either:
(1) Takes a poll or survey or asks questions for such purpose;
Campaigns for votes, asserts political, religious, social or economic
policies or solicits funds for political, religious, social or economic
interests or objectives; or
(2)
Carries, conveys or transports, and sells, distributes, attempts to
sell or distribute, or takes orders for the sale of, goods, wares, dry
goods, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck
farm products, newspapers, periodicals, advertisements, handbills
or personal property of any nature whatsoever or services,
including home improvements, whether for present or future
delivery or performance, and whether or not such person has,
carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject or collects
advance payments on such sales; and
(3)
A.
For himself or for another person, firm, corporation or partnership
hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, hotel room,
lodging house, apartment or any other place within the Borough for the
purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.
B.
§ 237-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-3
1:243
§ 237-3. Application for license. [Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No.
376]
Applications shall contain the following information:
§ 237-4. Investigation; records required. [Amended 11-16-1987 by
Ord. No. 376]
A. Name and address of the applicant.
B. Description of the applicant.
C. Name and address of the firm represented by the applicant, together
with credentials establishing the exact relationship with the firm.
D. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods and/or
services to be sold. In case of products of a farm or orchard, a statement
as to whether the same are produced or grown by the applicant.
E. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with its
license number.
F. Certifications by at least two property owners, who reside in the County
of Bergen, as to the applicant's good character and business
responsibility or, in lieu of such certifications, such other available
evidence of good character and business responsibility of the applicant
as will enable the Police Department to properly investigate such
character and business responsibility. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 658]
G. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted
of any crime, other than traffic regulations, and the nature of the
offense. [Amended 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 726]
H. Two photographs showing the applicant's face, of a minimum size of
1 1/2 inches by 1 1/2 inches, said photographs to be not over one year
old. Said photographs shall be affixed to the application.
I. If funds are to be solicited, a detailed description of the entity, and/or
organization upon whose behalf these funds are to be solicited, setting
forth the name and address of the same and the name and address of
the chief executive officer of the same.
A. Upon receipt of an application by an applicant seeking to solicit,
canvass, poll-take and/or survey-take or for any reason regulated under
this article or for any purpose, the Police Department shall, for the
protection of the public welfare, investigate the applicant's business
and moral character. [Amended 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 726]
B. Upon receipt of an application by any applicant for a license under this
article, the Police Department shall, for the protection of the public
welfare, investigate his/her business and moral character. [Amended
7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 726]
§ 237-3 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 237-4
1:244
§ 237-5. Fee; expiration date. [Amended 11-20-2017 by Ord. No.
719]
The annual license fee for all commercial entities shall be $25, with said
license being good from January 1 through December 31 of the same year.
§ 237-6. Hours restricted; conduct; exhibition of permit. [Amended
7-2-1984 by Ord. No. 348; 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 376]
§ 237-7. Nontransferability.
No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be used at any
time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued.
C. If, as a result of the above investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Police
Department shall issue a license, but in no case less than 10 days from
the date of the filing of the application form. Such license shall contain
the signature of the applicant and the seal of the issuing officer and
shall show the name, address and photograph of said licensee and, if
goods or services are to be sold, the kind of goods or services to be sold.
A permanent record of all licenses issued shall be kept by the Police
Department. The Police Department shall, at least once a month, report
to the Mayor and Council the number of licenses issued, with a
breakdown showing the kind of license issued.
A. Any person who is licensed to solicit, canvass, poll-take, survey-take or
for any reason under this article shall do so only between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. [Amended 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 72683]
B. (Reserved)
C. No person shall engage in any activity licensed under this article, either
for trade or nontrade purposes, on Sundays or holidays.
D. All persons who are licensed under this article shall carry upon their
person a copy of said license which shall be exhibited to any police
officer or any other person in the Borough at his/her request.
E. All persons who are licensed under this article shall be courteous to all
persons while engaged in such licensed activity, shall obey signs posted
by individual residents which indicate, in any way, that such licensees
are not welcome, shall not importune or annoy any of the residents of
the Borough and shall conduct themselves in a lawful manner at all
times.
83.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection B, regarding hours for
licensed activity, which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 237-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-8
1:245
§ 237-8. Maintenance and inspection of equipment.
The equipment used or employed by peddlers, barkers and vendors of ice
cream, food, beverages, confections and other related commodities shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary manner and be subject to the inspection
of the Board of Health or its authorized agent.
§ 237-9. Use of streets. [Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 376]
A licensee shall not have any exclusive right to any one place upon any
sidewalk or any street and shall not be permitted to operate in any
congested area where his/her operation might impede or inconvenience the
public. For the purpose of this article, the judgment of a police officer,
exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area
is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.
§ 237-10. Exceptions. [Amended 7-2-1984 by Ord. No. 348]
A. This article shall not be construed to apply to the selling of any article at
wholesale to dealers in such articles, or the delivery of milk, eggs,
bread, newspapers or such other necessary and perishable articles of
food or merchandise of a type commonly delivered on a house-to-house
basis at intervals of less than one week, or to the selling of products
actually grown by the seller, but the foregoing shall be subject to any
and all regulations, statutes and ordinances concerning food handling
and food handlers and all other applicable ordinances, regulations and
statutes of the Borough or state. [Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No.
376]
B. This article shall be inapplicable to federal census takers and polls or
surveys taken pursuant to federal, state or local law.
C. Any veteran or volunteer fireman who holds a special license issued
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9, as may be supplemented and amended,
shall be exempt from the fee requirements of § 237-5 of this article but
shall be required to comply with all other applicable sections of this
article.
D. The Police Department shall issue a special permit, without charge, for
a specified period, to any non-profit-making religious, charitable, civic,
political or veteran organizations, service clubs, or volunteer fire or
first aid companies desiring to solicit, or have solicited in its name,
money, donations or financial assistance of any kind or desiring to sell
or distribute any item of literature or merchandise for which a fee is or
is not charged, provided that there is filed with the Police Department a
sworn application, in writing, containing the following information:
[Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 376]
(1) The name and address of the organization.
(2) The purpose for which the special permit is requested.
§ 237-8 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 237-10
1:246
§ 237-11. Revocation.
§ 237-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and
Penalties.85
(3) The names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
organization.
(4) The period during which solicitation is to be carried on, and further
provided that the Police Department is satisfied that such person,
organization or association is bona fide.84
A. Licenses issued under this article may be revoked by the Police
Department for any of the following causes:
(1) Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application.
(2) Misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on activities herein.
(3) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
(4) Conducting the licensed business in an unlawful manner, in
violation of this article or in such a manner as to cause a breach of
the peace, to create a nuisance or to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. All persons whose licenses have been revoked or denied shall have the
right of appeal to the Mayor and Council by requesting a hearing in
writing to the Borough Clerk within 10 days of the revocation. The
Mayor and Council shall, within 30 days after receipt of the request,
hold a hearing. At the conclusion of said hearing, the Mayor and
Council shall affirm, or order the Police Department to set aside, the
revocation or denial of the license. The decision of the Mayor and
Council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
84.Former Subsection E, regarding hours and requirements for nontrade licensed activity, as
amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 376, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 726.
85.Editor's Note: Original § 24-16, Applicability, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658.
§ 237-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-12
1:247

ARTICLE II
No-Knock List
[Adopted 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 633]
§ 237-13. Hours. [Amended 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 726]
All persons regulated by this chapter shall only conduct their canvassing/
solicitation within the Borough within the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
§ 237-14. No-knock signs. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658;
7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 726
All persons to which this chapter applies shall not conduct any canvassing/
solicitation within the Borough at any premises that has a visible "no knock"
sign on their property or who has registered with the Harrington Park Police
Department as a property to which no canvassing/solicitation shall occur
(the "No-Knock list").
§ 237-15. No-knock list. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658;
7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 726
Any group or individual regulated by this chapter shall not within the
Borough disturb residents who have registered their names on a No-Knock
list maintained by the Harrington Park Police Department. It is the
responsibility of all such individuals/groups to obtain a copy of said No-
Knock list from the Clerk of the Borough prior to conducting any operations
pursuant to this chapter and to honor the privacy of those listed.
§ 237-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Any person, group or organization violating the provisions of this article
shall be liable to a maximum penalty at the discretion of the Judge of the
Municipal Court of the Borough as set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and
Penalties.
§ 237-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-16
1:249
Chapter 242
PESTICIDE APPLICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fines and penalties — See Ch. 164.
Rodent extermination — See Ch. 256.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 286.
§ 242-1. Title.
This chapter shall be knows as the "Pesticide Control Ordinance."
§ 242-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT — The Pesticide Control Act of 1971, as amended (N.J.S.A. 13:1F-1 et
seq.).
ACTIVE INGREDIENT — Any ingredient which will prevent, destroy, repel,
control or mitigate pests or which will act as a plant regulator, defoliant or
desiccant.
ADJACENT and CONTIGUOUS — To border upon or touch; for the purpose
of this chapter this includes those properties across the intervening
residential street, which would actually touch or border upon the property
in question if the street were not present.
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY — Any plant, or part thereof, or animal
or animal product, produced by a person (including farmers, ranchers,
vineyardists, plant propagators, Christmas tree growers, aquaculturists,
floriculturists, orchardists, foresters, or other comparable persons)
primarily for sale, consumption, propagation, or other use by man or animal.
APPLICATION — Spraying, dusting, vaporizing or any outdoor airborne
application of a pesticide by any person.
BRAND or BRAND NAME or TRADE NAME — The characteristic
designation by words, symbols, name, number or trademark of a specific
particular pesticide or formation thereof under which the pesticide is
distributed, sold, offered for sale, handled, stored, used or transported in
the State of New Jersey.
COMMERCIAL PESTICIDE APPLICATOR — Any person who uses or
supervises the use of any pesticide for any purpose or on any property other
than as provided by the definition of "private pesticide applicator."
CUSTOMER — Any person(s) who hires a commercial pesticide applicator
business to perform turf or ornamental pest control application on a
property owned or rented by him.
§ 237-16 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 242-2
1:250
DEP — New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Police.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships, and joint-stock companies, as well as individuals, and shall
also include all political subdivisions of the state or any agency or
instrumentalities thereof.
PEST — Any insect, rodent, nematode, fungus, weed or any other form
of terrestrial or aquatic plant or animal life or virus, bacteria, or
microorganism (except viruses, bacteria, or other microorganisms on or in
living man or other animal) which is injurious to health or the environment.
PESTICIDE (also includes HERBICIDE) — Includes any substance or
mixture of substances labeled, designed or intended for use in preventing,
destroying, repelling or mitigating any pest or any substance or mixture of
substances labeled, designed or intended for use as a defoliant, desiccant
or plant regulator, provided that the term "pesticide" shall not include any
substance or mixture of substances which the EPA does not consider to be
a pesticide or herbicide.
PRIVATE PESTICIDE APPLICATOR — Any person who uses or supervises
the use of any pesticide for purposes of producing any agricultural
commodity on property owned or rented by him or his employer or, if
applied without compensation, other than trading of personal services
between producers of agricultural commodities, on the property of another
person.
RESPONSIBLE PESTICIDE APPLICATOR — Any individual who is
accountable for the use of a pesticide by himself or any person under his
direct supervision.
RESTRICTED-USE PESTICIDE — Any pesticide or pesticide use so
classified under the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:30-1 et seq. or so classified by
the Administrator of United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
TARGET SITE — A specific location, including but not limited to any crop,
commodity, object, delineated field or area, or structure or part thereof, that
is intended to be treated by a pesticide so than any pests therein or thereon
are controlled. This term does not include any similar site which was not
part of the original agreement between the contracting parties even if such
site is included on the label or labeling of the pesticide.
USE — Any act of handling or release of a pesticide or exposure of man,
property or the environment to a pesticide through acts which include but
are not limited to:
Applying a pesticide, including mixing, loading and any required
supervisory action in or near the area of application.
A.
B. Handling, transporting or storing a pesticide or pesticide container(s).
§ 242-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-2
1:251
§ 242-3. Commercial pesticide applicator.
§ 242-4. Pesticide storage.
No person shall store restricted-use pesticides without first meeting
applicable provisions of state regulations.
§ 242-5. Safety equipment.
All persons having employees who use, apply, transport or otherwise handle
any pesticide shall make available to such employees any necessary and
appropriate safety equipment in good working order and shall train such
employees in the proper operation of such safety equipment.
§ 242-6. Financial responsibility.
Businesses required to register pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:30-7.1 et seq. shall
maintain financial responsibility at all times while such registration is in
effect. The financial responsibility shall meet or exceed the standards set
forth in N.J.A.C. 7:30-7.1 et seq.
§ 242-7. Notification; outdoor ornamental and turf applications.
The customer may obtain copies of notices from the commercial pesticide
applicator and shall deliver such notices, at least 12 hours prior to the
proposed application date, to residents of property adjacent and contiguous
to the customer's property, such notice to contain the following information:
Disposal actions for a pesticide and/or containers or equipment
associated with the pesticide.
C.
A. No person shall engage in the activities of a commercial pesticide
applicator without having satisfied the applicable requirements
established by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) and
having obtained a valid commercial pesticide applicator registration
issued by the Department.
B. Each commercial pesticide applicator shall at all times have in his/her
possession the valid registration card and shall produce it upon request
by proper enforcement officers as well as the customer.
C. Each commercial pesticide applicator must keep records of each
application of pesticides in accordance with provisions of state
regulations. Such records shall be made available to proper
enforcement officers or to customers upon request.
D. No person shall make false or misleading claims through any media
relating to the effects of a pesticide, the degree of certification
required, or the application methods to be utilized.
E. No person shall falsify or produce fraudulent application records.
§ 242-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 242-7
1:252
§ 242-8. Exceptions.
§ 242-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties.
Chapter 245
PLASTICS, SINGLE-USE
A. A general statement of the purpose of the notification and procedures
to follow to obtain additional updated information.
B. The proposed application date(s).
C. The location of the application.
D. The name, address and registration number of the applicator business
or the responsible applicator associated with the application.
E. The pesticide(s) to be used (brand name and common chemical names,
if available, of the active ingredients).
F. The name, address and telephone number of the applicator who may be
contracted and is responsible for supplying updated information on the
proposed pesticide applications to those persons requesting it.
G. Any precautionary statement(s) on the product's federal registered
label.
H. The telephone number of the National Pesticide Telecommunication
Network for general pesticide information.
I. The telephone number of the New Jersey Poison Information and
Education System for emergency use.
J. The telephone number for the DEP Pesticide Control Program for
regulation information.
A. Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to apply in any regard to
the application of any pesticide as defined herein which is available to
the consumer market and for which use or application no license or
certification is required by any federal or state agency.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any pesticide
application which is made for the purpose of producing an agricultural
commodity.
§ 242-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-9
1:253

ARTICLE I
Plastic Bags, Straws and Stirrers and Polystyrene Containers
[Adopted 9-9-2019 by Ord. No. 737]
§ 245-1. Purpose.
The Borough of Harrington Park ("Borough") and its Environmental
Commission are committed to protecting the environment and the public
health, safety, and welfare of its citizens, the watershed and surrounding
waterways. The goal of this article is to reduce the common use of singleuse
plastic bags, plastic straws, plastic stirrers and polystyrene foam food
packaging containers and to encourage the use of reusable bags by
consumers, paper straws, wooden or bamboo stirrers and more sustainable/
recyclable packaging containers by retailers, thereby reducing local land
and water pollution, advancing solid waste reduction, protecting the
Borough's unique natural beauty and irreplaceable natural resources, and
improving the quality of life for the citizens of the Borough.
§ 245-2. Findings.
A. Single-use plastic bags, plastic straws, plastic stirrers and polystyrene
foam food packaging containers are an environmental nuisance;
adversely affect public health; are a detriment to the watershed and
waterways surrounding our Borough; and impair the overall quality of
life of the Borough's residents and visitors.
(1) Because plastic bags, plastic straws, plastic stirrers and
polystyrene foam food packaging containers are lightweight, they
easily become airborne even when properly disposed of, littering
the waterways, roadsides and sidewalks. They clog storm drainage
systems, contribute to water and terrestrial pollution, and detract
from the natural beauty of the Borough.
(2) Plastic bags, plastic straws, plastic stirrers and polystyrene foam
food products photo-degrade, disintegrating into minute particles
which adsorb toxins and pose a threat to riparian and marine
environments, contaminating the food chain, water and soil. They
are also a menace to marine life, killing birds, marine mammals,
sea turtles and fish each year. Polystyrene foam also contains toxic
substances, styrene and benzene, which are known carcinogens
and neurotoxins that are hazardous to humans.
(3) The vast majority of plastic bags, plastic straws, plastic stirrers and
polystyrene foam food packaging containers are not recycled, and
recycling of plastic bags, plastic straws, plastic stirrers and
polystyrene foam food packaging containers is not available in the
Borough of Harrington Park. Their disposal adds to the Borough's
waste management expense, both through the cost of transporting
waste to landfills and due to their contamination of the singlestream
recycling system.
§ 245-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-2
1:255
§ 245-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHECKOUT BAG — A carryout bag with or without handles provided by a
store to a customer at the point of sale that is intended for the purpose of
transporting food or merchandise out of the store. The term "checkout bag"
does not include product bags.
HEALTH OFFICER — Includes the Sanitarian of the Borough of Harrington
Park or any duly authorized agent or employee of the Board of Health,
Borough of Harrington Park, County of Bergen, New Jersey.
PLASTIC STIRRER — A device that is used to mix beverages, intended
for only one-time use, and made predominantly of plastic derived from
either petroleum or a biologically based polymer, such as corn or other
plant sources. "Plastic stirrer" includes compostable and biodegradable
petroleum or a biologically based polymer stirrers, but does not include
stirrers that are made from nonplastic materials, such as paper, sugar cane,
bamboo, etc.
PLASTIC STRAW — A tube made predominantly of plastic derived from
either petroleum or a biologically based polymer, such as corn or other plant
sources, for transferring a beverage from its container to the mouth of the
drinker. "Plastic straw" includes compostable and biodegradable petroleum
or biologically based polymer straws, but does not include straws that are
made from nonplastic materials, such as paper, sugar cane, bamboo, etc.
POLYSTYRENE FOAM CONTAINER — Includes any form of container made
from blown polystyrene and expanded and/or extruded foams (sometimes
referred to as "Styrofoam"), which are derived from thermoplastic
petrochemical materials utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by
any number of techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of polymer
spheres (expandable bead polystyrene) injection molding, foam molding,
and extrusion-blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene). Polystyrene foam
is generally used to make such things as cups, bowls, plates, trays,
clamshell containers, prepared food take-out containers, meat trays, and
egg cartons.
PRODUCT BAG — A flexible container made of very thin plastic material
with a single opening that is used to transport dry cleaning materials,
produce, meats, small unpackaged or other items selected by customers at
the point of sale.
RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG — A paper bag with or without handles that is
100% recyclable.
B. Single-use plastic bags, plastic straws, plastic stirrers and polystyrene
foam food packaging container ordinances have proven to be effective
in reducing single-use plastic consumption and litter; and are part of a
growing global movement towards sustainability.
§ 245-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 245-3
1:256
RETAIL SALES — The transfer to a customer of goods in exchange for
payment occurring in retail stores, sidewalk sales, farmer's markets, flea
markets and restaurants. The term "retail sales" does not includes sales of
goods at yard sales, tag sales, other sales by residents at their home.
REUSABLE BAG — A bag which can be reused many times. It is an
alternative to single-use paper and plastic bags.
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BAG — A plastic bag provided at the check stand,
cash register, point of sale, or other point of departure for the purpose of
transporting food or merchandise out of the establishment.
STORE — Any commercial or noncommercial enterprise engaging in retail
sales, selling or offering goods, food or services directly to the public,
whether for or not for profit, including, but not limited to, convenience and
grocery stores, markets, restaurants, pharmacies, liquor stores, take-out
food purveyors, and merchandise retailers.
§ 245-4. Use regulations; exception.
§ 245-5. Recyclable paper and reusable bag fees; exceptions.
§ 245-6. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a civil fine of $250 per
incident.
§ 245-7. Enforcement.
A. Any person engaged in retail sales shall provide only reusable bags and/
or recyclable paper bags as checkout bags to customers. No store in the
Borough shall provide single-use plastic checkout bags to any person.
B. If a store provides checkout bags, they shall only provide recyclable
paper bags or reusable bags.
C. This article shall not apply to product bags.
D. No store shall provide plastic straws to any person.
E. No store shall provide plastic stirrers to any person.
F. No store shall serve, sell, give or provide food or beverage contained in
a polystyrene foam container to any person.
A. Stores shall charge and retain a fee of not less than $0.10 for each
recyclable paper bag or reusable bag provided to a customer.
B. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a store from encouraging and
providing incentives for the use of reusable bags. Stores may use
credits or rebates for customers that bring their own reusable bags for
the purpose of carrying away goods.
§ 245-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-7
1:257
§ 245-8. When effective; ramp-up period; guidance to businesses.
A. The Borough Health Officer shall be authorized to enforce violations of
this article.
B. The Borough Health Officer shall provide written notice to any person
who violates this article. Upon subsequent violation by the same
person, the Borough Health Officer shall issue a citation as provided for
the Code. Repeat offenders shall be issued additional citations without
first receiving a notice of violation.
A. This article shall take effect four months from the date of adoption.
B. There will be a four-month window for public education and for
businesses to use their existing inventory of plastic bags, straws,
stirrers and polystyrene foam containers and make the conversion.
Education materials for businesses will be provided by the Harrington
Park Environmental Commission. During this time suggested
alternative options will be provided to retail stores and businesses.
C. After the four months, anyone who violates the ban will be notified by
the Borough and given 14 days to comply. Each subsequent violation is
punishable by a $250 per incident fine. Fine money will be used for
further initiatives to create a culture of plastic waste reduction.
Additionally, the Borough will not renew licenses for businesses found
to be in violation of the ordinance.
§ 245-7 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 245-8
1:258
Chapter 248
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131.
Fines and penalties — See Ch. 164.
Rodent extermination — See Ch. 256.
Littering and refuse disposal — See Ch. 280,
Art. II.
§ 248-1. General provisions.
§ 248-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Title. This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code
of the Borough of Harrington Park" and may be referred to as "this
chapter."
B. Findings. The Borough of Harrington Park hereby finds that certain
unsafe, unsanitary, undesirable and unhealthy conditions exist at
various properties in the Borough, and the public health, safety and
welfare make it desirous to terminate unsafe, unsanitary, undesirable
and unhealthy conditions and to prevent other similar conditions from
arising in the future on any properties in the Borough.
C. Purposes. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health,
safety and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the
maintenance, appearance and condition of residential and
nonresidential structures and all existing premises; to establish
minimum standards governing facilities and other physical components
and conditions essential to make the aforesaid facilities fit for human
habitation and use; to compel certain responsibilities and duties upon
owners, operators and occupants; and to affix penalties for the violation
of this chapter. This chapter is hereby declared to be remedial and
essential for the public interest, and it is intended that this chapter be
liberally construed to effectuate the purposes stated herein.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A building or use that is on the same lot
as and subordinate to the main building and which is under the same
ownership or control as and used for a purpose customarily incident to
the use of the main building.
BLIGHTING — A deteriorating influence or conditions affecting use and
value of real estate.
§ 245-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-2
1:259
BUILDING — Any building or structure or part thereof, whether used
for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any outbuildings and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
DETERIORATION — The condition of a building or a part thereof
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rust,
or any other evidence of physical decay, neglect, lack of maintenance or
excessive use.
EXTERIOR PREMISES — Those portions of a building or structure
which are exposed to public view or are visible from adjoining and
adjacent lots, including all outside surfaces and appurtenances thereto,
and the open land space of any premises outside any building or
structure erected thereon.
IMMINENT DANGER — A condition that could cause serious or lifethreatening
injury or death at any time.
INFESTATION — The presence on or within a premises of any insects,
rodents or other pests that present a safety hazard.
JUNKED VEHICLE — Any vehicle or trailer (not located within a
garage) which is without a current valid license plate and/or is
unregistered as required by Title 39 of the New Jersey statutes and/
or is in a rusted, wrecked, discharged, dismantled, partly dismantled,
inoperative or abandoned condition. The Code Enforcement Official
determines whether or not a vehicle warrants this classification.
Specifically exempt from the definition of "junked vehicle" are vehicles
registered as historic vehicles.86
LITTER, RUBBISH, JUNK and SCRAP MATERIALS — Nonputrescible
solid wastes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible
wastes, such as paper wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, auto parts,
appliances, construction debris or similar materials.
NUISANCE —
Any public or private condition that would constitute a nuisance
according to the statutes, laws and regulations of the State of New
Jersey, its governmental agencies or the ordinances of the Borough
of Harrington Park.
(1)
Any condition which may be detrimental to the health or safety
of a person or persons, whether outside or inside a building, on
the lands and premises containing a building or in or upon an
unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to, such conditions
created by abandoned, open or structurally unsound wells, shafts,
towers, basements, foundations or excavations; abandoned
iceboxes, refrigerators, motor vehicles or parts thereof;
structurally unsound buildings, structures or fences; lumber, trash,
(2)
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 248-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 248-2
1:260
OCCUPANT — Any person or persons, including the owner, in actual
possession of and using a building or any occupancy unit in the
building.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling
or premises, or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge
and consent of the owner.
OWNER — Any person or persons or other entity who or which shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises or part thereof, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof, or who or which shall
have charge, care or control of any lot, premises, building, structure or
part thereof, as owner or agent of the owner, or a fiduciary, including
but not limited to testamentary heirs, fiduciaries, trustees, receivers,
guardians of an estate or of another, administrators or as mortgagees
in possession.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel, including the buildings or structures
thereon.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL (also
referred to as "Code Enforcement Official") — The individual primarily
and concurrently responsible for the enforcement of the Property
Maintenance Code and all Borough ordinances not otherwise reserved
to statutory code officials.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (exception to Chapter 127, Commercial
Vehicles) — A motorized vehicle that has a truck or motor van chassis
primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for travel,
camping, recreation and/or vacation use. A recreational vehicle shall
meet all requirements set forth in this chapter for motor vehicles.87
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including
but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandon automobiles and parts thereof and solid market and
industrial wastes.
STORAGE CONTAINER — A receptacle or container that is less than
1,500 cubic feet, or any aggregate of that total (if multiple containers),
that is suitable for the depositing of household furnishings, clothing and
similar materials for the purpose of storage of the same by the owner on
debris, rubbish, refuse containers, construction material, tree
stumps, dead or dying trees or branches, stones, appliances,
furniture or household goods; or depressions or holes in the land.
Any physical condition potentially dangerous or hazardous to
human life or safety or tending to be detrimental to the health of
persons on, near or passing within the proximity of the premises
where said condition exists.
(3)
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 248-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-2
1:261
§ 248-3. Maintenance of landscaping.
All trees, shrubbery and other items of landscaping required as part of
the site plan approvals heretofore or hereafter granted shall be maintained
and, if necessary, replaced by the owners of such property. Said items of
landscaping shall be maintained at all times and at least to the same quality
required at site plan review.
§ 248-4. Lawns and vegetation.
Lawns in said residential and business, commercial and industrial areas
shall be maintained so that the length of grass does not exceed six inches.
All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds
or plant growth in excess of eight inches. All noxious weeds shall be
prohibited. "Weeds" shall be defined as all vines, annual plants and
vegetation of an undesirable nature which primarily choke other preferred
plantings other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, that said definition
shall not include cultivated flowers and/or gardens.
§ 248-5. Shrubs and trees.
The shrubbery and trees within such areas shall be attractively maintained
and kept free of all debris and rubbish.
§ 248-6. Maintenance of exterior premises.
The exterior premises shall be kept free of litter (including, without limiting
the generality of the foregoing, discarded, windblown, deposited, dropped
or strewn papers, wrappings, cardboard, bottles, cans, boxes and broken
glass) and of all nuisances and hazards to safety of tenants, occupants,
pedestrians and other persons having access to the premises and free of
unsanitary conditions, and any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed
and abated. The word "hazards" shall include but not be limited to the
following:
a temporary basis when moving, construction or renovation is ongoing
by the owner on his/her lot in the Borough.88
TRAILER — A structure standing on blocks or wheels, towed or hauled
by another vehicle, and used for carrying materials, goods or objects or
as a temporary office. Single axle is acceptable. Anything over a single
axle is prohibited.89
B. All terms and words used in this chapter shall be deemed and construed
to include any other number, singular or plural, and other gender,
masculine, feminine or neuter, as the context or sense of any paragraph
or clause herein may require.
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 248-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 248-6
1:262
§ 248-7. Exterior appearance.
In furtherance of the purposes of this chapter, it shall be the duty and
responsibility of the owner, owners, operators or occupants of the premises
aforesaid to comply with any and all the requirements and standards of this
chapter, to keep the premises free of conditions which constitute violations
A. Refuse.
B. Dead and dying trees and other natural growth which, by reason of
rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage, are or may be
dangerous to persons in the vicinity thereof. Trees are to be kept
pruned and trimmed to prevent such conditions.
C. Loose overhanging and projecting objects which, by reason of location
above ground level, constitute a dangerous to persons in the vicinity
thereof.
D. Holes, mounds, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions and
excretions on paths (and other animals on paths), sidewalks, walks,
driveways, parking lots and parking areas and other parts of the
exterior of the premises which are accessible to and used by persons
having access to such premises.
E. Sources of infestation.
F. Structurally unsound, defective or damaged foundation walls.
Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound, free from defects and
damage and capable of bearing imposed load safely.
G. Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and
similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound
and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by any periodic
application of weather-coating materials such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
H. Defective or deteriorating porches, stairs and fire escapes. Exterior
porches or landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be
provided, consistent with building and fire codes, with banisters or
railings properly designed and maintained, structurally sound, in good
repair and free from defects. [Amended 11-20-2017 by Ord. No.
719]
I. In all districts within the Borough of Harrington Park, refuse and
recycling bins and material may not be placed at the curb prior to 6:30
p.m. of the day preceding a scheduled refuse/recycling pick up and
further providing that all such bins and cans must be removed from the
curb and returned to a proper storage area, either in the rear portion of
a property, or contained area not visible from the street, by 9:00 p.m. of
the day of such scheduled pickup. [Amended 9-9-2019 by Ord. No.
740]
§ 248-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-7
1:263
hereof and to promptly remove, prevent or abate such conditions within 30
days of the enactment of this chapter.
A. Exterior surfaces. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to
doors, door and window frames, roofs, cornices, porches, trim,
balconies and decks, shall be maintained in good condition and free
from any hazards. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant
woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or
other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped
paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All surfaces shall be
maintained free from broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or
brick or other condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate
maintenance to the end that the property itself may be preserved,
safety hazard eliminated and adjoining properties and the
neighborhood protected from blighting influence.
B. Signs. All signs, including the structural and supporting components
thereof, and all light stanchions and poles shall be maintained in good
repair.
C. Awnings and marquees. Any awning or marquee and its accompanying
structural members which extend over any street, sidewalk or other
portion of the premises shall be maintained in good repair and shall be
so maintained as to not constitute a nuisance or safety hazard. In the
event that any such awning or marquee is not properly maintained in
accordance with the foregoing, it shall, together with its supporting
members, be removed forthwith. In the event that any such awning or
marquee is made of cloth, plastic or of similar materials, said materials,
where exposed to public view, shall be maintained in good condition and
shall not show evidence of excessive weathering, discoloration, ripping,
tearing or other deterioration. Nothing herein shall be construed to
authorize an encroachment of an awning, marquee or its accompanying
structural members on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public
domain.
D. Scaffolding. No temporary painting scaffold or other temporary
equipment used for construction, repair or maintenance shall be
permitted to remain in place beyond the period of six months after
erection or placement thereof, without permission of the Zoning Officer
or Construction Code Official.
E. Firewood. Firewood cannot be stored in the front yard. It must be
stacked.
F. Residential parking. No person shall park, stop or stand any motor
vehicle on any portion of any premises except on driveways constructed
and installed in compliance with applicable Borough ordinances.
G. Trailers. No person shall park, stop or stand any trailer on any portion
of any premises at any time. Exception: Specifically exempt from the
aforesaid are single-axle, licensed trailers.
§ 248-7 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 248-7
1:264
H. Motor vehicles and trailers.
(1) No motor vehicle or trailer which is either without a current
inspection sticker, or without current license plates, or without a
currently valid New Jersey registration, or is classified as a junked
vehicle by the definition set forth in this chapter shall be parked,
kept or stored on any premises, and no motor vehicle shall at any
time be in a state of major disassembly or disrepair or in the
process of being stripped or dismantled unless such vehicle is kept
within a garage or automobile service station service bay.
Exception: Specifically exempt from the aforesaid are vehicles
registered as historic vehicles, vehicles at approved towing yards
and vehicles being repaired at approved auto body shops. No
required front, side or rear setbacks shall be used for the overnight
parking or storage of any boats, house trailers, mobile homes,
recreation vehicles or unregistered, uninspected or dismantled
motor vehicles.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor or occupant of lands in
the Borough of Harrington Park to store, place, keep, park or
accumulate upon such lands any motor vehicles, automobiles or
machines in need of repair so as not to be readily operated under
their own power, requiring substantial repairs or not currently
licensed or not being currently used for transportation. Nothing
herein shall be construed to limit the storage of vehicles which are
kept in an enclosed garage.
(3) No person shall keep or permit the keeping on any streets, vacant
lots, parking lots or anywhere outdoors on the premises, except in a
fully enclosed structure, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer:
(a) Which is missing tires, wheels, engine or any essential part;
(b) Which displays extensive body damage or deterioration;
(c) Which does not display a current, valid state license plate and
valid inspection sticker; or
(d) Which is wrecked, disassembled, partially disassembled,
inoperable or considered a junked vehicle.
I. Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways,
parking spaces, paved areas and similar areas shall be kept in the
proper state of repair and maintained free from potholes, cracks and
other hazardous conditions.
J. There shall not be stored or used at a location visible from the sidewalk,
street or other public areas in residential zones equipment and material
relating to commercial (excepting vehicles as otherwise provided under
Chapter 127, Commercial Vehicles) or industrial uses unless otherwise
permitted under the applicable zoning ordinances of the Borough of
Harrington Park.
§ 248-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-7
1:265
§ 248-8. Building and structure maintenance.
Every inside and outside stairway, every porch and every appurtenance
thereto shall be constructed and maintained as to be safe to use and capable
of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and
should be kept in sound condition and in good repair.
§ 248-9. Storage containers.
K. Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including but not limited
to detached garages, fences and walls, stairways, walkways and
parking lots, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair,
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
L. Boats. Boats shall not be parked within any required front, side, or rear
yard setbacks. Any boat must be on a trailer that is registered and
covered during the off season. The area around the boat must be
properly maintained.
M. Exterior structure. The exterior of the structure shall be maintained in
good repair, structurally sound and sanitary in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
N. All leaders, gutters or any stormwater drainage systems must be
maintained clean and free of obstructions, debris and vegetation and in
good working order.
O. Public nuisance. No premises, lots or structures within this Borough
shall be maintained in such a way as to constitute a public nuisance. A
public nuisance shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1) Any physical condition or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children,
including but not limited to abandoned wells, shafts, basements,
excavations or unsafe fences or structures.
(2) Any premises that is unsanitary or littered with rubbish or garbage
or that is overgrown with grass, weeds or other natural growth.
(3) Any structure that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or
decay; has faulty construction; is overcrowded; has excessive
storage or is vacant (and is deteriorating) or abandoned; has been
damaged by fire to the extent so as not to provide shelter; is in
danger of collapse or failure; or is dangerous to anyone on or near
the premises.
P. Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant, owner or agent shall
keep that part of the property which the occupant, owner or agent
controls or occupies in a clean and sanitary condition.
A. General restrictions.
§ 248-7 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 248-9
1:266
(1) A single storage container of 1,500 cubic feet or any aggregate of
that total (if multiple containers) or less shall be permitted on any
lot in the Borough on a temporary basis as set forth hereafter.
Larger size storage containers are prohibited in all residential
zones.
(2) It may be located in any yard area but no closer than five feet to all
interior property lines, and it shall not be located any closer than
10 feet to any street line.
(3) The location of the temporary storage container on a corner
property shall not cause a sight obstruction at an intersection.
(4) A storage container(s) shall be permitted in accordance with this
section, but it shall only remain on the lot for a maximum of 30 days
from the date that the permit is issued.
(5) A storage container(s) with a valid building permit issued
pertaining to the need for a storage container shall only remain on
the lot for a maximum of 90 days when there is a need for a storage
container.90
B. Permit requirements. Before any owner shall be permitted to place a
storage container(s) on the lot, an application to the Construction
Department for a permit to do so shall be filed and approved. The
application shall identify the owner and/or the tenant, location, size and
the length of time that the storage container is requested.
(1) A storage container shall be permitted to remain for the following
length of time:
(a) Thirty days.
(b) Ninety days if a valid building permit was issued pertaining to
the need for a storage container.
(2) The owner may seek to keep the storage container for an additional
period of time by making a separate application for extension to the
Construction Department, with the understanding and
acknowledgment that any extension granted will not be further
extended and additional fees will be required unless extenuating
circumstances apply, such as a fire or natural disaster.
C. Fees. There is no fee for the first 30 days. In the case of an extension
application (for each thirty-day period thereafter), there is a fee to the
Borough, in such amount as provided in the Borough Fee Schedule.9192
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
92.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Violations and penalties, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 248-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-10
1:267
§ 248-10. Administration and enforcement.
A. Enforcement officer. The Property Maintenance Code Enforcement
Official, or his designee, of the Borough of Harrington Park is hereby
designated as the public officer to exercise the powers prescribed by
this chapter.
B. Enforcement procedures. Whenever the enforcement officer
determines that there is or has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, he shall give notice of such violation to the person or persons
or entities responsible therefor under this chapter. Such notice shall be
in writing and shall include a concise statement of the reasons for
issuance. Such notice shall be deemed properly and sufficiently served
if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to the last known
address of the person or entity upon which the same is served, as shown
by the most recent tax list of the municipality, or a copy thereof is
handed to said person or persons, or a copy thereof is left at the usual
place of abode or office of said person or entity. Notice shall be given as
aforesaid within or without the municipality. The notice shall also state
that, unless the violation is abated, removed, cured or prevented within
10 days of the date of service of such notice (exclusive of the date of
service), a summons shall be issued for such violation. The enforcement
officer may, at the time he issues the notice, or any time thereafter,
extend the period for compliance with the violations stated in the notice
for a period in excess of the aforesaid 10 days if, in his judgment, the
abatement, removal, prevention, cessation of or cure of the condition
violated cannot reasonably be effected within the ten-day period. In the
event that the violation is not abated, removed, cured, prevented or
otherwise fully remedied within said ten-day period or within such
extended period as set forth in the notice pursuant to the foregoing, a
summons shall be issued against the person, persons, entity or entities
so notified.
C. Failure to conform; abatement by Borough. Where the abatement of any
condition as described herein, correction of a defect in the premises or
work necessary to place the premises in a proper condition, so as to
conform to this chapter or any other ordinance of the Borough or
applicable laws of the State of New Jersey, shall not have been
completed within 10 days of said written notice from the Code
Enforcement Official, the Code Enforcement Official shall present a
report of work proposed to be done to accomplish the foregoing to the
governing body of the Borough with an estimate of the cost, along with
a summary of the proceedings undertaken by the Code Enforcement
Official to secure compliance, including notices served upon the
occupants, owners, operators or their agents as the case may be. The
governing body may thereupon, by resolution, authorize the abatement
of the nuisance or the correction of the defect or work necessary to
place the premises in proper condition and in compliance with this
chapter. The Code Enforcement Official or, at the direction of the
governing body, his agents or representatives, depending upon the
§ 248-10 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 248-10
1:268
§ 248-11. Responsibilities of owner, operator and occupant.
The responsibilities of the owner, operator and occupant are to be
independent of each other.
§ 248-12. Emergency conditions.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Official or Construction Code Official
finds that an emergency condition in violation of this chapter exists, which
condition requires immediate attention to protect the public health or
safety, he may issue an order by service of notice as set forth above reciting
the existence of such an emergency condition and requiring that such action
be taken by the violator as soon as it is reasonably necessary to meet
the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, such
order shall be effective immediately.94
volume of work to be performed, may thereafter proceed to have the
work performed in accordance with the resolution at Borough expense,
not to exceed the amount specified in the resolution, and shall, upon
completion thereof, submit a report of the moneys expended and costs
to the governing body. After a review of the report, the governing body
may approve the expenses and costs, whereupon the same shall become
a lien against the premises, collectible as provided by law. A copy of
the resolution approving the expenses and costs shall be certified by
the Borough Clerk and filed with the Tax Collector of the Borough of
Harrington Park, who shall be responsible for the collection, and a
copy of the report and resolution shall be sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner.93
A. Owners and operators. Owners shall have all the duties and
responsibilities as prescribed in this chapter, and the owner shall not be
relieved from any such duties and responsibilities nor be entitled to
defend against any charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that
the occupant is also responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
B. Occupants. Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as
prescribed in this chapter, and the occupant shall not be relieved from
any such duties and responsibilities nor be entitled to defend against
any charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that the owner or
operator is also responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
C. Contract not to alter responsibilities, unless expressly provided to the
contrary in this chapter. The responsibilities of the owner and operator
on one hand, and the occupant on the other, shall not be altered or
affected by any agreement or contract by and between any of the
aforesaid or between them and other parties.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
94.Editor's Note: Former § 248-13, Lien on property, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 248-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-13
1:269
§ 248-13. Landscape costs to become lien against property.
The costs of landscape maintenance or replacement on the basis of time
and materials shall be charged to the property owner and, if not promptly
paid, shall be certified to the Tax Assessor and shall become a municipal lien
against said property.
§ 248-14. Applicability to zoning.
Nothing contained in this chapter or any requirement of compliance
herewith shall be deemed to alter, impair or affect the application of the
zoning laws or ordinances of the Borough of Harrington Park.95
§ 248-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons or entity who or which violates any provision of this
chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each and every occasion
or day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 253
RIPARIAN ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Steep slopes — See Ch. 284.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 286.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 291.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
303.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 253-1. Purpose and authority.
The purpose of this chapter is to designate riparian zones and to provide for
land use regulation therein in order to protect the streams, lakes, and other
surface water bodies of the Borough of Harrington Park and to comply with
N.J.A.C. 7:15-5.25(g)3, which requires municipalities to adopt an ordinance
that prevents new disturbance for projects or activities in riparian zones as
described herein. Compliance with the riparian zone requirements of this
chapter does not constitute compliance with the riparian zone or buffer
requirements imposed under any other federal, state or local statute,
regulation or ordinance.
§ 253-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
95.Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning.
§ 248-13 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 253-2
1:270
ACID-PRODUCING SOILS — Soils that contain geologic deposits of iron
sulfide minerals (pyrite and marcasite) which, when exposed to oxygen
from the air or from surface waters, oxidize to produce sulfuric acid. Acidproducing
soils, upon excavation, generally have a pH of 4.0 or lower.
After exposure to oxygen, these soils generally have a pH of 3.0 or lower.
Information regarding the location of acid-producing soils in New Jersey can
be obtained from local soil conservation district offices.
APPLICANT — A person, corporation, government body or other legal entity
applying to the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment or the
Construction Department proposing to engage in an activity that is
regulated by the provisions of this chapter and that would be located in
whole or in part within a regulated riparian zone.96
CATEGORY ONE WATERS or C1 WATERS — Shall have the meaning
ascribed to this term by the Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C.
7:9B, for purposes of implementing the antidegradation policies set forth in
those standards, for protection from measurable changes in water quality
characteristics because of their clarity, color, scenic setting, and other
characteristics of aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance,
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
or exceptional fisheries resources.
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure or
movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A surface water body with definite bed and
banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water and shown on
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a special
water resource protection area (SWRPA), pursuant to the stormwater
management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the United
States Geological Survey (USGS) quadrangle map or in the county soil
surveys.
LAKE, POND or RESERVOIR — Any surface water body shown on the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information
System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a special water
resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the stormwater management
rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS quadrangle
map or in the county soil surveys, that is an impoundment, whether
naturally occurring or created in whole or in part by the building of
structures for the retention of surface water. This excludes sedimentation
control and stormwater retention/detention basins and ponds designed for
treatment of wastewater.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A surface water body that flows continuously
throughout the year in most years and shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information System
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 253-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-2
1:271
(GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a special water resource
protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the stormwater management rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in
the county soil surveys.
RIPARIAN ZONE — The land and vegetation within and directly adjacent
to all surface water bodies, including but not limited to lakes, ponds,
reservoirs, and perennial and intermittent streams, up to and including
their point of origin, such as seeps and springs, as shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection's GIS hydrography coverages or,
in the case of a special water resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant
to the stormwater management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the county soil surveys. There is
no riparian zone along the Atlantic Ocean nor along any man-made lagoon
or oceanfront barrier island, spit or peninsula.
SPECIAL WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA or SWRPA — A threehundred-
foot area provided on each side of a surface water body designated
as a C1 water or tributary to a C1 water that is a perennial stream,
intermittent stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein, and shown
on the USGS quadrangle map or in the county soil surveys within the
associated HUC 14 drainage, pursuant to the stormwater management
rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h).
SURFACE WATER BODY(IES) — Any perennial stream, intermittent stream,
lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein. In addition, any regulated water
under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules at N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.2, or
state open waters identified in a letter of interpretation issued under the
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act rules at N.J.A.C. 7:7A-3 by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Land Use
Regulation, shall also be considered surface water bodies.
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES — A species identified
pursuant to the Endangered and Nongame Species Conservation Act,
N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq., the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C.
§ 1531 et seq., or the Endangered Plant Species List, N.J.A.C. 7:5C-5.1, and
any subsequent amendments thereto.
TROUT MAINTENANCE WATER — A section of water designated as trout
maintenance in the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
TROUT PRODUCTION WATER — A section of water identified as trout
production in the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
§ 253-3. Establishment and protection of riparian zones.
A. Except as provided in §§ 253-4 and 253-5 below, riparian zones adjacent
to all surface water bodies shall be protected from avoidable
disturbance and shall be delineated as follows:
§ 253-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 253-3
1:272
(1) The riparian zone shall be 300 feet wide along both sides of any
Category One water (C1 water) and all upstream tributaries
situated within the same HUC 14 watershed.
(2) The riparian zone shall be 150 feet wide along both sides of the
following waters not designated as C1 waters:
(a) Any trout production water and all upstream waters (including
tributaries);
(b) Any trout maintenance water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries) within one linear mile as measured
along the length of the regulated water;
(c) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains
documented habitat for a threatened or endangered species of
plant or animal, which is critically dependent on the surface
water body for survival, and all upstream waters (including
tributaries) within one linear mile as measured along the
length of the regulated water; and
(d) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains
acid-producing soils.
(3) For all other surface water bodies, a riparian zone of 50 feet wide
shall be maintained along both sides of the water.
B. If a discernible bank is not present along a surface water body, the
portion of the riparian zone outside the surface water body is measured
landward as follows:
(1) Along a linear fluvial or tidal water, such as a stream, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the feature's center line;
(2) Along a nonlinear fluvial water, such as a lake or pond, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the normal water surface limit;
(3) Along a nonlinear tidal water, such as a bay or inlet, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the mean high-water line; and
(4) Along an amorphously shaped feature such as a wetland complex,
through which water flows but which lacks a discernible channel,
the riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's center line.
C. The applicant or designated representative shall be responsible for the
initial determination of the presence of a riparian zone on a site and for
identifying the area of the riparian zone on any plan submitted to the
Borough of Harrington Park in conjunction with an application for a
construction permit, subdivision, land development, or other
improvement that requires plan submissions or permits. This initial
determination shall be subject to review and approval by the Municipal
Engineer, governing body, or its appointed representative and, where
§ 253-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-3
1:273
§ 253-4. Variances.
To the extent allowed by the stormwater management rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8),
the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules (N.J.A.C. 7:13), and the Highlands
Water Protection and Planning Act rules (N.J.A.C. 7:38), new disturbances
for projects or activities in the riparian zone established by this chapter may
be allowed through the Zoning Board of Adjustment review and approval
of a variance, provided that the disturbance is proposed to be located on a
preexisting lot (existing as of the effective date of this chapter), when there
is insufficient room outside the riparian zone for the proposed use otherwise
permitted by the underlying zoning; there is no other reasonable or prudent
alternative to placement in the riparian zone, including obtaining variances
from setback or other requirements that would allow conformance with
the riparian zone requirements; and upon proof by virtue of submission of
appropriate maps, drawings, reports and testimony that the disturbance is
necessary:
§ 253-5. Exceptions.
To the extent allowed under the stormwater management rules (N.J.A.C.
7:8), the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules (N.J.A.C. 7:13), and the
Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act rules (N.J.A.C. 7:38) and
subject to review and approval by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to the extent required by those rules, the
following disturbances for projects or activities in the riparian zone
established by this chapter are allowed:
required by state regulation, the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
A. To protect public health, safety or welfare;
B. To provide an environmental benefit;
C. To prevent extraordinary hardship on the property owner peculiar to
the property; or
D. To prevent extraordinary hardship, provided that the hardship was not
created by the property owner, by not allowing a minimum
economically viable use of the property based upon reasonable
investment.
A. Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces;
B. Linear development with no feasible alternative route;
C. Disturbance that is in accordance with a stream corridor restoration or
stream bank stabilization plan or project approved by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection;
D. Disturbance necessary to provide for public pedestrian access or waterdependent
recreation that meets the requirements of the Freshwater
§ 253-3 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 253-5
1:274
§ 253-6. Appeals; interpretation.
§ 253-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.99
A prompt investigation shall be made by Code Official/Borough Engineer
of the Borough of Harrington Park of any person or entity believed to be
in violation hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition which is in violation of
this chapter is discovered, a civil action may be initiated in the Special
Part of the Superior Court, or in the Superior Court, if the primary relief
Wetlands Protection Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7A, the Flood Hazard Area
Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, or the coastal zone management rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:7E; or
E. Disturbance with no feasible alternative required for the remediation of
hazardous substances performed with New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection or federal oversight pursuant to the Spill
Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11a et seq., or the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq.
A. Any party aggrieved by the location of the riparian zone boundary
determination under this chapter may appeal to the Construction Code
Official in conjunction with the Borough Engineer under the provisions
of this chapter. The party contesting the location of the riparian zone
boundary shall have the burden of proof in case of any such appeal.97
B. Any party aggrieved by any determination or decision of the
Construction Code Official under this chapter may appeal to the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Borough of
Harrington Park. The party contesting the determination or decision
shall have the burden of proof in case of any such appeal.98
C. Conflicts. All other ordinances, parts of ordinances, or other local
requirements that are inconsistent or in conflict with this chapter are
hereby superseded to the extent of any inconsistency or conflict, and
the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
D. Interpretation.
(1) This chapter shall be so construed as not to conflict with any
provision of New Jersey or federal law.
(2) The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative with, and not in
substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and land use
regulations.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 253-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-7
1:275
sought is injunctive or if penalties may exceed the jurisdictional limit of
the Special Civil Part, by the filing and serving of appropriate process.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude the right of the
Borough of Harrington Park, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-25, to initiate legal
proceedings hereunder in Municipal Court. The violation of any section or
subsection of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
independent of the violation of any other section or subsection or of any
order issued pursuant to this chapter. Each day a violation continues shall
be considered a separate offense. Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
penalties in Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties, in the discretion of the court.
§ 253-8. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect upon final adoption and publication in
accordance with the law on April 21, 2014, the date it is filed with the
County Planning Board after adoption.
Chapter 256
RODENT EXTERMINATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fines and penalties — See Ch. 164.
Pesticide application — See Ch. 242.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 248.
§ 256-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL EXTERMINATING FIRM — Includes persons,
sole proprietorships, associations or other business entities wherein at
least one person is a certified professional exterminator engaged in rodent
elimination or eradication by use of rodenticides approved by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. Wherever in this chapter
work is to be conducted by a professional exterminating firm, the work must
be supervised by a licensed professional exterminator.
CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL EXTERMINATOR — Includes persons certified
by the State of New Jersey, Department of Environmental Protection, as
competent and authorized to use or supervise the use of pesticides who is
engaged in rodent elimination or eradication by use of rodenticides.
CLEARANCE — The act or acts ridding a property of obstructions,
entanglements or obstacles, including tree and other growth, provided that
the area affected is 500 square feet or more.
§ 253-7 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 256-1
1:276
CONSTRUCTION — The erection, alteration or repair of any building or
structure as requires municipal approval or a building permit.
DEMOLITION — The act or acts of pulling down, tearing down or otherwise
leveling all or part of a building or structure as requires municipal approval
or a building permit.
EXCAVATION — The act or acts of digging or uncovering or removing soil
or material used as the foundation of a building or a structure as requires
municipal approval or a building permit.
HEALTH OFFICER — Includes the Sanitarian of the Borough of Harrington
Park or any duly authorized agent or employee of the Board of Health,
Borough of Harrington Park, County of Bergen, New Jersey.
PERSON — Includes any person, persons, partnership, firm, association, or
corporation and the owner of buildings or properties subject to demolition,
construction or excavation.
REAL ESTATE PREMISES — Includes any vacant land or structure on land,
public or private, regardless of its use.
RODENT EXTERMINATION — Includes the elimination or eradication of
rats, mice and other rodents on said real estate premises such that said real
estate premises is completely freed of such rodents or there is no evidence
of rodent infestation remaining after implementation of accepted measures
such as poisoning and other means approved by the Health Officer.
§ 256-2. Approval required; inspection; program determination.
A. It shall be the duty of any person engaged in the demolition,
construction, excavation or clearance of any real estate premises in the
Borough of Harrington Park to first secure approval from the Health
Officer before commencement of such demolition, construction,
excavation or clearance.
B. Before granting permission for demolition, construction, excavation or
clearance of any real estate premises, a certified professional
exterminator shall inspect the premises and the immediate surrounding
premises to determine whether evidence of rodent infestation exists in
or about said real estate premises.
C. In the event that inspection reveals evidence of rodent infestation, the
Health Officer shall determine whether a program of rodent
extermination should be undertaken and completed by a certified
professional exterminating firm. The program for rodent extermination
in the case of vacant land shall be baiting burrows, approved by the
Health Officer, until results of said baiting indicate to the satisfaction of
the Health Officer that rodent infestation is nonexistent or eliminated.
[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
D. Thirty days prior to commencement of demolition, construction,
excavation or clearance, a certificate shall be issued by the Health
Officer.
§ 256-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-2
1:277
§ 256-3. Notification of Construction Code Official. [Amended
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
The Board of Health, upon issuing a certificate of approval, shall notify
the Construction Code Official of the Borough of Harrington Park of said
issuance. The issuance of a certificate of approval shall be a condition
precedent to the issuance of any permits pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23, the
Building Code and the municipal ordinances.
§ 256-4. Fees. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
§ 256-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Chapter 262
SEWER USE
E. After completion of a rodent extermination program as required herein,
the Health Officer shall reinspect the premises and, upon determination
that the program has been effective, shall issue a certificate from the
Board of Health signifying its approval of said extermination.
F. Notwithstanding the issuance of a certificate of approval, in the event
that evidence of reinfestation of said real estate premises is discovered
by the Health Officer, then, prior to demolition, construction,
excavation or clearance, the foregoing provisions of this chapter shall
apply, and new requests for permission to demolish, construct, excavate
or clear shall be made by the persons required herein.
A. Upon application to the Construction Department for a permit for
demolition or construction of any premises, the applicant shall pay, in
addition to any other fees, an application fee of $25 to the Health
Officer.
B. Upon approval by the Health Officer for the demolition, construction,
excavation or clearance of any real estate premises, the applicant shall
pay a permit fee of $25.
C. Upon any reinspection by the Health Officer pursuant to this chapter,
the applicant shall pay a fee of $25 for each and every inspection.
A. Any person or entity who or which shall violate this chapter for the first
offense shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and
Penalties, and in addition shall be required to supply such certification.
B. Anyone convicted of a subsequent offense shall be punished as set forth
in Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties, in addition to supplying the
required certificate. Each day of the continuing violation shall
constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
§ 256-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 256-5
1:278
ARTICLE I
User Charge System and Industrial Cost Recovery System
[Adopted 12-17-1979 by Ord. No. 309]
§ 262-1. Applicability of Utilities Authority rules.
The use of all sanitary sewers of the Borough of Harrington Park shall be
in compliance with the rules and regulations enacted by the Bergen County
Utilities Authority.
§ 262-2. Implementation of user charge system.
The Borough of Harrington Park hereby adopts and enacts the user charge
system and industrial cost recovery system contained in the rules and
regulations of the Bergen County Utilities Authority and authorizes their
immediate implementation by the appropriate municipal official, to be
designated by resolution of the governing body.
§ 262-3. Copies on file.
Not fewer than three copies of the rules and regulations of the Bergen
County Utilities Authority have been and are filed in the office of the Clerk
of the Borough of Harrington Park and are available for public inspection
during normal business hours.
§ 262-4. Obtaining copies of rules.
Copies of the rules and regulations of the Bergen County Utilities Authority
can be obtained from the Bergen County Utilities Authority for the cost of
publication.
§ 262-5. Amendments to service agreement.
The Mayor and Clerk of the Borough of Harrington Park shall be and they
are hereby authorized to act as signatories upon, and to execute and deliver
on behalf of the Borough of Harrington Park, an amendment to the existing
service agreement with the Bergen County Utilities Authority, which will
embody the intent and purpose of this article.
§ 262-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 262-5
1:279

ARTICLE II
Discharge of Wastewater to County Treatment Works
[Adopted 6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 671]
§ 262-6. Adoption of rules and regulations.
As required by the Federal Clean Water Act,100 the Borough of Harrington
Park hereby enacts the industrial cost recovery system, user charge system,
and rules and regulations governing the use of public and private sewers by
adopting the rules and regulations of the Bergen County Utilities Authority
rules and code entitled "Bergen County Utilities Authority Rules and
Regulations for the Direct and Indirect Discharge of Wastewater to the
Bergen County Utilities Authority Treatment Works" and which are
approved by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
§ 262-7. Copies on file.
Not fewer than three copies of the Bergen County Utilities Authority Rules
and Regulations for the Direct and Indirect Discharge of Wastewater to the
Bergen County Utilities Authority Treatment Works have been and now are
filed in the office of the Clerk of the Borough of Harrington Park.
§ 262-8. Amendments.
The adoption of this Sewer Use Ordinance by the Borough of Harrington
Park shall include the adoption of all future amendments to said Bergen
County Utilities Authority Rules and Regulations for the Direct and Indirect
Discharge of Wastewater to the Bergen County Utilities Authority
Treatment Works, provided that, prior to enacting such amendments, the
Borough of Harrington Park is given 45 days' notice in writing of the
amendment and an opportunity to comment on the same at a public hearing.
100. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 262-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 262-8
1:281
Chapter 280
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fines and penalties — See Ch. 164.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 248.
Rodent extermination — See Ch. 256.
Littering — See Ch. 291, Art. II.
Improper waste disposal — See Ch. 291, Art.
III.
Containerization of yard waste — See Ch. 291,
Art. V.
Yard waste collection and disposal — See Ch.
291, Art. VI.
Refuse containers and dumpsters — See Ch.
291, Art. VIII.
§ 262-8 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 262-8
1:282
ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted 12-21-1987 by Ord. No. 379 (Ch. 36A of the 1967 Code)]
§ 280-1. Purpose. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
The purpose of this article is to cause the Borough to comply with the
mandatory statewide recycling program, P.L. 1987, c. 102 (N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.11 et seq.), and the Clean Communities Program Act, N.J.S.A.
13:1E-213 et seq.
§ 280-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — Recyclable aluminum cans.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — The recyclable materials listed
in § 280-4 which are to be source separated in the Borough pursuant to P.L.
1987, c. 102, Section 3 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13).[Amended 10-17-1988 by
Ord. No. 407; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
DISPOSITION or DISPOSITION OF DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE
MATERIALS — The transportation, placement, reuse, sale, donation,
transfer or temporary storage for a period not exceeding six months of
designated recyclable materials for all possible uses except for disposal as
solid waste.
HOUSEHOLD E-WASTE — Computers, laptops, games consoles, printers,
fax machines, copiers, televisions, monitors, DVD players or VCRs, as well
as individual electronic parts such as motherboards and hard disk drives,
should be recycled to prevent the toxic chemicals that they contain from
contaminating the natural environment.101
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE STREAM — All residential, commercial and
institutional solid waste generated within the boundaries of the Borough as
measured in tons.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed
thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and other
matters of public interest.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY — All residential, commercial and institutional property in the
Borough.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become municipal solid waste and which are to be collected, separated or
101. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. III).
§ 280-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-2
1:283
processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw
materials or products.[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
RECYCLING — Any process by which materials which would otherwise
become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and returned to
the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
RECYCLING CENTER — Any facility designed and operated solely for
receiving, storing, processing and transferring source-separated designated
materials from residential, commercial and industrial premises.[Amended
10-17-1988 by Ord. No. 407; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
RECYCLING SERVICES — The services provided by persons engaged in
the business of recycling, including the collection, processing, storage,
purchase, sale or disposition, or any combination thereof, of recyclable
materials.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials,
as listed in § 280-4, from commercial and industrial premises, which are
kept separate and apart from all other residential, commercial and
institutional solid waste by the generator thereof for the purposes of
collection, disposition and recycling.[Amended 10-17-1988 by Ord. No.
407; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
WHITE GOODS — The following types of appliances: freezers, refrigerators,
dishwashers, washing machines, dryers, hot-water heaters, stoves and the
like.
§ 280-3. Recycling Coordinator.
There is hereby created the position of Harrington Park Recycling
Coordinator.
§ 280-4. Designation of recyclable materials. [Amended 10-17-1988
by Ord. No. 407; 3-15-1994 by Ord. No. 461; 1-30-1995 by Ord. No.
468; 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 631; 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 643]
The following materials are designated as mandatory recyclables under the
Harrington Park mandatory program:
A. Residential sector:
(1) Leaves.
(2) Newspapers.
(3) Aluminum cans.
(4) White goods.
(5) Glass beverage containers.
(6) Ferrous scrap, mixed paper, and high-grade paper.
(7) Tin cans.
§ 280-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 280-4
1:284
(8) Grass.
(9) Construction and demolition debris (concrete, brick, tree parts,
nonferrous/ferrous metal, asphalt, and corrugated cardboard,
where practicable).
(10) Corrugated cardboard.
(11) Automobile batteries.102
(12) Types 1 and 2 plastic containers.
(13) Motor oil and anti-freeze.103
(14) Household e-waste.104
B. Commercial sector:
(1) Corrugated cardboard.
(2) High-grade office paper.
(3) Glass beverage containers.
(4) Ferrous scrap.
(5) White goods.
(6) Aluminum cans.
(7) Mixed paper.
(8) Construction and demolition debris (concrete, brick, tree parts,
nonferrous/ferrous metal, asphalt, and corrugated cardboard,
where practical).
(9) Types 1 and 2 plastic containers.
(10) Leaves.
(11) Newspaper.
(12) Automobile batteries.105
(13) Motor oil and anti-freeze.106
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
104. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. III).
105. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. III).
106. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. III).
§ 280-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-4
1:285
§ 280-5. Mandatory source separation; separation requirements;
collection.
§ 280-6. Private disposal of recyclable materials. [Amended
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit any owner, lessee or
occupant from disposing of recyclable materials privately through a sale or
gift; provided, however, that in no event shall any such recyclable materials
be left at the curb for any private pickup.
§ 280-7. Placement of recyclable materials at curb.
From the time recyclable materials are placed at the curb by the owner,
lessee or occupant for collection by the Borough, such recyclable materials
(14) Household e-waste.107
A. On and after the effective date of this article, it shall be mandatory for
all persons who are owners, lessees and occupants of property within
the Borough to separate or cause to be separated the recyclable
materials designated in § 280-4 above from all other solid waste.
B. The owner, lessee and occupant of every property within the Borough
who shall separate or cause to be separated the recyclable materials
designated in § 280-4 above shall do so in strict conformity with the
regulations of the garbage hauler and regulations on leaf placement
and collection in Chapter 291, Stormwater Management, Article VI,
Yard Waste Collection and Disposal. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 658]
C. Newspapers and aluminum cans shall be placed or caused to be placed
by the owner, lessee or occupant of every property at the curb no earlier
than 6:00 p.m. of each day which is the day preceding a day established
by the Mayor and Council for pickup within the district in which the
property in question is located, the schedule for all such pickups to be
in the form of a calendar setting forth the dates for specific pickups.
D. White goods shall be placed or caused to be placed by the owner, lessee
or occupant of every property at the curb for collection only after
special arrangements for their pickup by the Borough have first been
made in person or by telephone or the mail with the Recycling
Coordinator.
E. Collection from curbside of all recyclable materials shall be made by the
Borough, either through its employees or under contract for outside
services as directed by the Mayor and Council of the Borough, with
primary administrative supervision under the control of the Recycling
Coordinator.
107. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. III).
§ 280-4 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 280-7
1:286
shall become the property of the Borough. Once recyclable materials have
been so placed at the curb, it shall be a violation of this article for any
unauthorized person to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked
up any such recyclable materials for any purpose whatsoever. Any and
each such collection from a single property shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 280-8. Authorization to sell recyclable materials.
The Recycling Coordinator is authorized from time to time to sell and
deliver, by bid or by contract approved by the Mayor and Council, recyclable
materials so collected in order to obtain the best possible price.
§ 280-9. Annual report. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
The Recycling Coordinator shall, on or before July 1 of each year, submit
a recycling tonnage report to the New Jersey Office of Recycling in
accordance with rules and regulations adopted therefor by the Department
of Environmental Protection.
§ 280-10. Notification of public. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
The Recycling Coordinator shall notify at least once every six months all
persons occupying residential, commercial and institutional premises
within the Borough of local recycling opportunities and the sourceseparation
requirements of this article. Said notification shall be
accomplished by placing an advertisement in the Borough newsletter and
by posting a notice in public places where public notices are customarily
posted by the Borough.
§ 280-11. Referral to Planning Board; review and recommendations.
This article shall be referred to the Borough's Planning Board which, under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28, is responsible for preparing, adopting and maintaining
the Borough's Master Plan to guide the use of lands within the Borough in
a manner which protects public health and safety and promotes the general
welfare. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16c, the Borough's Planning
Board shall, within 30 days of the effective date of this article and at least
every 36 months thereafter, conduct a review and make such revisions
to the Master Plan and development regulations adopted by the Planning
Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. as are necessary to reflect
changes in state, county and Borough policies and objectives (including
those set forth in this article) concerning the collection, disposition and
recycling of designated recyclable materials and to cause said Master Plan
and development regulations to contain provisions requiring any
development proposal for the construction of 50 or more units of singlefamily
residential housing or 25 or more units of multifamily residential
housing, and any commercial or industrial development proposal for the
utilization of 1,000 square feet or more of land, to provide for the collection,
§ 280-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-11
1:287
disposition and recycling of designated recyclable materials. The Planning
Board shall also make recommendations to the Mayor and Council for the
amendments to Chapter 350, Zoning, and Chapter 303, Subdivision and Site
Plan Review, in accordance with this section.
§ 280-12. Enforcement.
The Recycling Coordinator, or his designee, is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce this article. He is hereby authorized and directed to
establish and promulgate reasonable regulations as to the manner, days and
times for the collection of designated recyclable materials in accordance
with the terms hereof, said rules and regulations to be subject to change,
modification, repeal or amendment by a majority vote of the Mayor and
Council.
§ 280-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-17-1988 by Ord.
No. 407; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall
be punishable as set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties.
§ 280-11 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 280-13
1:288
ARTICLE II
Littering and Refuse Disposal
[Adopted 11-21-1988 by Ord. No. 406 (Ch. 17A of the 1967 Code)]
§ 280-14. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food and wastes from handling,
storage and sale of produce.
LITTER — Includes any uncontainerized man-made or man-used waste
which, if deposited within the Borough otherwise than in a litter receptacle,
tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare or to impair
the environment of the people of the Borough. "Litter" may include, but is
not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, grass clippings or other
lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper
container or other construction material, motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil
or nauseous or offensive matter of any kind or any object likely to injure
any person or create a traffic hazard. Without limitation, "litter" includes
junk vehicle, wrecks, machinery, motorized equipment or vehicles, tools
or equipment that is inoperable or broken beyond repair considering its
commercial value.[Amended 6-19-2000 by Ord. No. 532]
LITTER RECEPTACLE — Includes any container which is designed to
receive litter and to prevent the escape of litter deposited therein, which
is of such size or sufficient capacity to hold all litter generated between
collection periods.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Includes any and all property, including but not
limited to vacant land or any land, building or other structure designed
or used for residential, commercial, business, individual, institutional or
religious purposes, together with any yards/grounds, walk, driveway, fence,
steps and other structures appurtenant thereto.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Includes any and all streets, boulevards, avenues,
lanes, alleys or other public ways and parks, squares, plazas, grounds and
buildings frequented by the general public.
RECYCLING RECEPTACLE — Includes any container which is used solely
for the purpose of collecting aluminum cans, glass and any other materials
designated by the Borough's Recycling Coordinator.
REFUSE — Includes all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes,
including but not limited to abandoned automobiles and parts thereof,
abandoned machinery and parts thereof, ashes, dead animals, debris,
garbage, junk, rubbish, scrap lumber, solid market and industrial wastes,
street cleanings, stumps, tires and trash.
§ 280-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-14
1:289
RUBBISH — Includes all nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, including but not limited to
bedding, paper, pieces of crockery, pieces of glass, wood, wrappings and
similar materials.
VEHICLE — Each and every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon land or water, including
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 280-15. Depositing of litter and refuse on public property
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, individually or through an agent,
employee or servant, to cast, throw, sweep, sift, deposit or dump, or permit
or cause to be cast, thrown, swept, sifted, deposited or dumped, in any
manner in or upon any public way or any other public place in the Borough,
or any river, canal, public water, basin, sewer or receiving basin within the
Borough, any kind of litter, garbage, refuse or rubbish, whether liquid or
solid, nor shall any person, individually or through an agent, employee or
servant, cast, throw, sweep, sift, deposit or dump any of the aforementioned
items anywhere within the Borough in such manner that it may be carried
or deposited, in whole or in part, by the action of the sun, wind, rain or
snow, into any of the aforementioned places.
§ 280-16. Depositing of litter and refuse on private property
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, individually or through an agent,
employee or servant, to throw, deposit or accumulate litter upon any private
property, occupied or vacant, within the Borough, whether owned by such
person or not, except that the owner or person in control of such property
may maintain litter receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the action of the sun,
wind, rain or snow upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon
any private property.
§ 280-17. Littering from vehicles prohibited.
A. No person while the operator of or passenger in a vehicle shall deposit
litter upon any public or private property within the Borough.
B. No person shall transport in any vehicle or by any other means or
manner any loose material or article likely to sift, fall, spill or be blown
about on any public or private property.
C. No person shall use any vehicle to transport any kind of material, unless
such material is covered or otherwise properly secured or containerized
to prevent such material, or any part thereof, from spilling or dropping
onto any public or private property.
§ 280-14 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 280-18
1:290
§ 280-18. Transportation and collection of litter and refuse.
Unless so authorized by the Borough, no person, individually or through an
agent, employee or servant, shall bring, cart, remove, transport or collect
any litter, garbage, refuse or rubbish from any other municipality to the
Borough for the purpose of dumping or depositing such materials within the
Borough, nor shall any such person bring, cart, remove, transport or collect
any such litter, garbage, refuse or rubbish from within the Borough, without
such authorization.
§ 280-19. Maintenance of private property.
§ 280-20. Maintenance of public property.
No person, individually or through an agent, employee or servant, shall
sweep, throw or deposit litter in or upon any public property, except in litter
receptacles or official recycling receptacles, nor shall any person deposit
such litter except in a manner so as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the action of the sun, wind, rain or snow upon any public
property.
§ 280-21. Disposal of garden wastes prohibited. [Amended
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
It shall be unlawful for any commercial landscaper, tree surgeon, arborist,
gardener, horticulturist or any other person performing services for the
Borough or Borough residents to deposit for collection within the Borough
any trimmings, branches, tree stumps, clippings or any other garden waste
materials generated by the performing of services in any other municipality.
§ 280-22. Enforcement.
Regulations promulgated in this article shall be enforced by the Department
of Public Works of the Borough of Harrington Park and the Police
Department of the Borough of Harrington Park. The Department of Public
Works and the Police Department are authorized and empowered to notify
any person owning private property within the Borough to properly dispose
of litter located on such property which is dangerous to public health, safety
or welfare.
A. The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the property free of litter, garbage, refuse and rubbish. Such
persons shall keep the sidewalks and alleys adjacent to such property
free of litter.
B. In maintaining private property, no owner or person in control of such
property shall sweep or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public
place within the Borough litter from any buildings and lot or from any
public or private areas whatsoever. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
§ 280-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-23
1:291
§ 280-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
as set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties. A separate violation shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 280-23 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 280-23
1:292
Chapter 284
STEEP SLOPES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Riparian zones — See Ch. 253.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 286.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 291.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
303.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 284-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the intensity of use in areas
of steeply sloping terrain in order to limit soil loss, erosion, excessive
stormwater runoff and the degradation of surface water and to maintain the
natural topography and drainage patterns of land.
§ 284-2. Findings.
Disturbance of steep slopes results in accelerated erosion processes from
stormwater runoff and the subsequent sedimentation of water bodies with
the associated degradation of water quality and loss of aquatic life support.
Related effects include soil loss, changes in natural topography and
drainage patterns, increased flooding potential, further fragmentation of
forest and habitat areas, and compromised aesthetic values. It has become
widely recognized that disturbance of steep slopes should be restricted or
prevented based on the impact disturbance of steep slopes can have on
water quality and quantity and the environmental integrity of landscapes.
§ 284-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall be applicable to new development or land disturbance on
a steep slope within the Borough of Harrington Park.
§ 284-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure or
movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any structure, surface, or improvement that
reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, and includes
porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks, patios, elevated
structures, and other similar structures, surfaces, or improvements.
§ 280-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-4
1:293
REDEVELOPMENT — The construction of structures or improvements on
areas which previously contained structures or other improvements.
STEEP SLOPES — Any slope equal to or greater than 20% as measured over
any minimum run of 10 feet. Steep slopes are determined based on contour
intervals of two feet or less.
§ 284-5. Designation of areas.
The percent of slope (rise in feet per horizontal distance) shall be
established by measurement of distance perpendicular to the contour of the
slope. The percent of slope shall be calculated for each two-foot contour
interval. For example, any location on the site where there is a one-foot
rise over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a ten-percent slope; a oneand-
five-tenths-foot rise over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a fifteenpercent
slope; and a two-foot rise over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes
a twenty-percent slope.
§ 284-6. Steep slope limits.
For steep slopes, any disturbance shall be prohibited except as provided
below:
§ 284-7. Conflicts and interpretation.
A. Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces; and
B. New disturbance necessary to protect public health, safety or welfare,
such as necessary linear development with no feasible alternative; to
provide an environmental benefit, such as remediation of a
contaminated site; to prevent extraordinary hardship on the property
owner peculiar to the property; or to prevent extraordinary hardship,
provided that the hardship was not created by the property owner, that
would not permit a minimum economically viable use of the property
based upon reasonable investment. For example, redevelopment within
the footprint of existing impervious cover should be allowed to support
efforts to revitalize development that has fallen into disrepair. The
applicant shall demonstrate through site plans depicting proposed
development and topography that new disturbance is not located in
areas with a twenty-percent or greater slope.
A. Conflicts. All other ordinances, parts of ordinances, or other local
requirements that are inconsistent or in conflict with this chapter are
hereby superseded to the extent of any inconsistency or conflict, and
the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
B. Interpretation.
(1) This chapter shall be so construed as not to conflict with any
provision of New Jersey or federal law.
§ 284-4 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 284-7
1:294
§ 284-8. Enforcement; violation and penalties.108
A prompt investigation shall be made by the appropriate personnel of
Borough of Harrington Park of any person or entity believed to be in
violation hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition which is in violation of this
chapter is discovered, a civil action may be initiated in the Special Part of
the Superior Court, or in the Superior Court, if the primary relief sought is
injunctive or if penalties may exceed the jurisdictional limit of the special
civil part, by the filing and serving of appropriate process. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to preclude the right of Borough of Harrington
Park, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-25, to initiate legal proceedings
hereunder in Municipal Court. The violation of any section or subsection
of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense independent
of the violation of any other section or subsection or of any order issued
pursuant to this chapter. Each day a violation continues shall be considered
a separate offense. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties in Chapter
164, Fines and Penalties, in the discretion of the court.
§ 284-9. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect upon final adoption and publication in
accordance with the law on April 21, 2014.
Chapter 286
STORMWATER CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Certificates of continued occupancy — See
Ch. 118.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131.
Excavations — See Ch. 150.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 179.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 202.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 248.
Riparian zones — See Ch. 253.
Sewer use — See Ch. 262.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 284.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 291.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
303.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 286-1. Scope and purpose.
(2) The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative with, and not in
substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and land use
regulations.
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 284-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-1
1:295
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, as defined in § 286-2.
C. Applicability.
(1) This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions
for the following major developments that require preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough of Harrington Park.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this chapter are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This
chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law, except
that where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
§ 286-1 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 286-2
1:296
§ 286-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. The
definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions
in the stormwater management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
coastal planning areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinances. The county review agency may be either:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure; any mining
excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, "development"
means any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed by the
County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC); and municipal review of any activity not exempted by
the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 286-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-2
1:297
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance, for the purpose of this
rule, is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the Borough of Harrington Park and any political subdivision of
this state subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state or
§ 286-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 286-2
1:298
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities or
conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
§ 286-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-2
1:299
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 286-3. Design and performance standards.
§ 286-4. Requirements for major development.
Stormwater management requirements for major development are as
follows:
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 286-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
B. The standards in this chapter apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
plan or water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
§ 286-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 286-4
1:300
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 286-10.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or
Clemmys muhlenbergii (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance with the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad, or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates, through an alternatives analysis, that,
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections F and G that were not achievable on site.
§ 286-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-4
1:301
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at Subsection E into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss.
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces.
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation.
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from preconstruction
to post-construction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed.
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading.
(f) Minimize soil compaction.
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides.
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas.
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
§ 286-4 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 286-4
1:302
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Grates.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle-safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches
or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest
dimension.
[2] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches or be no greater than
two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
§ 286-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-4
1:303
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 286-7 or found on the Department's website
at http://www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
§ 286-4 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 286-4
1:304
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 286-5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual preconstruction
groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from pre-construction to post-construction for the
two-year storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with a Department-approved remedial action work
plan or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
§ 286-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-4
1:305
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels; and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 286-5, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
pre-construction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the preconstruction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the pre-construction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
§ 286-4 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 286-4
1:306
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 286-2 shall be submitted to the
appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
§ 286-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-4
1:307
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 286-7 or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of
technical guidance are listed in § 286-7. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs.
A = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP.
B = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP.
§ 286-4 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 286-4
1:308
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater wetland 90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 286-6C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converges on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 286-7.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
§ 286-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-4
1:309
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable. In no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the
waterway or center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subsection shall be subject to review and approval by the
Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS postconstruction
removal rate;
§ 286-4 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 286-4
1:310
§ 286-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
§ 286-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-5
1:311
National Engineering Handbook Section 4, Hydrology, and
Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the pre-construction
condition of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing pre-construction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce pre-construction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following: the New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32A Method
for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
§ 286-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 286-5
1:312
§ 286-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological Survey, 29
Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427; (609)
984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 286-8B.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosionresistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 286-8.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided that the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
§ 286-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-6
1:313
§ 286-7. Sources for technical guidance.
§ 286-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 286-4 of this chapter.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 286-4 of this chapter, provided that the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey, promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)3.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625,
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)3. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625, (609)
292-5540.
§ 286-6 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 286-8
1:314
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion-resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
be removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), "escape provisions" means
the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
§ 286-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-8
1:315
Subsection C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six feet
in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet
below the permanent water surface, and the second step shall
be located one foot to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
surface. See Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in
a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
§ 286-8 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 286-8
1:316
§ 286-9. Site development stormwater plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this chapter.
(3) The applicant shall submit 18 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C of this section.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
§ 286-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-9
1:317
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the planning and/or zoning board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth
in this chapter.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that a topographic base map of the site be submitted
which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits of the
proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or
greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map, as
appropriate, may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis: a written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s): a map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 286-3
through 286-6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
§ 286-9 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 286-9
1:318
§ 286-10. Maintenance and repair.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions, with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the pre-development and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in § 286-4 of this chapter.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 286-10.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this chapter may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsection C(1) through C(6) of this section
when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 286-1C of this chapter
shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C.
B. General maintenance.
§ 286-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-10
1:319
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
§ 286-10 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 286-10
1:320
§ 286-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this chapter shall be
subject to the following penalties: $500 for the first offense; subsequent
offenses shall carry a fine of $1,000 for each and every day that the offense
continues to exist thereafter.
§ 286-12. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the county
review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the chapter by the county
review agency if the county review agency should fail to act.
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsection B(6) and (7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsection B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 286-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-12
1:321
Chapter 291
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 179.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 248.
Riparian zones — See Ch. 253.
Solid waste — See Ch. 280.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 284.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 286.
§ 286-12 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 286-12
1:322
ARTICLE I
Disposal of Pet Waste
[Adopted 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 590]
§ 291-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
disposal of pet solid waste in Harrington Park, so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 291-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the
text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER or KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political division of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 291-3. Proper disposal required.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 291-4. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article while such animal is being
used for that purpose.
§ 291-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-5
1:323
§ 291-5. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Harrington Park Police
Department and/or the Board of Health and/or the Department of Public
Works.
§ 291-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and
Penalties.
§ 291-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 291-6
1:324
ARTICLE II
Littering
[Adopted 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 591]
§ 291-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements to control littering
in Harrington Park, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and
to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 291-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the
text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including but not limited to any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar or
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political division of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 291-9. Prohibited conduct.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a receptacle, or having done so to allow such litter to remain.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this article, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this article.
§ 291-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-10
1:325
§ 291-10. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Harrington Park Police
Department and/or the Board of Health and/or the Department of Public
Works and/or the Construction Department.
§ 291-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and
Penalties.
§ 291-10 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 291-11
1:326
ARTICLE III
Improper Disposal of Waste
[Adopted 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 592]
§ 291-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the Borough of Harrington Park, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 291-13. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the
text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Harrington Park or
other public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political division of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 291-14. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Harrington Park is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of
materials other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge
of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also
prohibited.
§ 291-15. Exemptions.
The following are exempt from the prohibition in § 291-14:
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
§ 291-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-15
1:327
§ 291-16. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Harrington Park Police
Department and/or the Board of Health and/or the Department of Public
Works and/or the Construction Department.
§ 291-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to the penalties as set forth
in Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, and rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from firefighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following its use for its
intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
(3) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 291-15 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 291-17
1:328
ARTICLE IV
Feeding of Wildlife
[Adopted 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 593]
§ 291-18. Purpose. [Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 712]
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
on any property within the Borough of Harrington Park, private or public,
so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply.
§ 291-19. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the
text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political division of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human or domesticated.
§ 291-20. Prohibited conduct. [Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No.
712]
No person shall feed, on any property within the Borough of Harrington
Park, private or public, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife (for
example, wildlife confined to zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers, or feral cats as part
of an approved trap-neuter-release program). Such activity shall be subject
to the same enforcement as otherwise provided in § 291-21; and by way of
example and not by limitation, includes the feeding of deer, geese, rodents,
swans, or birds, but shall not apply with respect to private property the
feeding of birds by way of a bird feeder.
§ 291-21. Enforcement.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Harrington Park Police Department
and/or the Board of Health and/or the Department of Public Works.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 291-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-22
1:329
§ 291-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to the penalties as set forth
in Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties.
§ 291-22 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 291-22
1:330
ARTICLE V
Containerized Yard Waste
[Adopted 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 594]
§ 291-23. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
handling of yard waste in the Borough of Harrington Park, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 291-24. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the
text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, so as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or blowing
out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political division of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings and other yard debris.
§ 291-25. Prohibited conduct.
The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or contractor
of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste in the
street, unless the yard waste is containerized. If yard waste that is not
containerized is placed in the street, the party responsible for placement of
yard waste must remove the yard waste from the street or said party shall
be deemed in violation of this article.
§ 291-26. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Harrington Park Police
Department and/or the Board of Health and/or the Department of Public
Works and/or the Construction Department.
§ 291-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-27
1:331
§ 291-27. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to the penalties as set forth
in Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties.
§ 291-27 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 291-27
1:332
ARTICLE VI
Yard Waste Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 595]
§ 291-28. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a yard waste collection and
disposal program in the Borough of Harrington Park, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 291-29. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the
text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, so as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or blowing
out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political division of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves only.
§ 291-30. Permitted placement.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and such yard
waste shall not be placed closer than 10 feet to any storm drain inlet.
Placement of such yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other
time or in any other manner is a violation of this article. If such placement
of yard waste occurs, the party responsible for placement of the yard waste
must remove the yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed
in violation of this article.
§ 291-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-31
1:333
§ 291-31. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Harrington Park Police
Department and/or the Health Department and/or Department of Public
Works and/or Construction Department.
§ 291-32. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to the penalties as set forth
in Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties.
§ 291-31 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 291-32
1:334
ARTICLE VII
Illicit Connections to Storm Sewers
[Adopted 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 596]
§ 291-33. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Harrington
Park, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 291-34. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the
text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Harrington Park, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES
permit other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit
(NJPDES Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may
include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b) or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b) or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Harrington Park or
other public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issue by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
§ 291-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-34
1:335
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political division of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. "Process wastewater" includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 291-35. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Borough of Harrington Park any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling
water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than
stormwater).
§ 291-36. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Harrington Park Police
Department and/or the Board of Health and/or the Department of Public
Works and/or the Construction Department.
§ 291-37. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to the penalties as set forth
in Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties.
§ 291-34 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 291-37
1:336
ARTICLE VIII
Refuse Containers and Dumpsters
[Adopted 8-16-2010 by Ord. No. 649]
§ 291-38. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times, and this article prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise
discharging of liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the
municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of
Harrington Park and/or the waters of the state so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 291-39. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Harrington Park or
other public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer
systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to
collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 291-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-40
1:337
§ 291-40. Standards.
§ 291-41. Exceptions.
The following are exempt from the requirements of § 291-40:
§ 291-42. Enforcement.109
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
Property Maintenance Code Enforcement Official of the Borough of
Harrington Park.
§ 291-43. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and
Penalties.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Harrington
Park.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, and white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 291-40 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 291-43
1:338
ARTICLE IX
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 8-16-2010 by Ord. No. 650]
§ 291-44. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Borough of Harrington Park so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 291-45. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Harrington Park or
other public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer
systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to
collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 291-46. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
§ 291-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-46
1:339
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering of any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm
drain inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 291-47. Design standards.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 291-46 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see Subsection C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 291-47 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven square inches or is no
greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
§ 291-46 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 291-47
1:340
§ 291-48. Enforcement.110
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Property
Maintenance Code Enforcement Official of the Borough of Harrington Park.
§ 291-49. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and
Penalties.
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch;
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 291-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-49
1:341
Chapter 297
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fines and penalties — See Ch. 164.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 248.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 291.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
303.
§ 291-49 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 291-49
1:342
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 297-1. Definition and word usage.
A. Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms,
whenever used in this chapter, shall respectively be deemed to have the
meanings indicated:
COUNCIL — The Mayor and Council of the Borough.
DEVELOPER — Any person who engages, either through himself or
by an agent or contractor, in a land subdivision or the construction of
two or more buildings within the Borough, or undertaking any project
involving the construction or improvement of any street.
DRAINAGE — The runoff, natural or otherwise, of any surface or
underground water, including but not limited to rainfall.
OCCUPANT — The owner, tenant, lessee or person in charge of or in
control of or in possession of any building or premises or part thereof
or of any personal property.
OWNER — The person, firm or corporation having the legal title to
lands and premises or to personal property.
PERSON — An individual or individuals or a corporation or voluntary
association.
ROADWAY — That portion of the street lying between the curblines.
SIDEWALK — The pavement between the curbline and street line.
SIDEWALK AREA — The area between the curbline and the street line,
whether paved or unpaved.
STREET — Any dedicated public thoroughfare, road, avenue or
highway, whether accepted or unaccepted, including the sidewalk area.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS or SUPERINTENDENT —
The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works appointed by
the Borough, or such person or persons as shall succeed to his office,
powers and duties.
B. Word usage. The singular includes the plural; the masculine includes
the feminine, and also corporation and voluntary associations.
§ 297-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 297-1
1:343

ARTICLE II
General Conditions
§ 297-2. Written application required for permit.
No permit authorized by this chapter shall be granted except pursuant to an
application in writing therefor signed by the person desiring such permit,
or his agent, which application shall set forth such facts as are hereinafter
required by the provisions of this chapter.
§ 297-3. Appeal upon refusal.
In case any permit shall be refused by any officer authorized to issue the
same, an appeal of such officer's determination may be taken to the Mayor
and Council, and the Mayor and Council, after hearing the applicant and
such officer and such other evidence as may be produced, may either direct
the issuance of such permit or sustain the refusal of the officer.
§ 297-4. Payment of fee required.
No permit shall be issued until the fee therefor shall have been paid to
the officer authorized to issue such permit. The permit fee for all work
started prior to the issuance of a permit covering the same shall be twice
the regular fee as herein required.
§ 297-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 297-4
1:345

ARTICLE III
Street Improvements
§ 297-5. Permission required.
No street, highway or public way shall be improved by any person, firm or
corporation until permission shall have been granted by resolution of the
Mayor and Council upon formal application in writing as herein provided,
accompanied by three complete sets of plans, maps, profiles and
specifications for the project. It shall be within the discretion of the Mayor
and Council to refuse permission to improve any street, highway or public
way unless the same is proposed to be fully improved by grading, the
construction of sanitary sewer mains and laterals, storm sewers and catch
basins, gas and water mains and laterals, curbs, sidewalks and pavement
therein.
§ 297-6. Responsibilities of Borough Engineer for plan review and
supervision.
The plans, maps, profiles and specifications shall be referred to the Borough
Engineer, who shall submit his report and recommendations to the Mayor
and Council before approval is granted. All construction work shall be done
under the general supervision of the Borough Engineer, and the applicant
shall agree to pay his supervision and inspection fees.
§ 297-7. Signs and tree planting requirements for new streets.
[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
Signs and tree planting shall be consistent with the requirements of
Chapter 303, Subdivision and Site Plan Review, and Chapter 350, Zoning.
§ 297-8. Plans to indicate surface contours and runoff control.
The maps, plans and specifications shall indicate surface contours of the
surrounding land and shall make proper provision for the drainage and
runoff of rainfall and surface waters from such lands and streets, indicating
the place where the same will be eventually deposited or discharged.
§ 297-9. Drainage requirements.
No permit shall be issued for the improvement of any street unless and
until adequate provisions are indicated on the map or plans for the proper
drainage thereof and disposition of surface water therefrom.
§ 297-10. Provisions of agreement.
The applicant shall, prior to the issuance of a permit, enter into an
agreement with the Borough setting forth his entire undertaking in
connection with the improvement. All legal charges in connection with the
preparation of the agreement and the approval of the bond shall be paid
§ 297-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 297-10
1:347
by the applicant. The provisions of the agreement shall be substantially as
follows:
§ 297-11. Street acceptances; adoption of ordinance.
No street shall be deemed accepted by the Borough until it has been
completely and fully improved as provided for herein and accepted by
ordinance.
A. That the applicant shall agree to construct the required improvements
in the street or streets.
B. That the applicant shall furnish a bond of a surety company authorized
to do business in the State of New Jersey, in an amount agreed upon by
the Mayor and Council, to insure the installation of the improvements
and the performance of the agreement.
C. That all work shall be done in a competent and workmanlike manner
within a specified period of time.
D. That the applicant shall agree to comply with the ordinances of the
Borough and the laws of the State of New Jersey in the performance of
the work, and also shall agree to insure against liability for injury or
death by accident to his employees employed upon the work herein
provided for as required.
E. That the applicant shall agree to maintain the improvement for a period
of one year after completion and acceptance thereof by the Borough
and to repair or rectify all defects, sinking, wear and tear, washouts or
any other condition detrimental to such streets during that period.
A. The Borough Engineer shall make a final inspection of completed
streets immediately upon being notified by the developer of their
completion and shall report his findings in writing to the Mayor and
Council.
B. The approval of the construction shall be by resolution of the Mayor and
Council.
C. After approval as above set forth, the developer shall deposit with the
Borough an amount sufficient to defray the costs of drawing, publishing
and recording the ordinance accepting the street or improvement.
D. The Mayor and Council shall, upon being satisfied that all of the
prerequisites herein provided have been met, introduce an acceptance
ordinance.
E. The passage of an acceptance ordinance shall not in any way be deemed
to release the developer from any of the provisions of his contract or
from the obligations of his bonds.
§ 297-10 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 297-12
1:348
§ 297-12. Improvements by Borough excepted.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any general improvement
work undertaken by the Borough itself.111
111. Editor's Note: Original Article IV, Street Openings, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658. See now Ch. 150, Excavations.
§ 297-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 297-12
1:349

ARTICLE IV
Sidewalks
§ 297-13. Maintenance.
The owner or occupant of premises abutting any flagstone or concrete
sidewalk shall maintain such sidewalk at all times in a good and passable
condition at a grade which will prevent water accumulating thereon and
shall replace any flagstones which become broken and shall maintain the
flagstones so that the joints thereof are even. The surface of all concrete
sidewalks shall be kept properly roughened so as not to become smooth and
slippery.112
§ 297-14. Repair by owner or occupant.113
In case any sidewalk becomes out of repair, the owner or occupant of the
lands abutting such sidewalk shall forthwith, upon receipt of written notice
from the Code Enforcement Official or, in their absence, the Construction
Code Official, repair or cause the same to be repaired and made in a good
and passable condition conforming with the requirements of § 297-13 of this
article.114
§ 297-15. Consent to obstruct gutters required.
No person shall place any bridging over any gutter or any pipe or other
obstruction in any gutter without first having secured the consent of the
Mayor and Council.
§ 297-16. Obstruction of sidewalks prohibited.
§ 297-17. Awnings.
A. No person shall place or permit to be placed upon any sidewalk or
sidewalk area any object or thing that shall in any manner encumber or
obstruct such sidewalk or sidewalk area or render travel upon such
sidewalk or sidewalk area dangerous or unsafe.
B. No steps, walls, fences, driveway curbs or similar features shall extend
into the sidewalk area, nor shall hedges or shrubbery be permitted to
project into a sidewalk area so as to obstruct pedestrian traffic.
A. No person shall place or maintain any drop awning extending over any
sidewalk which when lowered shall be less than seven feet above such
sidewalk.
112. Editor's Note: Original § 44-21, Permit requirements; fees, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
114. Editor's Note: Original § 44-23, Openings for leader drains; fee for permit, and § 44-24,
Gutters; consent for bridging, etc., required, which immediately followed this section,
were repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658.
§ 297-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 297-17
1:351
B. Temporary awnings may be erected across a sidewalk and permitted to
remain for a period not exceeding 24 hours, provided that the same
shall be securely fastened and shall be so arranged as to permit travel
along the sidewalk.115
115. Editor's Note: Original § 44-27, Curbs, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658.
§ 297-17 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 297-17
1:352
ARTICLE V
Use of Streets
§ 297-18. Permit required to obstruct roadway; application;
conditions.
§ 297-19. Parade permits.
§ 297-20. Posting signs or other matter.
No person shall place any sign or advertisement or other matter upon any
pole, tree, curbstone, sidewalk or elsewhere in any public street or public
place, excepting such as may be authorized by this or any other ordinance
of the Borough.
§ 297-21. Interference with public signs prohibited.
No person shall injure, deface, obliterate, remove, take down or disturb or
in any other manner interfere with or disturb any signboard containing the
name of any street or public place, or any bulletin board, or sign or notice
A. No person shall obstruct or permit the obstruction of any street or
public place by the storage or placing of any building material or other
material or merchandise thereon and permitting the same to remain
longer than is necessary to convey the same on or into private property,
unless a permit therefor shall be obtained from the Borough Clerk. No
permit shall be granted which permits the use or obstruction of more
than 1/4 of the width of the roadway of such street or public place at
any point.
B. The application for such permit shall state the kind and character of
material to be stored or placed in such public street or place, the exact
location where the same is to be stored or placed, and the maximum
length of time that such obstruction shall continue. The Superintendent
may impose conditions in any permit issued under this section with
respect to keeping the sidewalk open for travel and any other
conditions which he shall deem proper in the interest of the public
safety and convenience. Such permit shall be kept posted in a
conspicuous place on or near the material and shall be kept there so as
to be readily accessible to inspection. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 658]
A. No person shall organize or conduct or assist in the organization or
conduct of any parade upon any of the public streets or public places
without obtaining a permit therefor from the Borough Clerk.
B. The Borough Clerk shall not issue any such permit until an application
therefor shall have been submitted to the Mayor and Council at a
regular or special meeting and such permission has been granted and a
permit authorized by a resolution of the Mayor and Council.
§ 297-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 297-21
1:353
erected, posted or placed, bearing the name of the Mayor and Council or
any officer of the Borough.
§ 297-22. Garbage and refuse on streets prohibited; exception.
No person, firm or corporation shall place or permit to be placed any ashes,
garbage, dirt, paper, tree limbs or branches, garden refuse or other waste
material upon any street or public place, provided that clean ashes or sand
may be placed upon ice which has formed upon any sidewalk.
§ 297-23. Burning prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall burn any leaves or other waste material
or cause the same to be burned upon any street or public place.
§ 297-24. Sharp substances.
No person shall throw or place, or permit or aid the throwing or placing of,
glass, tacks or other like sharp substance upon any street or public place.116
§ 297-25. Manholes.
No person shall open any manhole or remove the cover thereof unless
such opening shall be guarded by a guardrail and shall be so marked
both day and night as to be plainly seen at a distance of 50 feet, which
guardrail shall be maintained so long as such manhole shall remain opened
or uncovered.117
§ 297-26. Closing of streets. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
The Superintendent of Public Works may close any street or public place or
section thereof to public traffic for the purpose of repairing, constructing or
reconstructing the same. When any street or public place or portion thereof
is closed, there shall be a sign at each end of the portion closed, plainly
visible to approaching traffic, reading substantially as follows: "STREET
CLOSED." No person shall drive or cause to be propelled any vehicle over
said street or portion thereof so closed and marked as aforesaid.
§ 297-27. Poles or wires.
No person, firm or corporation shall place or erect any electric light,
telegraph, telephone or other pole in or upon any street or public place
except pursuant to permission granted by the Mayor and Council. No wires
shall be run or strung upon any pole at a distance less than 18 feet from the
ground.118
116. Editor's Note: Original § 44-35, Damaging or removing safety devices prohibited, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658.
117. Editor's Note: Original § 44-37, Coasting or sledding, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658.
118. Editor's Note: Original § 44-40, Drains and connections to storm sewers, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658.
§ 297-21 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 297-28
1:354
§ 297-28. Snow removal by Borough.
It shall be the responsibility of the Department of Public Works to maintain
the pavement of and to clear snow from all streets and thoroughfares which
have been accepted by ordinance duly adopted by the Mayor and Council
of the Borough. The Department of Public Works shall not undertake the
maintenance of or snow removal from any street or highway which has not
been accepted by ordinance, except by resolution of the Mayor and Council
authorizing such work.
§ 297-29. Throwing snow on plowed streets prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall cast or throw ice or snow upon a public
street or thoroughfare from which snow has been plowed or removed.
§ 297-30. Removal of debris spilled from trucks.
It shall be the responsibility of any person, firm or corporation owning
or operating trucks from which earth, stones or similar debris has been
dumped or spilled upon any street or thoroughfare to remove the same.
§ 297-31. Mixing concrete prohibited.
No mortar, concrete or similar material shall be mixed or placed upon the
surface of any street or sidewalk.
§ 297-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 297-31
1:355

ARTICLE VI
Removal of Snow and Ice, Weeds or Grass
§ 297-32. Time limit for removing or treating snow and ice.
[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
The owner or owners, or tenant or tenants, of lands abutting or bordering
upon a sidewalk in a public street, avenue, highway or public place shall
be responsible for the removal of all snow and ice from such sidewalk or
applying ice-melting compounds within 24 hours after the same shall be
formed or fall thereon.
§ 297-33. Care of lands abutting sidewalks; cutting of grass and
weeds.
The owner or owners, or tenant or tenants, of lands abutting or bordering
upon the sidewalk area of a public street, avenue, highway or public place
shall be responsible for such sidewalk area. All grass and weeds shall be cut
to a height of less than four inches from the ground.
§ 297-34. Failure to remove; costs to become lien.
In case the owner or owners, or tenant or tenants, of lands abutting or
bordering upon a sidewalk or a sidewalk area in a public street, avenue,
highway or public place shall refuse or neglect to remove all snow and ice
from such sidewalk within 24 hours after the same shall be formed or fall
thereon, or shall refuse or neglect to remove all grass and weeds and other
impediments from such sidewalk area within three days after notice served
upon any of them by the Borough, the Superintendent may cause such work
to be done under his direction, and he shall certify the cost thereof to the
Council. The cost of such removal as certified by the Superintendent, if
found correct by the Council, shall forthwith become a lien upon the lands
abutting or bordering any such sidewalks and gutter and shall be added to
and become and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon
such lands and shall bear the same interest as taxes.
§ 297-35. Procedure for assessing Borough costs of removal.
The Mayor and Council shall, upon receiving a certificate of cost as
aforesaid from the Superintendent, examine the same and, if found correct,
shall adopt a resolution to that effect, directing that a certified copy thereof
be delivered to the Collector of Taxes, who shall thereupon collect such
charges at the time of collection of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon such lands and as a part thereof.
§ 297-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 297-35
1:357

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 297-36. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction for each and every violation thereof and for
each and every day that such violation thereof continues, be punished as set
forth in Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties.
§ 297-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 297-36
1:359
Chapter 303
SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affordable housing — See Ch. 85.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 112.
Certificates of continued occupancy — See
Ch. 118.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131.
Excavations — See Ch. 150.
Fees — See Ch. 153.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 179.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 202.
Riparian zones — See Ch. 253.
Sewer use — See Ch. 262.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 284.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 286.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 297-36 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 297-36
1:360
ARTICLE I
General Provisions; Definitions
§ 303-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance of
the Borough of Harrington Park."
§ 303-2. Intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules, regulations and standards
to guide land subdivision and the development of land in the Borough
in order to promote its public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare. It shall be administered to ensure orderly growth and development,
conservation, protection and proper use of land and adequate provision for
circulation, utilities and services.
§ 303-3. Administration.
As authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37, the provisions of this chapter shall
be administered by the Planning Board; provided, however, that whenever,
pursuant to law or ordinance, the Zoning Board of Adjustment has
jurisdiction to grant site plan or subdivision approval, then the applicable
provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
§ 303-4. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall not be construed to repeal the Zoning Ordinance119 or any
part thereof. All other ordinances which are inconsistent with the provisions
of this chapter shall be deemed superseded.
§ 303-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person with whom applications for
development are filed pursuant to this chapter. The administrative officer
for the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be the Clerk to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment. The administrative officer for the Planning Board shall be
the Clerk to the Planning Board.
AMENDED APPROVAL — An action of the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment, as applicable, that amends the subject, terms and/or
conditions of a prior approval and which occurs prior to the issuance of
a certificate of occupancy, certificate of continued occupancy, the filing of
a subdivision plat or deed with the county recording officer, or any other
perfection of such prior approval. Amended approval is by resolution of the
Board and involves only minor modifications from the original application.
119. Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning.
§ 303-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-5
1:361
Applications that, in the opinion of the reviewing board, deviate
substantially from the initial application are not properly the subject of
amended approval; rather, such applications are to be considered new
applications and are subject to the same requirements for approval as if
there had been no prior approval.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, conditional use, zoning variance or direction of
the issuance of a permit for construction within the bed of a mapped street
or for construction of a structure not having access or not related to a
street.
CERTIFICATE AS TO APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION OF LAND — A
certificate issued by the proper administrative officer of the Borough
certifying:
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the Construction
Code Official upon completion of the construction of a new building or
addition or upon a change in the occupancy of a building, other than a
dwelling unit as defined in Chapter 350, Zoning, which certificate certifies
that all requirements of Chapter 350, Zoning, or such adjustment therefrom
which has been granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, have been
met and that the purpose for which a building or land is to be used is in
conformance with the uses required under Chapter 350, Zoning, for the
zone in which it is located or is to be located.120
CONCEPT/INFORMAL PLAN — The optional, initial development plan for
subdivisions and/or site plans of sufficient accuracy and detail to be used
for the purpose of informal review, evaluation and nonbinding comment by
the Planning Board and meeting the requirements of this chapter.[Added
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
CONSTRUCTION CODE OFFICIAL — A qualified person appointed by the
Borough Council pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23,
to enforce and administer the regulations within the jurisdiction of the
enforcing agency.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658121]
A. That there is in the Borough a duly established Planning Board.
That there is in the Borough an ordinance controlling the subdivision of
land.
B.
Whether a subdivision has been approved by the Planning Board for
the land designated in the application for such certificate and, if so, the
date of such approval and any extensions and terms thereof.
C.
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 303-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-5
1:362
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Any form of development other than
planned development.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
C VARIANCE — Any variance which is not a D variance.[Added 4-18-2011
by Ord. No. 658]
DAYS — Calendar days.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.[Amended 4-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 658]
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or of any
mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure or land or extension of use of land for which
permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means, and includes:[Amended 5-16-1988 by
Ord. No. 394]
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream
or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of
water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage, in accordance
with Title 58, Chapter 16A, Flood Control, of the Revised Statutes, the
amendments thereto and supplements thereto. A drainage right-of-way
need not be limited, in the contemplation of the Planning Board, to any one
or single application for a subdivision.122
D VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of
Chapter 350, Zoning, to permit:[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
Control of runoff during and after construction or development to
minimize erosion and sedimentation, to assure the adequacy of existing
and proposed culverts and bridges, to induce water recharge into the
ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint pollution and to maintain
the integrity of stream channels for their biological functions as well as
for drainage; and
A.
The means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or
alleviation of flooding.
B.
A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such use or
principal structure;
A.
B. An expansion of a nonconforming use;
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 303-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-5
1:363
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on
a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed or guaranties have
been properly posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the
posting of such guaranties.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is
presented to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance with this
chapter.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough Council of the Borough of Harrington
Park.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
INTERESTED PARTY — In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any
citizen of the State of New Jersey, and in the case of a civil proceeding in
any court or in an administrative proceeding before a municipal agency, any
person, whether residing within or without the Borough, whose right to use,
acquire or enjoy property is or may be affected by any action taken under
this chapter or whose rights to use, acquire or enjoy property under this
chapter or under any other law of this state or of the United States have
been denied, violated or infringed by an action or failure to act under this
chapter or the Municipal Land Use Law.123[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 658]
LOADING SPACE — Any off-street space available for the loading or
unloading of goods and having direct usable access to the street or alley.
LOT — A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions
by description, as on a subdivision or record of survey map, or by metes and
bounds, for the purpose of sale, lease or separate use.
LOT AREA — The area of a lot, expressed in square feet or acres. Any
portion of a lot included in a street shall not be included in calculating lot
area. However, no portion of a lot or lots dedicated to the Borough for other
public use shall be deducted from the calculation of the lot area.
Deviation from a specification or standard pertaining solely to a
conditional use;
C.
An increase in the permitted floor area ratio as defined in Section 3.1
of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4);
D.
An increase in the permitted density as defined Section 3.1 of P.L. 1975,
c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4), except as applied to the required lot area
for a lot or lots for detached one- or two-dwelling-unit buildings, which
lot or lots are either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting from a
minor subdivision; or
E.
A height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or 10% the
maximum height permitted in the district for a principal structure.
F.
123. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 303-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-5
1:364
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security, other than cash, which may be
accepted by the Borough for the maintenance of any improvements required
by this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision. All subdivisions regarding business or industrial lots and any
subdivision necessitating rezoning shall be considered major subdivisions.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the Borough, which shall have
been duly adopted by the Planning Board.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots which
requires site plan approval and which:[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land for the creation of not
more than three lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or
development, provided that such subdivision does not involve:[Amended
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 394]
Proposes new development which is limited to any or all of the
following:
(1) Alterations to the facade or roof of an existing building;
An increase and/or decrease in the floor area of an existing
principal building(s), provided that the change involves no more
than 5% of the existing floor area or 250 square feet, whichever is
less; or
(2)
Construction of an accessory building(s) or accessory structure(s)
and/or site grading or landscaping with a combined floor area
and/or ground surface area, as applicable, of no greater than 250
square feet;
(3)
A.
Does not involve planned development, any new street or extension
of off-tract improvements which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42; and
B.
Contains the information reasonably required in order to make an
informed determination.
C.
A. A planned development;
B. Any new street; or
The extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to
be prorated pursuant to Section 30 of P.L. 1975, c. 291, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42.124
C.
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 303-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-5
1:365
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Borough Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Borough Council when acting pursuant to this chapter, and
any agency created by or responsible to the Borough of Harrington Park
when such agency is acting pursuant to this chapter.[Added 4-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 658]
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with applicable law. Such
a map shall be deemed to be conclusive with respect to the location and
width of the streets, public parks and playgrounds and drainage rights-ofway
shown thereon.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OWNER — Any person, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or
corporation having sufficient legal or equitable interest in the lands sought
to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the
same under this chapter and also having sufficient legal or equitable
interest to maintain proceedings for reviewing the action of the Planning
Board in a court of record. The right to obtain a commission or fee,
contingent or otherwise, upon the approval of the subdivision shall not be
construed as a sufficient legal or equitable interest to maintain proceedings
for reviewing the action of the Planning Board in a court of record. The right
to obtain a commission or fee, contingent or otherwise, upon the approval
of the subdivision shall not be construed as a sufficient legal or equitable
interest in or to the land or lands in question.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of a motor
vehicle, provided that such space shall have a minimum width of 10 feet and
a minimum depth of 20 feet, exclusive of maneuvering areas, passageways,
driveways and loading spaces appurtenant thereto.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — Any applicant for development, the
owners of the subject property and all owners of property and government
agencies entitled to notice under this chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by the
Borough, including cash, provided that the Borough shall not require more
than 10% of the total performance guaranty in cash.
PERMIT, BUILDING — A certificate issued by the Construction Code Official
for the construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or repair of a
building upon approval of the submitted application and plans.
§ 303-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-5
1:366
PERSON — Any person, individual, business entity, partnership, association,
corporation, limited liability corporation, company, organization or legal
entity of any kind or nature.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
PLANNING BOARD — The duly constituted Planning Board of the Borough
authorized by this chapter to act in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.
PLAT — The map or maps of a subdivision.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — Rights conferred pursuant to this chapter
prior to final approval after specific elements of a development plan have
been agreed upon by the Planning Board and applicant.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision which is submitted to the Secretary of the Planning Board
for its consideration and tentative approval and meeting the requirements
of this chapter.
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal
agency.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
RESERVE STRIP — A privately owned strip of land of less width or lot depth
than permitted by the applicable zoning regulations and bounded on one
side by a proposed street and on the other by the boundary of a subdivision.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division or relocation of lot lines of any
lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law or the alteration of any streets or the establishment of
any new streets within any subdivision previously made and approved or
recorded according to law, but does not include conveyances so as to
combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.[Added 4-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 658]
RETAINING WALL — A structure designed for the separation of varying
ground levels.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways.
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and
screening devices.
B.
Any other information required by this chapter that may be reasonably
required in order to make an informed determination pursuant to this
chapter.
C.
§ 303-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-5
1:367
law or approved by official action, or a street or way on a plat duly filed
and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to the
appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power
to review plats, and includes the land between the street lines, whether
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines. For the
purpose of this chapter, streets shall be defined as follows:
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under
this chapter to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or itself or
for another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two
or more lots, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale or building development. The following
divisions, if they involve no new streets or roads, shall not be considered
subdivisions: divisions of land for agricultural purposes where the resulting
parcels are five acres or larger in size; divisions of property by testamentary
or intestate provisions or requirements; divisions of property resulting from
an order of a court of record, including but not limited to judgments
of foreclosure; consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument; and the conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or
parcels of land owned by the same person or persons and all of which
are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to the
requirements of the municipal development regulations and are shown and
designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Map or atlas
of the municipality. "Subdivision" also includes resubdivision and, where
appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the
lands or territory divided.[Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 394]
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those streets which carry or are intended to
carry a heavy volume of traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those streets which carry traffic from minor
streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including
the principal entrance streets of a residential or industrial development
and streets for circulation within such a development.
B.
IMPROVED STREETS — Those streets dedicated or deeded for public
use and constructed according to Borough regulations and duly
accepted by the Borough.
C.
MINOR STREETS — Those streets which are used primarily for access
to the abutting properties.
D.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Those streets which are parallel and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
E.
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street.
F.
§ 303-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-5
1:368
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate permitting
the occupancy of any building or structure prior to the full completion,
provided that such portion or portions may be occupied safely prior to full
completion of the building or structure without endangering life or public
welfare.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
TRANSCRIPT — Any typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or
reproduction thereof.[Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 394]
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of Chapter
350, Zoning.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Officer which is
required by this chapter as a condition precedent to the commencement of
a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion
or installation of a structure or building and which acknowledges that
such use, structure or building complies with the provisions of the zoning
regulations or variance therefrom duly authorized by a Borough agency
pursuant to the provisions of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
§ 303-6. Minimum standards; variances.
The rules, regulations and standards contained in this chapter shall be
considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough. Any action taken
by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment under the terms
hereof shall give primary consideration to the above-mentioned matters
and to the welfare of the entire community. However, if the subdivider or
site plan applicant or his agent can clearly demonstrate that, because of
peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the literal enforcement of one
or more of these regulations is impracticable or will exact undue hardship,
the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment may permit such
variance or variances as may be reasonable and within the general purpose
and intent of the rules, regulations and standards established by this
chapter.
§ 303-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-6
1:369

ARTICLE II
Approval Required
§ 303-7. Subdivisions. [Amended 9-17-1979 by Ord. No. 306]
§ 303-8. Site plans.
A. No person shall sell or agree to sell any land which forms part of a
subdivision, as defined in this chapter, until final approval of such
subdivision has been obtained pursuant to this chapter.
B. An application for a subdivision of three lots or less which does not
meet all of the requirements for classification of the subdivision as a
minor subdivision may, in the sole discretion of the Planning Board, be
deemed to be an application for minor subdivision approval.
A. No building permit shall be issued for a new building unless a site plan
shall have first been approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
B. No building permit shall be issued for an addition to an existing
building unless a site plan shall have first been approved by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with the
terms of this chapter.
C. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any new building, for any
addition to an existing building or for any change in use or occupancy of
a building if, under Chapter 350, Zoning, of this Code, a greater number
of parking spaces would be required for such new use or occupancy,
unless the building and its appurtenances conform in all respects to an
approved site plan or an approved amendment to an approved site plan.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections A, B and C of this
section, no site plan approval shall be required prior to the issuance of a
building permit for any new building or addition to an existing building
or prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any building or
addition if such building or addition is used or is to be used solely as a
single- or two-family dwelling or as an accessory thereto.
§ 303-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-8
1:371

ARTICLE III
Procedures
§ 303-9. Minor subdivision procedures and plat details.
For a minor subdivision, the procedure shall be as follows:
A. An application shall be submitted to the proper administrative officer, in
writing, in duplicate, on forms supplied by the Planning Board,
furnishing pertinent data, such as names and addresses of the owner,
agent and engineer and identification of the property involved.
B. The application shall be accompanied by 10 copies of a plan of the
proposed subdivision accurately drawn to a scale of not less than one
inch equals 100 feet, certified by a licensed land surveyor. All design
shall be done by a licensed professional engineer. The plan shall be of a
size acceptable to the County Clerk for filing and shall indicate:
(1) The location of the lots to be created in relation to the entire tract.
(2) All existing structures and wooded areas within the subdivision and
contiguous lots.
(3) The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners, as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.
(4) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
(5) All streets and streams within 20 feet of the subdivision. Both the
width of paving and the width of rights-of-way shall be shown for
streets.
(6) The area, in square feet, of all lots to be created.
(7) A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas.
(8) Easements, covenants, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads,
bridges, culverts, drainpipes, rights-of-way and drainage
easements.
(9) Any variance or variances required.
(10) The acreage of the entire parcel to be subdivided.
(11) Date, North point and scale.
(12) If regrading of the site, other than in the foundation area of any
proposed buildings or within 10 feet, is to be done, a map showing
existing and proposed contours at contour intervals of two feet may
also be required to be submitted before the plat is approved.
C. The Planning Board may require receipt of an application 14 days prior
to the meeting at which action is to be taken on such application.
§ 303-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-9
1:373
§ 303-10. Preliminary approval of major subdivision or site plan.
For preliminary approval of a major subdivision or site plan, the procedure
shall be as follows:
D. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Board shall, within the
time periods prescribed by this chapter, approve or conditionally
approve the subdivision without the necessity of full notice and hearing,
classify the subdivision as a major subdivision or disapprove the
subdivision. The Board may, in addition to any other conditions which
the Board may deem necessary in order to carry out the purposes of this
chapter, require as a condition for minor subdivision approval that the
applicant install such improvements required by Article IV of this
chapter as the Board, in accordance with law, shall deem necessary.
Such improvements shall be in accordance with the standards set forth
in Article V, and performance guaranties may be required in
accordance with Article VII.
E. Before the administrative officer returns any approved minor
subdivision plat to the subdivider, sufficient copies shall be sent to the
following:
(1) Borough Clerk.
(2) Borough Engineer.
(3) Construction Code Official (Building Inspector).
(4) Tax Collector.
(5) Borough Sewer Engineer.
(6) Borough Tax Assessor.125
(7) Board of Health.
(8) Secretary of the Planning Board.
(9) County Planning Board.
A. An application shall be submitted to the proper administrative officer, in
writing, in quadruplicate, on forms supplied by the Planning Board,
furnishing pertinent data, such as names and addresses of the owner,
agent and engineer and identification of property involved.
B. The application shall be accompanied by the original drawing on
tracing cloth and 10 copies of a preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision or of the site plan, accurate and to scale as to boundaries,
existing features and proposed features. The accuracy of the
boundaries and existing features shall be certified by a licensed land
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 303-9 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-10
1:374
surveyor. All designs shall be done by a licensed professional engineer.
The details of the plat shall be in conformity with § 303-16.
C. Copies of preliminary plat.
(1) Simultaneously with filing the application, copies of the preliminary
plat shall be forwarded by the applicant to the following persons:
(a) Borough Engineer.
(b) Board of Health.
(c) Chief of Police.
(d) Environmental Commission.
(e) Fire Prevention Bureau.
(f) Construction Code Official (Building Inspector).
(g) Bergen County Planning Board (six copies).
(h) Planning Board Attorney.
(i) Borough Sewer Engineer.
(2) The applicant shall produce proof, by affidavit, of the date such
copies were forwarded. Said persons and boards may make
recommendations, in writing, to the Board within 30 days after
service of the preliminary plat on them. The Board shall take said
recommendations into account but shall have the authority to
proceed in the absence of such recommendation or to disregard or
modify such recommendations. Copies of all recommendations
shall be sent to the applicant by the recommending professionals
and boards.
D. Upon receipt of a completed application and the fees required by the
appropriate board, the Planning Board shall schedule a public hearing.
The applicant shall thereupon give notice of such hearing in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter and of law.
E. The developer shall notify, by registered mail, at least 10 days prior to
the hearing, all property owners within 200 feet of the extreme limits of
the subdivision, as their names appear on the municipal tax records.
The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing, a brief
description of the proposed subdivision and that a copy of the
subdivision map has been filed with the Borough Clerk for public
inspection. The Planning Board Secretary shall, at least 10 days prior to
the hearing, cause a notice of the hearing to be published in the official
newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality.
[Added 9-17-1979 by Ord. No. 306126]
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 303-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-11
1:375
§ 303-11. Details required for preliminary approval.
A. The preliminary plat of a site plan or major subdivision shall contain the
following:
(1) Date. All revisions shall be noted and dated.
(2) Key map, at 1/4 the scale of the plat, showing the location of the
tract with reference to surrounding properties and to a depth of
400 feet from existing street intersections.
(3) Title of the development, North arrow, scale, block and lot number,
name and address of the record owner, and the name and address
and the license number and seal of the person preparing the plat. If
the owner of the premises is a corporation, the name and address
of the president and secretary shall be submitted with the
application.
(4) A scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet as to subdivision
plats and a scale of one inch equals 20 feet as to site plans. All
distances shall be in feet and decimals of a foot, and all bearings
shall be given to the nearest 10 seconds.
(5) The names, as shown on the current tax records, of all owners of
the property within 200 feet of the subdivision, together with the
block and lot numbers of said property.
(6) The zoning district in which the parcel is located, together with
zone boundaries included within the boundaries of the parcel or
within 200 feet therefrom.
(7) Survey data, showing boundaries of the property, building or
setback lines and lines of existing and proposed streets, lots,
reservations, easements and areas dedicated to public use,
including grants, restrictions and rights-of-way.
(8) Reference to any existing or proposed covenants, deed restrictions
or exceptions covering all or any part of the parcel. A copy of such
covenants, deed restrictions or exceptions shall be submitted with
the application.
(9) The distances, measured along the right-of-way lines of existing
streets abutting the property, to the nearest intersections with
other public streets.
(10) Location, type and size of all existing buildings and all other
structures, including walls, fences, culverts and bridges, with spot
elevations of such buildings and structures. Structures to be
removed shall be indicated by dashed lines; structures to remain
shall be indicated by solid lines.
(11) Location of all existing and proposed storm drainage structures
and utility lines, whether publicly or privately owned, with pipe
§ 303-11 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-11
1:376
sizes, grades and direction of flow, locations of inlets, manholes or
other appurtenances and appropriate invert and other elevations.
If any existing utility lines are underground, the estimated location
of said utility lines shall be shown.
(12) Existing and proposed contours, referred to United States Coast
and Geodetic Survey datum, with a contour interval of two feet for
slopes of less than 10% and an interval of five feet for slopes of
more than 10%, to be extended 100 feet beyond the land to be
subdivided, plus tentative cross sections and center-line profiles for
all proposed new streets and proposed drainage facilities. Existing
contours are to be indicated by dashed lines, and proposed
contours are to be indicated by solid lines.
(13) Location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses,
depressions, ponds, marshes, wooded areas and other significant
existing features, including previous flood elevations of
watercourses, ponds and marsh areas, as determined by survey.
(14) Proposed grades of all streets shall be shown to a scale of one inch
equals five feet vertical and one inch equals 50 feet horizontal, and
drawings shall include both plans and profiles and shall show
elevations of all monuments referred to United States Coast and
Geodetic Survey level benchmarks, and such elevations shall be
shown in feet and hundredths of feet.
(15) Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
(16) The location of all existing and proposed waterlines, valves and
hydrants and all sewer lines or alternative means of water supply
or sewage disposal and treatment.
(17) Existing and proposed stormwater drainage system. All site plans
and major subdivisions shall be accompanied by a plan sketch
showing all existing drainage within 500 feet of any boundary and
all areas, such as paved areas, grassed areas, wooded areas and
any other surface area, contributing to the calculations and
showing methods used in the drainage calculations.
(18) Acreage, to the nearest tenth of an acre, of the tract to be
subdivided and the area, in square feet, of all lots.
(19) Positions of existing and proposed monuments.
(20) Open spaces, if any, to be dedicated for public parks or playgrounds
or other public use and the location and use of all property
reserved for the common use of all property owners.
(21) Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, water, gas
and electricity), showing feasible connections to existing or any
proposed utility systems. When an individual water supply and/or
sewage disposal system is proposed, the plan for such system must
§ 303-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-11
1:377
§ 303-12. Effect of preliminary approval.
be approved by the appropriate local, county and/or state health
agency.
(22) Such other information or data as may be required by the Planning
Board or the County Planning Board for determination that the
details of the subdivision are in accordance with the standards of
this chapter, all other ordinances of the Borough and all other
applicable laws, ordinances or resolutions.
B. In addition to the requirements of Subsection A of this section, the
preliminary plat of a site plan shall contain the following:
(1) The number and type of proposed use or uses of land and buildings,
together with the floor space of all buildings and the estimated
number of employees. If the precise use of the building is unknown
at the time of application, an amended plan showing the proposed
use shall be required prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(2) The means of vehicular access for ingress to and egress from the
site, showing, in particular, the size and location of driveways and
curb cuts; walkways; the proposed traffic channels, if any;
additional width, if any; and any other means of controlling
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(3) The location and design of any off-street parking areas or loading
areas, showing size and location of bays, aisles and barriers.
(4) The location, direction of illumination, power and hours of
operation of existing and proposed outdoor lighting.
(5) The location and elevation plan of existing and proposed signs.
(6) The proposed screening, landscaping and planting plan.
(7) Such details as shall cause the preliminary plat of the site plan to
be in conformity with the standards promulgated by the
Commissioner of Transportation pursuant to the Air Safety and
Hazardous Zoning Act of 1983 (N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.) for any
airport hazard areas delineated under that Act. [Added 5-16-1988
by Ord. No. 394]
A. Preliminary approval of a major subdivision or of a site plan shall,
except as provided in Subsection B of this section, confer upon the
applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date of
the preliminary approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements; and, in the case of a site plan, any requirements for
§ 303-11 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-12
1:378
§ 303-13. Final approval of major subdivision or site plan.
For final approval of a major subdivision or site plan, the procedure shall be
as follows:
preservation of existing natural resources, for safe and efficient
vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and loading, for
screening, landscaping and location of structures and for exterior
lighting, except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent
the municipality from modifying, by ordinance, such general terms
and conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public health
and safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case
may be.
(3) That the applicant may apply for, and the Planning Board may
grant, extensions on such preliminary approval for additional
periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total extension of
two years, provided that if the design standards have been revised
by ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
B. In the case of a subdivision or of a site plan for an area of 50 acres or
more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in
Subsection A(1), (2) and (3) above for such period of time longer than
three years as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may apply for thereafter, and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant, an extension to preliminary approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board
to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval, the potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area of the section or sections awaiting final approval, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development, provided
that if the design standards have been revised, such revised standards
may govern.
A. The plat and an application for final approval, in quadruplicate and in a
form approved by the Board, shall be submitted to the proper
administrative officer, together with the fee required by ordinance.
B. The original cloth tracing and five white prints (blue or black on white)
of the plat of a subdivision shall accompany the application. No final
plat shall be required for a site plan. The number of prints required may
be altered from time to time by the appropriate board.
§ 303-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-13
1:379
C. The plat of a subdivision shall not differ substantially from the
preliminary plat as approved.
D. The final plat of a subdivision shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth at a
scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet and in compliance with
all the provisions of the Map Filing Law127 and with the plat details
contained in § 303-11.
E. The administrative officer shall make a record of the date of submission
of the final plat and application and shall forthwith transmit the final
plat and application to the Planning Board.
F. Prior to final approval, the Board, upon the advice of the Borough
Engineer, shall determine:
(1) The nature of the improvements to be required as a condition of
final approval.
(2) The estimated value of the improvements installed or to be
installed in accordance with this chapter.
(3) The nature and amount of performance guaranties, if any, to be
required as a condition of final approval.
(4) The amounts to be deposited to reimburse the Planning Board and
Borough for costs incurred or to be incurred for legal, engineering
and other consultant reports, for recording fees and for any other
costs anticipated by the Board.
(5) Any other conditions upon which final approval will be granted.
G. Prior to final approval, the applicant shall submit to the Board:
(1) A developer's agreement, prepared by the Board Attorney, setting
forth the obligations of the applicant in connection with the final
approval.
(2) A performance guaranty, in a form satisfactory to the Board and
Borough, complying with this chapter and guaranteeing
performance of the developer's agreement.
(3) Maintenance guaranties, if any, for work completed prior to final
approval.
(4) Deeds for any easements, rights-of-way or public lands, in a form
satisfactory to the Board Attorney.
(5) Funds to be deposited to reimburse the Board for costs incurred or
to be incurred for legal, engineering and other consultant reports,
for recording fees and for any other costs anticipated by the Board.
127. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.
§ 303-13 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-13
1:380
§ 303-14. Conditional approvals. [Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 390]
(6) Evidence of compliance with any other conditions imposed by the
Board.
H. The Planning Board shall act on a complete application in accordance
with the time limits prescribed in § 202-32.128
I. Upon final approval by the Planning Board and after all required
signatures are placed on the original tracing, the administrative officer
shall request the Borough Engineer to have one cloth print, one Mylar
reproducible and 10 copies made of such final plat and file a copy
thereof with each of the following:
(1) Secretary of the Board.
(2) Engineer of the Board.
(3) Construction Code Official (Building Inspector).
(4) Borough Tax Assessor.129
(5) Borough Clerk.
(6) Board of Health.
(7) Superintendent of Public Works.
(8) Borough Sewer Engineer.
A. Conditions precedent. Whenever any application for development is
approved subject to specified conditions, intended to be fulfilled before
the approval becomes effective, said conditional approval shall lapse
and become null and void unless all specified conditions are fulfilled
within 180 days of the date of conditional approval.
B. The fulfillment of all conditions precedent shall be reported in writing
to the Borough agency (i.e., Planning Board), which may cause such
reports to be verified in an appropriate manner. Only upon fulfillment of
all conditions shall any subdivision map or site plan be signed or any
required building or zoning permit or certificate of occupancy be
issued.130
C. Conditions subsequent. Whenever any application for development is
approved subject to conditions which by their terms are incapable of
being fulfilled or are not required to be fulfilled prior to the final
approval of the application, the performance of which is not guaranteed
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 303-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-14
1:381
§ 303-15. Fees and escrows. [Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 390]
by bonds or securities of any type, failure to fulfill any such condition
within 180 days from the date of final approval of the application for
development shall be grounds for the issuance of a stop-work order
by the enforcing official and the withholding of any zoning permit,
certificate of occupancy or any other approval until such condition or
conditions are fulfilled.
D. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Borough agency from
specifying a longer period of time within which any specific condition
must be fulfilled or from granting, upon an ex parte application, an
extension of time for good cause shown.
E. The fulfillment of all conditions shall be reported in writing to the
Borough agency, which may cause such reports to be verified in an
appropriate manner. Only upon fulfillment of all conditions shall any
subdivision map or site plan be signed or any referred building or
zoning permit or certificate of occupancy or other required approval be
issued.131
A. An applicant shall be responsible to reimburse the Borough for:
(1) All expenses of professional personnel incurred and paid by it
necessary to process an application for development before a
Borough agency, such as, but not by way of limitation:
(a) Charges for reviews by professional personnel of applications
and accompanying documents.
(b) Issuance of reports by professional personnel to the Borough
agency setting forth recommendations resulting from the
review of any documents submitted by the applicant.
(c) Charges for any telephone conference or meeting requested or
initiated by the applicant, his attorney or any of his experts.
(d) Review of additional documents submitted by the applicant
and issuance of reports relating thereto.
(e) Review or preparation of easements, developer's agreements,
deeds, or the like.
(f) Preparation for and attendance at special meetings.
(2) The cost of expert advice or testimony obtained by the Borough
agency for the purpose of corroborating testimony of the
applicant's experts, provided that the Borough agency gives prior
notice to the applicant of its intention to retain such additional
expert advice and affords the applicant an opportunity to be heard
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 303-14 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-15
1:382
§ 303-16. Details required for final approval.
The final plat of a site plan or subdivision shall contain the following:
as to the necessity for such additional advice and definition of the
limitation on the nature and extent thereof.
B. No applicant shall be responsible to reimburse the Borough for any of
the following:
(1) Attendance by the Borough's professional personnel at any
regularly scheduled meeting of the Borough agency; provided,
however, that the Borough shall be entitled to be reimbursed for
attendance of its professional personnel at special meetings of a
Borough agency which were requested to be called by the applicant
for the applicant's convenience.
(2) The preparation of a resolution or memorializing resolution setting
forth the findings and conclusions of the Borough agency with
respect to an application.
C. The term "professional personnel" or "professional services" as used
herein shall include the services of a duly licensed engineer, surveyor,
planner, attorney, realtor, appraiser or other expert who would provide
professional services to ensure that an application for development
meets the performance standards set forth in this chapter and other
experts whose testimony is in an area testified to by the applicant's
expert or experts.
D. No subdivision plot or site plan shall be signed, nor shall any building or
zoning permit or certificate of occupancy be issued, until all bills for
reimbursable services have been received by the Borough from
professional personnel rendering services in connection with the
application, unless the applicant shall have deposited with the Borough
Clerk an amount agreed upon by the applicant and Borough agency as
likely to be sufficient to cover all reimbursable items, and upon the
posting of said deposit with the Borough Clerk, the maps or permits
may be signed and released or issued to the applicant. In the event the
amount of deposit exceeds the actual cost of services rendered, the
applicant shall be entitled to return of the excess deposit together with
such interest as authorized by statute, but if the charges submitted
exceed the amount of deposit, the applicant shall be liable for payment
of such deficiency.132
A. Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of the owner, graphic
scale and reference meridian.
B. Tract boundary lines; right-of-way lines of streets; street names;
easements and other rights-of-way; land to be reserved or dedicated to
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 303-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-16
1:383
§ 303-17. As-built plans.
public use; all lot lines and other site lines, with accurate dimensions,
bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and central angles of all
curves; and the area of each lot.
C. The names, exact locations and widths of all existing and recorded
streets intersecting or paralleling the plot boundaries within a distance
of 200 feet.
D. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to public
use shall be designated, and the proposed use of the site, other than
residential, shall be noted.
E. Lot, block and street numbers as approved by the Borough Engineer,
including lot and block numbers of abutting property.
F. Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
G. Location and description of all monuments.
H. Names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
I. Certification by the surveyor as to the accuracy of the details of the plat.
J. Certification that the applicant is the agent or owner of the land or that
the owner has given consent under an option agreement.
K. When approval of a plat is required by any other officer or body of a
municipality, county or state, such approval shall be certified on the
plat, or evidence shall be submitted that an application has been made
for such approval.
L. Proposed final grades of all streets shall be shown to a scale of one inch
equals five feet vertical and one inch equals 50 feet horizontal on sheets
22 inches by 36 inches, and drawings shall include both plans and
profiles and shall show elevations of all monuments referred to United
States Coast and Geodetic Survey level benchmarks, and such
elevations shall be shown in feet and hundredths of a foot.
M. Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
N. A certificate from the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
O. Written proof that the land set aside or shown for easement, public use
or streets is free and clear of all liens and encumbrances.
P. For final site plan approval, where the subject land is contaminated and
requires remediation, written proof from the appropriate
environmental agency that the land has been fully remediated in
accordance with all acceptable standards. [Added 4-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 658]
§ 303-16 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-17
1:384
A. After installation of the improvements required by this chapter, the
subdivider or applicant for site plan approval shall cause to be
prepared, signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer or land
surveyor:
(1) Plans showing:
(a) The contours (at two-foot intervals for lands having slopes
averaging 10% or greater and at one-foot intervals for lands of
lesser average slopes) of the land as finally graded.
(b) The location, as built, of all improvements required by this
chapter, including, without intending to limit the generality
hereof, the location of water mains, gas mains and
underground supply lines for light, power and telephone
service, septic systems, well heads and package treatment
plants and all of their appurtenances.
(2) Profiles, as built, of streets, storm sewers and sanitary sewers, if
applicable, and their respective appurtenances.
(3) Cross sections, as built, of streets.
B. The plans, profiles and cross sections required by this section are
hereinafter referred to as "as-built plans."
§ 303-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-17
1:385

ARTICLE IV
Improvements
§ 303-18. Required improvements; standards.
A. Prior to the granting of final subdivision or site plan approval, the
subdivider or site plan applicant shall have installed or shall have
furnished performance guaranties for the ultimate installation of the
following on-site and off-site improvements:
(1) Pavement of streets or portions thereof in the following manner:
(a) Preparation and grading of subbase shall be done in a manner
satisfactory to the Borough Engineer.
(b) Pavement shall consist of a four-inch macadam base course
and a two-inch stabilized base course and a one-and-one-halfinch
surface course (FABC 1).
(2) Approved street signs.
(3) Curbs, gutters or both.
(4) No topsoil shall be removed from the site or added thereto, except
in accordance with the provisions of Article XI, Soil Removal, of
Chapter 350, Zoning. All replaced or redistributed topsoil shall be
stabilized by seeding, planting or such other method as may be
specified in the soil moving permit to ensure that it will remain in
place and free from erosion. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
(5) Monuments. Monuments shall be of the size and shape required by
N.J.S.A. 46:26B-3 and shall be placed in accordance with said
statute.133
(6) Utilities (including sewage disposal systems, storm drains and
culverts, water and gas mains and electrical supply lines for light,
power and telephone service), hydrants and connections thereof
with approved existing and proposed systems.
(7) Shade trees. Shade trees shall be located on the street line so as
not to interfere with utilities or sidewalks and shall be one of the
following types: Norway maple, sugar maple or plane trees.
(8) Where public water supply is not available and where a natural
pond or stream in or adjacent to the subdivision will permit, an
improved suction point for fire apparatus may be required.
(9) Streetlighting, in accordance with the requirements of the
Planning Board.
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 303-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-18
1:387
(10) For all major subdivisions, the subdivider shall arrange with any
serving utility for the underground installation of all utility
distribution supply lines and service connections in accordance
with the provisions of the applicable standard terms and conditions
incorporated as a part of its tariffs, as same are then on file with the
State of New Jersey Board of Public Utilities, and, prior to the
granting of final approval, shall submit to the Planning Board a
written instrument from each serving utility which shall evidence
full compliance with the provisions of this subsection, provided that
lots in the subdivision which abut existing streets where overhead
electric or telephone distribution supply lines have theretofore
been installed on any portion of the streets involved may be
supplied with electric and telephone service from such overhead
lines, but the service connections from the utilities' overhead lines
shall be installed underground. The location of access facilities for
servicing the utility in the proposed subdivision shall be developed
in conjunction with and as part of the complete subdivision plan.
[Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 394]
B. The subdivider or site plan applicant shall, at his own cost, provide for
the ultimate installation of all off-tract water, sewer, drainage and street
improvements and easements therefor required by the Planning Board
in connection with the subdivision or site plan if such off-tract
improvements:
(1) Are wholly made necessary by the subdivision or site plan or the
improvement therein.
(2) Do not confer material benefits on any land other than the land
within the subdivision or site plan.
C. The subdivider or site plan applicant shall provide for payment of his
proportionate share, allocated in accordance with applicable law, of the
cost of the ultimate installation of all off-tract water, sewer, drainage
and street improvements and easements therefor required by the
Planning Board in connection with the subdivision or site plan if such
off-tract improvements:
(1) Are wholly or partially made necessary by the subdivision or site
plan or the improvements thereon.
(2) Confer benefit on lands other than those within the subdivision or
site plan.
D. In addition to the improvements set forth in Subsections A, B and C of
this section, a site plan applicant shall, upon the conditions delineated
by the Planning Board, provide for the ultimate installation, prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, of the following. All such
improvements shall meet the design standards of this chapter.
(1) Buffer landscaping and foundation plantings.
§ 303-18 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-18
1:388
§ 303-19. Inspection of improvements.
All of the improvements installed by a subdivider or site plan applicant shall
be subject to inspection and approval by the Borough Engineer, who shall
be notified by the subdivider or site plan applicant at least 48 hours prior to
the start of construction. No underground installation shall be covered until
so inspected and approved.
§ 303-20. Developer's agreement; restoration guaranty. [Added
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
Prior to any construction and coincident with the furnishing of the
performance guaranty by the developer, the developer shall enter into
a developer's agreement with the Borough Council incorporating all the
terms and conditions of approval as required by the Planning Board. At the
discretion of Borough Council, the developer may be required to provide
a restoration guaranty, as part of the agreement, that can be used by the
Borough to restore the property to a safe condition in the event that the
developer abandons the development project. The intent of such guaranty
is to ensure that the property in its unfinished development state does not
adversely affect the public safety or adversely impact the environment. No
cutting of trees or vegetation and no excavation, earthmoving or installation
of infrastructure shall be permitted until said developer's agreement is
executed between the Borough Council and the developer. No Borough
official shall sign an approved preliminary subdivision or site plan until the
required developer's agreement has been executed.
(2) On-site paved parking areas and all appurtenant curbs, islands,
lighting and driveways.
(3) Fencing and screening.
(4) On-site lighting.
(5) On-site pedestrianways.
§ 303-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-20
1:389

ARTICLE V
Subdivision Design Standards
§ 303-21. Compliance required.
The subdivider shall observe the requirements and principles of land
subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof, as hereafter
set forth in this article.
§ 303-22. General standards.
The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that will encourage
good development patterns within the Borough. Natural features, such as
trees, brooks, hilltops and views, shall be preserved whenever possible
in designing any subdivision or site plan containing such features. Where
an Official Map or Master Plan, or both, has or have been adopted, the
subdivision shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon.
The streets, drainageways, school sites, flood control basins, public parks
and playgrounds and other public areas shown on an officially adopted
Master Plan or Official Map shall be considered in approval of subdivision
plats. Where no Master Plan or Official Map exists, streets and
drainageways shall be shown on the final plat in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-44 and shall be such as to lend themselves to the harmonious
development of the Borough and to enhance the public welfare in
accordance with the design standards set forth in §§ 303-23 to 303-27,
inclusive.
§ 303-23. Streets.
A. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official
Map shall be such as to provide for the logical extension of existing
streets and provide for future access for remaining streets.
B. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
C. Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal service
road or reserve frontage with a buffer strip for planting or some other
means of separation of through and local traffic as the Planning Board
may determine to be appropriate.
D. Right-of-way widths, measured from lot line to lot line, shall be not less
than the following or as specified in the Master Plan or Official Map, if
adopted subsequent to this chapter: [Amended 9-17-1979 by Ord.
No. 306]
(1) Arterial streets: 80 feet.
(2) Collector streets: 60 feet.
(3) Minor streets: 50 feet.
(4) Marginal access streets: 40 feet.
§ 303-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-23
1:391
(5) The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multifamily,
commercial and industrial developments shall be determined on an
individual basis and shall in all cases be of sufficient width and
design to safely accommodate the maximum anticipated traffic,
parking and loading needs and maximum access for firefighting
equipment.
E. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall
be approved except where the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips has been placed in the Council, under conditions approved
by the Planning Board.
F. Subdivisions adjoining or including existing streets that do not conform
to street widths shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or to the
street width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate additional
width along one or both sides of streets of substandard width. If the
subdivision is along one side only, dedication of 1/2 of the required
extra width may be required.
G. Grades.
(1) Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 4%.
(2) Grades of all other streets shall not exceed 10%.
(3) No street shall have a minimum grade of less than 1/2 of 1%.
H. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible and in
no case shall be less than 60°. The block corners at intersections shall
be rounded at the curbline with a curve having a radius of not less than
20 feet.
I. A street intersection shall not be less than 125 feet removed from the
nearest other street.
J. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 10° and not more than 45°, they shall be connected by a
curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for minor streets and 300
feet for arterial and collector streets.
K. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
radii to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
L. Dead-end streets.
(1) Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than 600 feet and
shall provide a turnaround at the end with a right-of-way radius of
not less than 50 feet and a paved area with a radius of not less than
40 feet.
(2) If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround
shall be provided and provisions shall be made for future extension
§ 303-23 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-23
1:392
§ 303-24. Blocks.
§ 303-25. Lots.
§ 303-26. Public use and service areas.
of the street and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the
adjoining properties.
M. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or be likely to be
confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation of an
existing street shall have the same name. All street names shall be
subject to final approval of the Planning Board.
N. Provision of half streets, except to complete existing half streets, is
prohibited.
O. Access by streets shall be provided for all lots in the subdivision and
adjacent streets to the limits of the subdivision.
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of the lot required in the area by Chapter
350, Zoning, and to provide for the convenient access, circulation
control and safety of street traffic.
B. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian walkways may be required in
locations deemed necessary by the Planning Board. Each walkway shall
be 10 feet wide and be straight from street to street.
C. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
A. All lots created by subdivision shall conform strictly to the
requirements of Chapter 350, Zoning, as to the area and dimensions, as
to adequacy of space and grade to provide off-street parking or other
requirements specified in Chapter 350, Zoning.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra-width line, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
D. Each lot must front upon an approved street, which street shall have a
width of at least 50 feet.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions,
inadequate soil-bearing capacity, high water table, relative
impermeability of soil which may result in unsatisfactory sewage
disposal or similar circumstances, the Planning Board may, after
adequate investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
§ 303-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-26
1:393
§ 303-27. Utilities.
§ 303-28. Sanitary sewers.
A. Easements along rear property lines or elsewhere for utility installation
may be required. Such easements shall be at least 15 feet wide and
located in consultation with the public utility companies and Borough
departments concerned.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such
watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose.
C. Natural features, such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views, shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
A. All storm drains and culverts and all sewage disposal systems and
installations, both individual and public, shall meet the standards
prescribed by, and be approved by, the Borough, county and state
health and engineering authorities having jurisdiction thereof.
B. All utilities and installations connected with systems maintained and
controlled by privately owned public utilities shall meet the standards
for underground installation prescribed by, and shall be approved by,
said public utilities and by the Borough Engineer.
A. Plan and profile of sanitary sewers.
(1) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet.
(2) Profiles shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet
horizontally and one inch equals five feet vertically.
(3) Construction details shall be shown at a larger scale as may be
required for clarity.
(4) Plans shall be complete and show all existing and proposed
property lines, buildings, structures, utilities, geographical
features, street grades, rights-of-way, cellar and soil pipe elevations
and details of proposed sewer construction.
(5) All elevations shall be based upon mean sea level as established by
the New Jersey Geodetic Control Survey benchmarks.
(6) Plans and profiles shall be clearly shown on sheets not exceeding
36 inches by 26 inches in dimension.
(7) Profiles shall show the rate of grade of sewers between manholes,
elevations of inverts and tops of manholes and station manholes.
§ 303-26 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-28
1:394
(8) Said plans and profiles shall be prepared by a professional engineer
licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey.
(9) Said plans and profiles shall be subject to prior approval, in writing,
by the Borough Sewer Engineer and State Department of Health
and shall be ineffective without such approval.
B. Design and calculations report.
(1) A report prepared by professional engineer licensed to practice in
the State of New Jersey shall include the following:
(a) Design date and calculations of proposed sewers.
(b) Drainage area map indicating the entire drainage area to be
served presently and ultimately by the proposed sewers drawn
to a scale of one inch equals 200 feet, except that, where the
area cannot be drawn on one sheet, then the scale shall be one
inch equals 500 feet.
(c) Flow quantities from the entire drainage area.
(d) Structural computations and load for all pipes.
(e) Design computations for all special structures.
(2) Where information pertinent to the design, such as borings, has
been collected or is required, it shall be submitted with the report.
C. Pipe specifications.
(1) All specifications shall be subject to the prior approval, in writing,
by the Borough Sewer Engineer and State Department of Health
and shall be ineffective without such approval.
(2) All main sewer pipe and house connection pipe shall be extralength
vitrified clay sewer pipe or an approved equal substitute
with the written consent of the Borough Sewer Engineer or
Borough Engineer.
(3) Six-inch vitrified clay sewer pipe house connections shall be
installed from the main sewer to the property line.
(4) The minimum slope of house connections shall be 1/4 inch per foot.
(5) Watertight plugs or caps shall be furnished at all dead ends of
house connections.
D. Construction and installation.
(1) Sanitary sewer facilities shall be constructed and installed in
accordance with the sanitary sewer system of the Borough of
Harrington Park, as proposed. The subdivider shall install said
facilities in conformity with such system although a connection to
an existing main is not presently available.
§ 303-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-28
1:395
(2) Sanitary house connections shall be installed for vacant land in
accordance with the Chapter 350, Zoning, or as directed by the
Borough Sewer Engineer or Borough Engineer.
(3) The construction and installation of sanitary sewer facilities shall
be subject to inspection and approval by the Borough Sewer
Engineer or Borough Engineer, who shall be notified by the
subdivider at least 48 hours prior to the start of construction. No
underground sewer installation shall be covered until inspected
and approved.134
E. Exfiltration and infiltration tests.
(1) After the pipe has been laid and backfilled, an exfiltration or
infiltration test shall be made on each section of pipeline between
manholes.
(2) The maximum allowable amount of exfiltration or infiltration shall
not exceed a rate of 100 gallons per inch of pipe diameter per mile
per 24 hours.
F. As-built data.
(1) Drawings shall be submitted to the Borough showing final locations
and elevations of all installations, including all house connections.
The house connection shall be located at the curbline and
referenced to a permanent marker.
(2) The as-built plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer
licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey.
(3) The house connections shall be marked by an S-cut of 2 1/2 inches
marked on the face of the curb or by well-marked stakes if a curb
does not exist. Upon installation of a curb, the location of the
connection will be marked on the face of the curb.
(4) The subdivider shall submit an original cloth tracing of the as-built
plan to the Borough so that copies may be produced therefrom.
G. All of the above-listed improvements, tests and plans shall be subject to
inspection and approval by the Borough Sewer Engineer or Borough
Engineer, who, for purposes of inspection, shall be notified by the
subdivider at least 48 hours prior to the start of construction. No
underground installation shall be covered until inspected and
approved.
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 303-28 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-28
1:396
ARTICLE VI
Site Plan Design Standards
§ 303-29. Conformance to standards.
In reviewing site plans, the Planning Board and all advisory boards and
professional advisers shall be guided by the standards set forth in this
article.
§ 303-30. Access to parking spaces.
There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress to all parking
spaces. Access drives or driveways shall be no less than 12 feet wide
for ingress and egress and 24 feet wide for both ingress and egress. No
driveway or access drive shall be closer than 50 feet to the street lot lines
of any two intersecting streets.
§ 303-31. Buffer strips. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
The site plan shall indicate buffer strips and planting strips as required
by this chapter. In the event that the Planning Board shall determine that
additional buffer strips or planting strips are required to protect public
areas or neighboring properties from adverse effects of the proposed
building or addition, the Board may require such additional buffer or
planting strips. The Environmental Commission may recommend
landscaping and foundation planting which will ensure the attractiveness
of premises subject to this chapter and the protection of soil thereon. The
Planning Board shall approve the landscaping proposed by the applicant in
accordance with the recommendations.
§ 303-32. Circulation.
A. Provision shall be made for the safe and adequate circulation of
pedestrians and vehicles within the property. The width of all aisles or
driveways providing direct access to individual parking stalls shall be in
accordance with the following requirements:
Parking Angle
Aisle or Driveway Width
(feet)
0° (parallel parking) 12
30° 12
45° 13
60° 18
90° 25
B. Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles or driveways providing
direct access to parking spaces placed at an angle other than 90°.
§ 303-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-33
1:397
§ 303-33. Drainage.
Provision shall be made for the safe and adequate drainage of the surface
runoff waters in and from the premises so that flooding and erosion of the
property and the property of others will be prevented. Unless otherwise
provided by the Planning Board, drainage facilities shall be designed on the
basis of a ten-year storm, using a one-hour intensity of two inches.
§ 303-34. Fencing and screening. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
Provision shall be made for the protective and covering fencing and
screening of such portions of the property as the Planning Board, upon
recommendation of the Environmental Commission, may deem necessary
for the safety and welfare of those persons most likely to be exposed to the
property.
§ 303-35. Garbage and refuse.
Provision shall be made for the indoor or enclosed storage of garbage and
refuse.
§ 303-36. Illumination.
The lighting of the building, the property and all signs on the property shall
be such as not to produce any glare at the exterior lot lines of the premises.
The traffic circulation patterns shall be such as to eliminate, at the exterior
lot lines, glare from the lights of automobiles on the property.
§ 303-37. Loading spaces.
There shall be provided on the same lot with the building for which they
are to be used loading berths in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Each loading space shall be at least 12 feet wide, 35 feet long and
14 feet high and shall, as nearly as may be practicable, be located in such
a position as to cause the least hindrance to internal circulation of traffic
and the least noise and aesthetic disturbance to the public and neighboring
property owners. No loading space shall be located in a position in which
any vehicle using the space will block the free passage of pedestrians or
vehicles on the street.
§ 303-38. Noise.
Provisions shall be made for the elimination of all loud and offensive noise
to the general public emanating from the use of the property.
§ 303-39. Parking.
A. The Planning Board shall approve the most appropriate location on the
site for the proposed parking area, in view of the size and topography of
the property, considerations of safety and aesthetics, the requirement
§ 303-33 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-39
1:398
of adequate buffers and the elimination of glare, dust and noise caused
by traffic. There shall be provided, for each building subject to this
chapter, a number of off-street parking spaces in accordance with the
provisions of § 350-41. [Amended 11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 719]
B. Each off-street parking space shall have an area of at least 200 square
feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles, shall be at least 10 feet wide
and 20 feet long and shall be surfaced, as directed by the Planning
Board, so as to be usable for parking. If off-site off-street parking is
contemplated, the Board, in addition, shall determine what provisions,
if any, are required for the safe and adequate circulation of pedestrians
between the parking area and the property.
C. All parking areas and appurtenant maneuvering areas, passageways
and driveways serving semipublic office, research, commercial and
industrial uses shall be illuminated adequately during the hours
between sunset and sunrise when the use is in operation. Adequate
shielding, as determined by the Planning Board, shall be provided by all
such users to protect adjacent residential districts from the glare of
such illumination and from glare of automobile headlights produced by
automobiles entering and leaving the area.
D. Off-street parking areas shall be effectively screened on any side which
adjoins or faces premises situated in any residential district or
institutional premises by a solid, uniformly painted fence or wall not
less than four feet nor more than six feet in height, maintained in good
condition; provided, however, that where the adjacent owners agree, in
writing, or by Planning Board requirement, a screening hedge or
natural landscaping may be substituted for the required fence or wall.
No part of any parking area shall be closer than 10 feet to any school,
hospital or other institutional building unless properly screened in
accordance with Planning Board requirements. [Amended 4-18-2011
by Ord. No. 658]
E. Parking areas may be located in any yard space but shall not be closer
than 10 feet to any street line.
F. The Planning Board may, upon satisfactory proof that the occupancy of
the buildings for which a community parking program is provided does
not require final grading and surfacing of the entire area, grant
permission for deferment of that portion of the final grading and
surfacing not required by the then-current occupancy and use. No
person shall permit or cause to be occupied any building by more
persons than shall be permitted by Planning Board approval of the
community parking plan. In the event that the Planning Board shall
determine, after notice to the owner of buildings participating in the
community parking plan and a hearing, that the partially paved and
graded parking area is inadequate, the owner shall forthwith complete
the final grading and surfacing of the entire required parking area.
§ 303-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-40
1:399
§ 303-40. Paving and curbs.
Paving, when required, shall be dustless, durable, all-weather pavement and
shall be adequate in size and location to direct surface water runoff away
from neighboring properties and toward approved drainage systems.
§ 303-41. Retaining walls.
Retaining walls shall be designed to be safe and adequate for the purpose
intended.
§ 303-42. Sewage disposal.
Provision shall be made in accordance with applicable regulations of all
boards and bodies with jurisdiction over the collection and disposal of
sewage. No site plan approval may be granted until the Board of Health has
certified that a sanitary system has been designed to its satisfaction.
§ 303-43. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be provided where needed to protect the safety of
pedestrians.
§ 303-44. Storage.
Outside storage, when permitted, shall only be permitted in areas approved
by the Board. Such areas shall, as nearly as may be practicable, be shielded
from public view and protected by adequate fencing or screening.
§ 303-45. Utilities.
Facilities shall be provided for placing all utilities underground, including
telephone and electric power lines.
§ 303-40 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-45
1:400
ARTICLE VII
Guarantee Requirements
§ 303-46. On-tract improvements; guarantees required. [Amended
7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 723]
A. The Borough, as a condition of final site plan approval, may require the
developer to furnish and shall accept in accordance with the standards
adopted by this Code and the regulations adopted pursuant to Section 1
of P.L. 1999, c. 68 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53a) a performance guarantee, for
the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of certain ontract
improvements, and a maintenance guarantee, both in accordance
with Subsection A(1) and (2) of this section. Successor developers shall
furnish a replacement performance guarantee, as a condition to the
approval of a permit update under the State Uniform Construction
Code, for the purpose of updating the name and address of the owner of
property on a construction permit, and the Borough shall accept the
replacement performance guarantee in accordance with the standards
adopted by this Code and the regulations adopted pursuant to Section 1
of P.L. 1999, c. 68 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53a) for the purpose of assuring the
installation and maintenance of certain on-tract improvements, the
furnishing of a performance guarantee, and provision for a
maintenance guarantee, in accordance with Subsection A(1) and (2) of
this section.
(1) Performance guarantees.
(a) The developer shall furnish a performance guarantee in favor
of the Borough in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of
installation of only those improvements required by an
approval or developer's agreement, ordinance, or regulation to
be dedicated to a public entity, and that have not yet been
installed, which cost shall be determined by the Borough
Engineer, according to the method of calculation set forth in
Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4), for the
following improvements as shown on the approved plans or
plat: streets; pavement; gutters; curbs; sidewalks; street
lighting; street trees; surveyor's monuments, as shown on the
final map and required by "the Map Filing Law," P.L. 1960, c.
141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.; repealed by section 2 of P.L.
2011, c. 217) or N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 through 46:26B-8; water
mains; sanitary sewers; community septic systems; drainage
structures; public improvements of open space; and any
grading necessitated by the preceding improvements. The
Borough Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of
the improvements covered by the performance guarantee,
which itemized cost estimate shall be appended to each
performance guarantee posted by the obligor.
(b) The developer also will furnish a performance guarantee to
include, within an approved phase or section of a development,
§ 303-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-46
1:401
privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping, as imposed as
a condition of approval. At the developer's option, a separate
performance guarantee may be posted for the privately owned
perimeter buffer landscaping.
(c) If the developer seeks a temporary certificate of occupancy for
a development, unit, lot, building, or phase of development, as
a condition of the issuance thereof, the developer shall furnish
a separate guarantee, referred to herein as a "temporary
certificate of occupancy guarantee," in favor of the Borough in
an amount equal to 120% of the cost of installation of only
those improvements or items which remain to be completed or
installed under the terms of the temporary certificate of
occupancy and which are required to be installed or completed
as a condition precedent to the issuance of the permanent
certificate of occupancy for the development, unit, lot,
building, or phase of development, and which are not covered
by an existing performance guarantee. Upon posting of a
temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee, all sums
remaining under a performance guarantee, required pursuant
to Subsection A(1)(a) of this section, which relate to the
development, unit, lot, building, or phase of development of
which the temporary certificate of occupancy is sought, shall
be released. The scope and amount of the temporary certificate
of occupancy guarantee shall be determined by the Zoning
Officer and Borough Engineer. The Borough will not hold more
than one guarantee or bond of any type with respect to the
same line item. The temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee shall be released by the Zoning Officer or the
Borough Engineer upon the issuance of a permanent
certificate of occupancy with regard to the development, unit,
lot, building, or phase as to which the temporary certificate of
occupancy relates.
(d) Safety and stabilization guarantee.
[1] A developer shall furnish to the Borough a safety and
stabilization guarantee, in favor of the Borough. At the
developer's option, a safety and stabilization guarantee
may be furnished either as a separate guarantee or as a
line item of the performance guarantee. A safety and
stabilization guarantee shall be available to the Borough
solely for the purpose of returning property that has been
disturbed to a safe and stable condition or otherwise
implementing measures to protect the public from access
to an unsafe or unstable condition, only in the
circumstance that:
[a] Site disturbance has commenced and, thereafter, all
work on the development has ceased for a period of at
least 60 consecutive days following such
§ 303-46 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-46
1:402
commencement for reasons other than force majeure;
and
[b] Work has not recommenced within 30 days following
the provision of written notice by the Borough to the
developer of the Borough's intent to claim payment
under the guarantee. The Borough shall not provide
notice of its intent to claim payment under a safety
and stabilization guarantee until a period of at least 60
days has elapsed during which all work on the
development has ceased for reasons other than force
majeure. The Borough shall provide written notice to a
developer by certified mail or other form of delivery
providing evidence of receipt.
[2] Amount.
[a] The amount of a safety and stabilization guarantee for
a development with bonded improvements in an
amount not exceeding $100,000 shall be $5,000.
[b] The amount of a safety and stabilization guarantee for
a development with bonded improvements exceeding
$100,000 shall be calculated as a percentage of the
bonded improvement costs of the development or
phase of development as follows:
[c] $5,000 for the first $100,000 of bonded improvement
costs, plus 2 1/2% of bonded improvement costs in
excess of $100,000, up to $1,000,000; plus
[d] One percent of bonded improvement costs in excess of
$1,000,000.
[3] Release.
[a] The Borough shall release a separate safety and
stabilization guarantee to a developer upon the
developer's furnishing of a performance guarantee
that includes a line item for safety and stabilization in
the amount required under this paragraph.
[b] The Borough shall release a safety and stabilization
guarantee upon the Borough Engineer's
determination that the development of the project site
has reached a point that the improvements installed
are adequate to avoid any potential threat to public
safety.
(2) Maintenance guarantee.
(a) The developer shall post with the Borough, prior to the release
of a performance guarantee required pursuant to Subsection
§ 303-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-46
1:403
A(1)(a), Subsection A(1)(b), or both Subsection A(1)(a) and (b)
of this section, a maintenance guarantee in an amount not to
exceed 15% of the cost of the installation of the improvements
which are being released.
(b) If required, the developer shall post with the Borough, upon
the inspection and issuance of final approval of the following
private site improvements by the Borough Engineer, a
maintenance guarantee in an amount not to exceed 15% of the
cost of the installation of the following private site
improvements: stormwater management basins, inflow and
water quality structures within the basins, and the outflow
pipes and structures of the stormwater management system, if
any, which cost shall be determined according to the method of
calculation set forth in Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4).
(c) The term of the maintenance guarantee shall be for a period
not to exceed two years and shall automatically expire at the
end of the established term.
(3) If other governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will
own the utilities to be installed or the improvements are covered by
a performance or maintenance guarantee to another governmental
agency, no performance or maintenance guarantee, as the case
may be, shall be required by the Borough for such utilities or
improvements.
B. The time allowed for installation of the bonded improvements for which
a performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increase
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation, which cost shall be determined by the Borough
Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in Section 15
of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4) as of the time of the passage
of the resolution.
C. If the required bonded improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Borough for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not completed or corrected and the Borough may either
prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete such
improvements. Such completion or correction of improvements shall be
subject to the public bidding requirements of the Local Public Contracts
Law, P.L. 1971, c. 198 (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.).
D. Completion of improvements.
(1) Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
(except for the top course) and appurtenant utility improvements,
and the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may
§ 303-46 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-46
1:404
request of the governing body in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Borough Clerk, that the Borough Engineer
prepare, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by
the Borough Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee
pursuant to Subsection A of this section, a list of all incomplete
or unsatisfactory completed improvements. If such a request is
made, the obligor shall send a copy of the request to the Borough
Engineer. The request shall indicate which improvements have
been completed and which improvements remain incomplete in the
judgment of the obligor. Thereupon the Borough Engineer shall
inspect all bonded improvements covered by obligor's request and
shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, with the governing
body, and shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to the obligor
not later than 45 days after receipt of the obligor's request.
(2) The list prepared by the Borough Engineer shall state, in detail,
with respect to each bonded improvement determined to be
incomplete or unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the
incompleteness of each incomplete improvement or the nature and
extent of, and remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each
completed bonded improvement determined to be unsatisfactory.
The report prepared by the Borough Engineer shall identify each
bonded improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory
together with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction to
be made in the performance guarantee relating to the completed
and satisfactory bonded improvement, in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection A
of this section.
E. Approval or rejection of improvements.
(1) The governing body, by resolution, shall either approve the bonded
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
Borough Engineer, or reject any or all of these bonded
improvements upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for
rejection, and shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction
to be made in the performance guarantee relating to the
improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection A of this section.
This resolution shall be adopted not later than 45 days after receipt
of the list and report prepared by the Borough Engineer. Upon
adoption of the resolution by the governing body, the obligor shall
be released from all liability pursuant to its performance guarantee
with respect to those approved improvements, except for that
portion adequately sufficient to secure completion or correction of
the improvements not yet approved; provided that 30% of the
amount of the total performance guarantee and safety and
stabilization guarantee posted may be retained to ensure
§ 303-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-46
1:405
completion and acceptability of all improvements. The safety and
stabilization guarantee shall be reduced by the same percentage
as the performance guarantee is being reduced at the time of each
performance guarantee reduction. For the purpose of releasing
the obligor from liability pursuant to its performance guarantee,
the amount of the performance guarantee attributable to each
approved bonded improvement shall be reduced by the total
amount for each such improvement in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection A
of this section, including any contingency factor applied to the cost
of installation. If the sum of the approved bonded improvements
would exceed 70% of the total amount of the performance
guarantee, then the Borough may retain 30% of the amount of the
total performance guarantee and safety and stabilization guarantee
to ensure completion and acceptability of bonded improvements,
as provided above, except that any amount of the performance
guarantee attributable to bonded improvements for which a
temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee has been posted
shall be released from the performance guarantee even if such
release would reduce the amount held by the Borough below 30%.
(2) If the obligor has made a cash deposit with the Borough as part of
the performance guarantee, then any partial reduction granted in
the performance guarantee pursuant to this subsection shall be
applied to the cash deposit in the same proportion as the original
cash deposit bears to the full amount of the performance
guarantee, provided that if the developer has furnished a safety
and stabilization guarantee the Borough may retain cash equal to
the amount of the remaining safety and stabilization guarantee.
F. If any portion of the required bonded improvements is rejected, the
Borough may require the obligor to complete or correct such
improvements and, upon completion or correction, the same procedure
of notification as set forth in this section shall be followed.
G. Inspection fees.
(1) The obligor shall reimburse the Borough for reasonable inspection
fees paid to the Borough engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements, which fees shall not exceed the sum of the amounts
set forth in Subsection G(1)(a) and (b) of this section. The Borough
may require the developer to post the inspection fees in escrow in
an amount:
(a) Not to exceed, except for extraordinary circumstances, the
greater of $500 or 5% of the cost of bonded improvements that
are subject to a performance guarantee under Subsection
A(1)(a), Subsection A(1)(b), or both Subsection A(1)(a) and (b)
of this section; and
§ 303-46 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-46
1:406
§ 303-47. through § 303-48. (Reserved)135
(b) Not to exceed 5% of the cost of private site improvements that
are not subject to a performance guarantee under Subsection
A(1)(a) of this section, which cost shall be determined pursuant
to Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4).
(2) For those developments for which the inspection fees total less
than $10,000, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in
two installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a
developer shall be 50% of the inspection fees. When the balance on
deposit drops to 20% of the inspection fees because the amount
deposited by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to
the Borough Engineer for inspections, the developer shall deposit
the remaining 50% of the inspection fees.
(3) For those developments for which the inspection fees total $10,000
or greater, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in four
installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a developer
shall be 25% of the inspection fees. When the balance on deposit
drops to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount deposited
by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the
Borough Engineer for inspection, the developer shall make
additional deposits of 25% of the inspection fees.
(4) If the Borough determines that the amount in escrow for the
payment of inspection fees, as calculated pursuant to Subsection
G(1)(a) and (b) of this section, is insufficient to cover the cost of
additional required inspections, the Borough may require the
developer to deposit additional funds in escrow, provided that the
Borough delivers to the developer a written inspection escrow
deposit request, signed by the Borough Engineer, which informs
the developer of the need for additional inspections, details the
items or undertakings that require inspection, estimates the time
required for those inspections, and estimates the cost of
performing those inspections.
H. If final approval is by stages or sections of development pursuant to
subsection a of Section 29 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38), the
provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or section.
I. If any of the improvements have been dedicated to the Borough on a
subdivision plat or site plan, the governing body shall be deemed, upon
the release of any performance guarantee required pursuant to
Subsection A of this section, to accept dedication for public use of
streets or roads and any other improvements made thereon according
to site plan and subdivision plats approved by the approving authority,
provided that such improvements have been inspected and have
received final approval by the Borough Engineer.
§ 303-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-47
1:407
135. Editor's Note: Former § 303-47, Procedure on completion of improvements; liability for
breach; performance by Borough, as amended, and § 303-48, Discharge of principal and
surety; maintenance guaranty bond, were repealed 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 723. See now §
303-46.
§ 303-47 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-47
1:408
ARTICLE VIII
Off-Tract Improvements
§ 303-49. Procedure for determination and allocation of costs.
In the event that the Planning Board shall determine that off-tract
improvements are required in connection with any subdivision or site plan,
then prior to granting final approval:
A. The Planning Board shall report to the Borough Council:
(1) The location, character and extent of the required off-tract
improvements.
(2) The Borough Engineer's estimate of the total cost of such off-tract
improvements.
(3) The proposed allocation of said total cost determined in accordance
with the standards set forth in § 303-50.
B. In cases where the Planning Board determines that the reasonable and
necessary need for off-tract improvements is necessitated or required
by the subdivision or site plan and where the improvements are wholly
made necessary by the subdivision or site plan and do not confer
material benefits on any land other than the land within the subdivision
or site plan, the Planning Board shall, as a condition of approval,
require the applicant, at its expense, to provide for and construct such
improvements in the manner provided hereinafter and as otherwise
provided by law.
C. The Borough Council shall determine and report to the Planning Board
whether the off-tract improvement will be constructed:
(1) By the Borough as a general improvement or as a local
improvement, or as a combination thereof; or
(2) By the subdivider or site plan applicant with a formula specified by
the Borough Council providing for partial reimbursement if the
improvement specially benefits property other than that within the
subdivision or site plan.
D. The Planning Board shall require, as a condition for approval of the final
plan or site plan, that:
(1) If the improvement is to be constructed by the Borough as a
general improvement, the subdivider or site plan applicant shall
deposit with the Borough Treasurer an amount equal to the
difference, if any, between the estimated cost of the improvement
and the estimated total amount by which all properties, including
the subdivision or site plan to be serviced by the improvement, will
be specially benefited by the improvement;
§ 303-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-49
1:409
§ 303-50. Standards for allocating cost.
(2) If the improvement is to be constructed by the Borough as a local
improvement, the subdivider or site plan applicant shall deposit
with the Borough Treasurer, in addition to the amount specified in
Subsection D(1), the estimated amount by which the subdivision or
site plan will be specially benefited by the improvement; or
(3) If the improvement is to be constructed by the subdivider or site
plan applicant, the subdivider or site plan applicant shall file with
the Borough Clerk a performance guaranty meeting the
requirements of § 303-46 in the full estimated cost of the
improvement.
A. In determining the allocation of costs for off-tract improvements
between the subdivider or site plan applicant, other property owners
and the Borough, the Planning Board shall be guided by the following
factors:
(1) The total estimated cost of the off-tract improvements.
(2) The increase in market values of the properties affected and any
other benefits conferred.
(3) The needs created by the application.
(4) Population and land use projections for the land within the general
area of the subdivision or site plan and other areas to be served by
the off-tract improvements.
(5) The estimated time for construction of the off-tract improvements.
(6) The condition and periods of usefulness of the improvements which
may be based upon the criteria of N.J.S.A. 40A:2-22.
B. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Planning Board
may take into account the following specific factors:
(1) With respect to street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, shade tree,
streetlight, street sign and traffic light improvements, the Board
may consider:
(a) Traffic counts.
(b) Existing and projected traffic patterns.
(c) Quality of roads and sidewalks in the area.
(d) Such other factors as it may deem relevant to the need created
by the subdivision or site plan.
(2) With respect to drainage facilities, the Board may consider:
§ 303-49 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-50
1:410
§ 303-51. Deposits.
Any moneys received by the Borough Treasurer for off-tract improvements
to be constructed or installed by the Borough pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter shall be deposited in a suitable depository therefor and
shall be used only for the improvements for which they are deposited or
improvements satisfying the same purpose. If construction of improvements
for which the Borough is responsible has not commenced within five years
from the date of deposit, the amount deposited, with any interest thereon,
shall be returned to the subdivider or site plan applicant or his successor in
interest.
§ 303-52. Actual costs; refund.
Upon completion of any improvement constructed by the municipality as a
general or local improvement, the total cost of such improvement shall be
determined by the Borough Treasurer. The difference between the actual
cost as so determined and the estimated cost shall be computed. The
subdivider or site plan applicant or his successor in interest shall make
remittance to the Borough if the actual cost exceeds the estimated cost
or shall receive a refund from the funds deposited with the Borough if
the estimated cost exceeds the actual cost, in an amount which bears the
same relationship to the difference between the actual and estimated costs
as the amount deposited by the subdivider or site plan applicant for his
proportionate share of the estimated cost bears to the total estimated cost.
Any sum payable by the subdivider or site plan applicant or his successor in
(a) The relationship between the area of the subdivision or site
plan and the area of the total drainage basin of which the
subdivision or site plan is a part.
(b) The proposed use of land within the subdivision or site plan
and the amount of land area to be covered by impervious
surfaces on the land within the subdivision or site plan.
(c) The use, condition or status of the remaining land area in the
drainage basin.
(3) With respect to water, gas and electric supply and distribution
facilities, the Board may consider the use requirements of the use
proposed for the subdivision or site plan and the use requirements
of all other properties to be benefited by the improvements.
(4) With respect to sewerage facilities, the Board may consider:
(a) The anticipated volume of effluent from the use proposed for
the subdivision or site plan and the anticipated volume of
effluent from all other properties to be benefited by the
improvements.
(b) The types of effluent anticipated and particular problems
requiring special equipment or added costs.
§ 303-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-52
1:411
interest may be levied and collected by the Borough in the same manner as
is provided by law for the levy and collection of real estate taxes.
§ 303-53. Successors in interest.
In the absence of an express provision in a deed or deeds of conveyance,
it shall be presumed that the fee owners of all lots in the subdivision or
site plan at the date any deposit or portion thereof is returned or additional
charge is made pursuant to §§ 303-51 and 303-52 are the lawful successors
in interest to the subdivider or site plan applicant and that each such fee
owner shall be charged with or entitled to receive a pro rata share, based
on lot area, of any funds to be returned or additional charge to be made
pursuant to this article. Upon payment of any such sums to the fee owners,
the Borough shall be released from liability to any other person.
§ 303-52 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-53
1:412
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement
§ 303-54. Violations and penalties.
§ 303-55. Civil remedies.
A. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as
owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for which
Borough approval is required by this chapter, such person shall be
subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so
made may be deemed a separate violation.
B. Any owner, tenant or other occupant, agent, architect, builder,
contractor or any other workman or any other person who shall commit,
take part in or assist in any violation, other than a violation set forth in
Subsection A, or who shall knowingly maintain any building or premises
in which any violation of this chapter shall exist may, upon conviction
thereof, for each and every violation, be fined not exceeding $500 or be
imprisoned in the Bergen County Jail for a period not exceeding 90
days, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Unlawful building. In any case any building or structure is erected,
constructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any
building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the
Borough Council, the Construction Code Official or an interested party,
in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; to
restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of
said building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises.
B. Unlawful sale of land. In addition to the other remedies set forth in this
chapter, the Borough Council or Construction Code Official may, in the
event of a sale, transfer or agreement which violates § 303-54A of this
chapter, institute and maintain an action for injunctive relief and set
aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a contract
of sale if a certificate as to approval of subdivision of land shall not have
been issued for such conveyance. In any such action, the transferee,
purchaser or guarantee shall be entitled to a lien upon the portion of
the land from which the subdivision was made that remains in the
possession of the developer or his assigns or successors, to secure the
return of any deposit made or purchase price paid, and, also, a
reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any.
Any such action must be brought within two years after the date of the
§ 303-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-55
1:413
recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said land,
or within six years, if unrecorded.
§ 303-55 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 303-55
1:414
Chapter 315
TAXATION
§ 303-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-55
1:415

ARTICLE I
Tangible Household Personal Property Exemption
[Adopted 9-19-1960 by Ord. No. 185 (Ch. 47, Art. I, of the 1967
Code)]
§ 315-1. Exemption established.
Pursuant to Chapter 51 of the Laws of 1960, N.J.S.A. 54:4-9.2, the governing
body of the Borough of Harrington Park does determine that tangible
household property and personal effects shall not be assessed and taxed for
local use.
§ 315-2. When effective.
This article shall affect the personal property assessments beginning the tax
year 1961 and thereafter so long as this article shall be in effect.
§ 315-3. Filing of certified copy.
A certified copy of this article be filed with the Division of Taxation in the
Department of the Treasury and with the Bergen County Board of Taxation.
§ 315-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-3
1:417

ARTICLE II
Funding of Recreation Trust Fund Account
[Adopted 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 553]
§ 315-4. Establishment; funding.
A Recreation Trust Fund Account of $0.01 (one cent) per hundred of
assessed valuation is established to fund the maintenance, improvement
and the repair of recreation facilities.
§ 315-5. Continuance of set-aside. [Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
This set-aside shall continue from year to year unless revoked by ordinance
by a two-thirds majority vote of the entire Council.
§ 315-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-5
1:419
Chapter 331
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 297.
§ 331-1. Purpose.
It is hereby ordained by the Mayor and Council of the Borough Harrington
Park a traffic ordinance to limit the parking, weights, use and designation
of streets within the Borough of Harrington Park.
§ 331-2. Definitions; required signage.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein. Furthermore, the enforcement of any such provision herein is
contingent upon the Borough erecting the appropriate signage pursuant to
applicable New Jersey law.
§ 331-3. Regulations not exclusive.
The regulations contained herein are not exclusive and shall not constitute
an offense in lieu of an offense otherwise more restrictive as provided in
N.J.S.A. 39:4-1 et seq. or any other New Jersey statute or law.
§ 331-4. Repealer.
This chapter shall supersede and repeal any previous ordinance to the
contrary, and to the extent any provision of this chapter shall be declared
unenforceable, then such provision shall have no force and effect and the
remainder of these provisions shall be validly enforced.
§ 331-5. Interpretation of terms.
A. "No parking any time" shall mean that no vehicle occupied or
unoccupied shall stand or occupy space in an area designated as "no
parking" or in any area designated as a "bus stop" or any area
designated by the Harrington Park Board of Education and
appropriately signed.
B. "No parking at certain times" shall mean that no vehicle occupied or
unoccupied shall stand or occupy space in an area so designated,
indicated on the appropriate sign as "no parking."
§ 315-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 331-5
1:420
C. "No overtime parking" shall mean that no vehicle occupied or
unoccupied shall stand or occupy a space in an area so designated in
excess of the time allowed for such valid parking.
D. No parking "permit required" shall mean that no vehicle occupied or
unoccupied shall stand or occupy a space in an area so designated
during a period requiring a parking permit or decal without displaying
the appropriate decal/permit. Residential parking permits shall be
issued by the Chief of Police for use only by bona fide residents of the
Borough. When a resident moves from Harrington Park, the permit will
be forfeited and void. Any vehicle displaying a residential permit for a
vehicle not registered to a property owner in Harrington Park or vehicle
customarily used by a Harrington Park resident will, in addition to all
such other penalties contained in this Chapter 331, Vehicles and Traffic,
be subject to a fine of not more than $100 for each day of parking in any
such designated municipal area and displaying such invalid permit.
[Amended 6-17-2019 by Ord. No. 733]
E. No parking "state of emergency" shall mean that upon the declaration
of an emergency as declared by the Mayor and/or the Chief of Police or
in his absence a ranking police officer, no occupied or unoccupied
vehicle shall stand or occupy a space in an area so designated with
"temporary emergency no parking" signs or equivalent identification of
said emergency.
F. "No overnight parking at any time" shall apply to all streets and public
lots which are in the Borough of Harrington Park between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. during such time. No occupied or unoccupied
vehicle shall occupy any space on a street or in any public lot in the
Borough of Harrington Park in violation of this chapter.
G. "Waiver" shall mean that any resident of the Borough of Harrington
Park may apply to a police officer of the Borough of Harrington Park for
a waiver of the "no overnight parking" provision by calling the Police
Department and securing said approval prior to the overnight parking.
H. "Commercial vehicle" shall mean a vehicle registered as a commercial
vehicle by the New Jersey DMV or any other state or federal authority.
I. "Left-turn prohibition" and "lane use reservation" shall mean that no
vehicle, contrary to a duly posted sign, whether stationary or painted
upon the street, shall maneuver in violation of such designation.
J. "One-way," "stop" and "yield" signs shall refer to those streets and
intersections appropriately designated by the Mayor and Council for
use as so designated for the days and times as appropriately marked.
K. "Do not enter" shall mean any appropriately marked and designated
exit, entrance, street or vehicle way as may be designated by the Mayor
and Council.
§ 331-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 331-5
1:421
§ 331-6. Obedience to signs required.
No vehicle shall be parked, operated or used in violation of any designation,
sign and/or marking appropriately displayed which prohibits the parking,
operation or use of such streets or lots within the Borough unless a waiver
has been obtained from the Harrington Park Police Department.
§ 331-7. Fines.
§ 331-8. Traffic control during construction or maintenance
operations or utility work.
L. "Overweight vehicle" shall refer to any vehicle in excess of four tons
which traverses any street hereinafter designated by the Mayor and
Council and appropriately marked as excluding such vehicles, except
for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets.
A. Every person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall pay a fine as
hereinafter described, unless the court determines otherwise:
(1) Violation of overnight parking: $25. [Amended 4-21-2008 by
Ord. No. 625]
(2) Violation of "no parking emergency": $50.
(3) Violation of "no parking certain days/certain times": $50.
(4) Violation of "no commercial parking": $100.
(5) Violation of "no parking anytime": $50.
(6) Violation of "overweight vehicle on certain streets": $100.
(7) Violation of "no parking permit required": $100.
B. Violations of failure to obey stop signs, yield signs, one-way signs, no
turn signs, lane use signage, parking in handicapped designated spaces
and illegal parking on private property shall carry those motor vehicle
violation penalties as prescribed by New Jersey statutes.
A. The Mayor and Council hereby find and declare that problems of traffic
control occur when traffic must be moved through or around road or
street construction, maintenance operations and utility work, whether
above or below the ground, which require the blocking of the roadway
and obstructing the normal flow of traffic; such obstructions are or can
become dangerous when not properly controlled.
B. In order to better promote the public health, safety, peace and welfare,
it is necessary to establish controls and regulations directed to the safe
and expeditious movement of traffic through construction and
maintenance zones and to provide safety for the work forces
performing these operations.
§ 331-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 331-8
1:422
§ 331-9. Schedule I: No Parking.
Parking shall be prohibited on the following streets, designated as Schedule
I:
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the person or contractor, or, in the
case of a public utility, as required under the public utility
agreement, wishing to conduct work on, under, or above the
roadway to contact the Chief of Police or his designee from the
Harrington Park Police Department in order to arrange a preconstruction
meeting and to submit plans for the safe movement of
traffic during such period of construction work. Failure to comply
with this section shall be a violation of this chapter.
(2) The person, contractor, or utility shall provide the traffic officer
with at least two emergency contact telephone numbers to be used
in case of an emergency problem at the construction or
maintenance site prior to the start of any work. In the event any
emergency shall occur and the appropriate party cannot be
reached, then the Borough may undertake to correct any such
hazardous condition and the contractor shall be responsible for all
costs and expenses of the same.
(3) There shall be no construction, maintenance operation or utility
work on any roadway in the Borough, except in an emergency,
before the hour of 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. or on any Sunday.
(4) Road closings and detours shall only be permitted if approved by
the Harrington Park Police Chief or his designee.
(5) Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance
sites when determined by the Harrington Park police traffic officer
that the same are necessary to provide for the safety and
expeditious movement of traffic.
(6) The Police Chief or his designee shall have the authority to stop
work, including the removing of equipment and vehicles and stored
materials within the right-of-way and backfilling of open
excavations, when in his opinion a determination is made that any
section of this chapter has been violated or on his determination
that there is a clear and present safety hazard.
C. The Borough of Harrington Park, County of Bergen, State of New
Jersey, does hereby adopt the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, 1978 Edition, as hereinafter amended or supplemented, as it
controls and regulates construction, maintenance operations, or utility
work obstructions in the normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor
or utility who or which fails to comply with the provisions referenced
above while performing such work shall be in violation of this chapter
and shall be fined not less than $500 for a first offense and no less than
$1,000 for each subsequent offense.
§ 331-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 331-9
1:423
Name of Street Side Location
Bogerts Mill Road Both Jughandle turn northwest of Old Hook
Road intersection
Bogerts Mill Road Both Jughandle turn southwest of Old Hook
Road intersection
Bogerts Mill Road Both Old Hook Road to Taylor Place
Bogerts Mill Road West Taylor Place to Harriot Avenue
Carmen Road Both LaRoche Avenue to Harriot Avenue
Closter Road Both Schraalenburgh Road to Livingston
Street
Demarest Place South Tappan Road to Kohring Circle
Downing Place West Entire length
Elliot Road East LaRoche Avenue to The Parkway
Elm Street North Northwest curbline of LaRoche
Avenue to a point 135 feet east thereof
First Street North Entire length
Harriot Avenue Both Parkside Road to western boundary
line of Borough
Harriot Avenue North Lafayette Road to Downing Place
Harriott Avenue
[Added
10-10-2017 by
Ord. No. 717]
South Between Elliott Road and Giles Road
designated as "No Parking This Side
Any Time Except for Wedding or
Funeral Limousines Monday-Saturday,
no parking Sunday"
Harriot Avenue South Lafayette Road to 120 feet east of
Giles Road
Harriot Place South Thomas Street to Parkside Road
Herring Street East Harriot Avenue to Short Place
Herring Street East Russell Place to Hackensack Avenue
Kline Street Both Harriot Avenue to Short Place
Lafayette Road Both Harriot Avenue to Blanch Avenue
LaRoche Avenue Both Elm Street to a point 300 feet
northeast thereof
Legion Place West Highland Avenue to northern dead end
of Legion Place
Lohs Place West 50 feet north of Third Street and
continuing 750 feet south
Lynn Street East LaRoche Avenue to a point 150 feet
south thereof
§ 331-9 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 331-9
1:424
Name of Street Side Location
Lynn Street East LaRoche Avenue to The Parkway
Lynn Street West Columbus Avenue to a point 130 feet
north thereof
Lynn Street West Harriot Avenue to The Parkway
Martha Road East 190 feet north of The Parkway to the
intersection of Harriot Avenue
Martha Road East 340 feet north of LaRoche Avenue to
the intersection of The Parkway
Martha Road West Harriot Avenue north entire length
Martha Road West Harriot Avenue to The Parkway
Norma Road West LaRoche Avenue to The Parkway
Old Hook Road Both From boundary of Emerson to
boundary with Closter
Parkside Road Both River Road to Harriot Avenue
Park Street North Entire length
Penn Street North Schraalenburgh Road to Ward Way
Penn Street South Schraalenburgh Road to a point 74
feet west
Schraalenburgh
Road
Both Tappan Road to Closter boundary line
Semmens Road East Columbus Avenue to South Avenue
Tappan Road Both Schraalenburgh Road to boundary line
with Norwood
The Parkway Both Schraalenburgh Road to a point 160
feet west
The Parkway
[Added
10-10-2017 by
Ord. No. 717]
North Between Elliott Road and Lynn Street
Thomas Street South Between Harriot Avenue and Harriot
Place
Ward Way East LaRoche Avenue to Park Street
West Shore Road East Entire length
§ 331-10. Schedule II: No Parking Certain Hours.
Parking shall be prohibited during certain hours on the following streets,
designated as Schedule II:
A. Parking prohibited certain hours.
§ 331-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 331-10
1:425
Name of
Street Side Days Hours Location
Downing
Place
East Monday to
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Harriot Avenue to 185
feet north
Elliot Road West Monday to
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Harriot Avenue to The
Parkway
Harriot
Avenue
South Monday to
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Carmen Road to Elliot
Road
Lynn Street Both Monday to
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Between Hackensack
Avenue and Harriot
Avenue
B. Time-limit parking.
Name of
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Columbus
Avenue
Both 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between Semmens
Road and River Road
Elm Street Both 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between LaRoche
Avenue and
Schraalenburgh Road
Giles Road Both 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between Carmen
Road and Harriot
Avenue
Harriot Place North 2 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m.
Entire length
Herring Street Both 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between Harriot
Avenue and
Hackensack Avenue
LaRoche
Avenue
Both 2 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between Carmen
Road and Lynn Street
LaRoche
Avenue
Both 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
From Lynn Street to
River Road
LaRoche
Avenue
Both 2 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
From Schraalenburgh
Road to a point 300
feet northeast of Elm
Street
§ 331-10 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 331-10
1:426
§ 331-11. Overnight parking.
No vehicle shall be parked on any street in the Borough of Harrington Park
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless an appropriate waiver
has been received from the Harrington Park Police Department.
§ 331-12. Schedule III: No Parking Certain Hours in Municipal
Parking Areas.
The following areas shall have no parking for certain hours in designated
municipal parking areas as detailed in Schedule III below:
Name of
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Lynn Street Both 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between LaRoche
Avenue and Harriot
Avenue
Lynn Street East 15
minutes
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Beginning 25 feet
north of Columbus
Avenue to a point 87
feet north thereof
Lynn Street West 15
minutes
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Beginning 25 feet
south of LaRoche
Avenue to a point 30
feet south thereof
Park Street Both 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between Ward Way
and Schraalenburgh
Road
Semmens
Road
West 2 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between LaRoche
Avenue and South
Avenue
Short Place Both 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between Herring
Street and Kline
Street
South Avenue Both 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
From Semmens Road
to end of South
Avenue
The Parkway Both 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between Giles Road
and Elliot Road
Thomas Street Both 2 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m.
Entire length
West Shore
Road
Both 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between Harriot
Avenue and Lafayette
Road
§ 331-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 331-12
1:427
Area Side Hours Location
Municipal Area
A
Both 10:00 p.m.
to 6:00 a.m.
"Nutshell" parking lot, between
The Parkway and LaRoche
Avenue
Municipal Area
B
West 10:00 p.m.
to 6:00 a.m.
Ward Way parking lot, between
Elm Street and Park Street
Municipal Area
C
East 10:00 p.m.
to 6:00 a.m.
Semmens Road parking lot,
between LaRoche Avenue and
Columbus Avenue, except those
with permit stickers, but not to
include commercial vehicles
Municipal Area
D
Both 12:00
midnight to
6:00 a.m.
Borough Hall parking lot,
between Herring Street and
Kline Street
Municipal Area
E
East 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Highland Field parking lot,
between Van Orden Road and
Greenway
§ 331-13. Schedule IV: Municipal Permit Parking.
The following areas, designated as Schedule IV, shall be for municipal
permit parking:
Area Side Location
Municipal Area A Both "Nutshell" parking lot, between The
Parkway and LaRoche Avenue
Municipal Area B ("pay") West Ward Way parking lot, 95 feet south
of LaRoche Avenue to a point 342
feet thereof
Municipal Area C
(employee/qualified
residence)
East Semmens Road parking lot, 68 feet
south of LaRoche Avenue to a point
398 feet south thereof
§ 331-14. Schedule V: No Stopping or Standing.
Stopping or standing shall be prohibited in the following locations during
the times noted below, designated as Schedule V:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Glen Avenue East Both 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Lynn Street to Spring
Street
Harriot Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Dean Street to Downing
Place
Lynn Street East 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Glen Avenue East to
Hackensack Avenue
§ 331-12 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 331-15
1:428
§ 331-15. Schedule VI: Overweight Vehicles/No Vehicles in Excess of
Four Tons.
The following areas, designated as Schedule VI, are designated as areas
where trucks in excess of four tons are excluded:
Name of Street Location
Bluefield Avenue Entire length
George Street Entire length
Hackensack Avenue Entire length
Harriot Place Entire length
Highland Avenue Entire length
LaRoche Avenue Between Semmens Road and Parkside
Road
Lynn Street Between Blanch Avenue and Bluefield
Avenue
Parkside Road From LaRoche Avenue to Harriot
Avenue
The Parkway Entire length
§ 331-16. Schedule VII: One Way Streets.
The following areas, designated as Schedule VII, are designated as one-way
streets or one-way streets on certain days:
A. One-way streets.
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Bogerts Mill Road
jughandle turn
intersection (northwest of
Old Hook Road)
East From Old Hook Road onto
Bogerts Mill Road
Bogerts Mill Road
jughandle turn
intersection (southwest of
Old Hook Road)
North From Old Hook Road onto
Bogerts Mill Road
Harriot Place West From Thomas Street to
Harriot Avenue
Penn Street West From Schraalenburgh Road
to Ward Way
Thomas Street South From Harriot Place to
Harriot Avenue
B. One-way streets on certain days.
§ 331-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 331-16
1:429
§ 331-17. Schedule VIII: Through Streets and Stop Streets.
Name of
Street Days Time
Direction
of Travel Limits
Lynn Street Monday to
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 3:30
p.m.
South Between
Hackensack Avenue
and Harriot Avenue
Spring Street Monday to
Friday
3:00 p.m.
to 3:30
p.m.
North Between
Hackensack Avenue
and Harriot Avenue
A. Through streets. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on
the near side of each street intersection of the through street except
where yield right-of-way signs are provided for in the designation:
Name of Street Location
Columbus Avenue Between Semmens Road and River Road
Dean Street Between Harriot Avenue and Hackensack
Avenue
Hackensack Avenue Between Lafayette Road and George
Street
Harriot Avenue Between Lafayette Road and George
Street
Herring Street Between Harriot Avenue and Hackensack
Avenue
Highland Avenue Between Livingston Street and Tappan
Road
Kline Street Between Harriot Avenue and Hackensack
Avenue
LaRoche Avenue Between Carmen Road and Parkside Road
Lohs Place Between Blanch Avenue and First Street
Lynn Street Between Hackensack Avenue and Pine
Place
Lynn Street Between Harriot Avenue and Hackensack
Avenue
Spring Street Between Harriot Avenue and Hackensack
Avenue
B. Stops streets. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
§ 331-16 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 331-17
1:430
§ 331-18. Schedule IX: Bus Stops.
The following described locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel Side Location
Blanch Avenue East South a. Lynn Street (near side)
beginning at the westerly
curbline of Lynn Street and
extending 120 feet westerly
thereof
Blanch Avenue West North a. Dorotockey Drive (near side)
beginning at the easterly
curbline of Dorotockey Drive
and extending 120 feet easterly
thereof
Harriot
Avenue
East South a. Eckerson Road (near side)
beginning at the westerly
curbline of Eckerson Road and
extending 120 feet westerly
thereof
b. Bogerts Mill Road (near side)
beginning at the westerly
curbline of Bogerts Mill Road
and extending 120 feet
westerly thereof
Intersection Stop Sign On
Dean Street and Glen Avenue East Glen Avenue East
Greenway and Wicks Drive Wicks Drive
Harriot Place and Parkside Road Parkside Road
Highland Avenue and Legion
Place [Added 12-20-2010 by
Ord. No. 651]
Highland Avenue
Kohring Circle North and
Highland Avenue [Added
12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 651]
Highland Avenue
LaRoche Road and Elm Street LaRoche Road
Semmens Road and Columbus
Avenue
Columbus Avenue
Spring Street and Glen Avenue
East
Glen Avenue East
Ward Way and Park Street Park Street, northeast
§ 331-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 331-18
1:431
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel Side Location
c. Florence Road (near side)
beginning at the westerly
curbline of Florence Road and
extending 120 feet westerly
thereof
d. Lynn Street (near side)
beginning at the westerly
curbline of Lynn Street and
extending 120 feet westerly
thereof
e. Giles Road (near side)
beginning at the westerly
curbline of Giles Road and
extending 120 feet westerly
thereof
Harriot
Avenue
West North a. At Kline Street (near side)
beginning at the easterly
curbline of Kline Street and
extending 120 feet easterly
thereof
b. Lynn Street (near side)
beginning at the easterly
curbline of Lynn Street and
extending 120 feet easterly
thereof
c. Florence Road (near side)
beginning at the easterly
curbline of Florence Road and
extending 120 feet easterly
thereof
d. Bogerts Mill Road (far side)
beginning at the westerly
curbline of Bogerts Mill Road
and extending 110 feet
westerly thereof
e. Eckerson Road (far side)
beginning at the westerly
curbline of Eckerson Road and
extending 110 feet westerly
thereof
§ 331-18 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 331-18
1:432
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel Side Location
Lafayette
Road
North East a. Hackensack Avenue (far side)
beginning at the southerly
curbline of Hackensack Avenue
and extending 110 feet
northerly thereof
b. Lincoln Terrace (near side)
beginning at the southerly
curbline of Lincoln Terrace and
extending 120 feet southerly
thereof
c. Ehret Avenue (near side)
beginning at the southerly
curbline of Ehret Avenue and
extending 120 feet southerly
thereof
d. Bluefield Avenue (near side)
beginning at the southerly
curbline of Bluefield Avenue
and extending 120 feet
southerly thereof
Lafayette
Road
South West a. Bluefield Avenue (right turn,
far side) beginning at the
southerly curbline of Bluefield
Avenue and extending 150 feet
southerly thereof
b. Ehret Avenue (near side)
beginning at the northerly
curbline of Ehret Avenue and
extending 120 feet northerly
thereof
c. Lincoln Terrace (near side)
beginning at the northerly
curbline of Lincoln Terrace and
extending 120 feet northerly
thereof
d. Hackensack Avenue (near side)
beginning at the northerly
curbline of Hackensack Avenue
and extending 120 feet
northerly thereof
§ 331-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 331-18
1:433
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel Side Location
LaRoche
Avenue
South West a. Elm Street (near side)
beginning 50 feet from the
northwesterly curbline of Elm
Street and extending 120 feet
northerly thereof
Municipal
Parking Area A
South East a. Between LaRoche Avenue and
The Parkway (middle lot)
beginning 50 feet north of the
westerly curbline of LaRoche
Avenue and extending 180 feet
northerly thereof
Tappan Road North East a. Highland Avenue (near side)
beginning at the southerly
curbline of Highland Avenue
and extending 120 feet
southerly thereof
b. Greenway (near side)
beginning at the southerly
curbline of Greenway and
extending 120 feet southerly
thereof
Tappan Road South West a. Greenway (near side)
beginning at the northerly
curbline of Greenway and
extending 120 feet northerly
thereof
b. Highland Avenue (near side)
beginning at the northerly
curbline of Highland Avenue
and extending 120 feet
northerly thereof
c. Demarest Place (near side)
beginning at the northerly
curbline of Demarest Place and
extending 120 feet northerly
thereof
§ 331-19. Schedule X: Municipal Parking Areas.
The following areas are designated as municipal parking areas in which
parking shall be allowed as the signs reveal. Vehicles must conform to
the regulations prescribed and as provided below. The following described
locations are herein designated as municipal off-street parking areas:
§ 331-18 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 331-19
1:434
A. Municipal Area A, "Nutshell" parking lot: off-street municipal property
located between LaRoche Avenue and The Parkway. This parking area is
designated for vehicles displaying resident decals. All vehicles are
restricted to parking at a ninety-degree angle in this area.
B. Municipal Area B, Ward Way parking lot: off-street municipal property
located between Elm Street and Park Street. All vehicles are restricted
to parking at a ninety-degree angle in this area. This area includes nofee
time-restricted parking, handicapped parking, paid parking and
resident decal parking.
(1) There shall be 30 off-road parking spaces.
(2) There shall be 12 two-hour parking spaces/paid decal parking
spaces/overflow resident decal parking spaces, all as provided by
signage.
C. Municipal Area C, Semmens Road parking lot: off-street municipal
property located between LaRoche Avenue and Columbus Avenue. All
vehicles are restricted to parking at a ninety-degree angle in this area.
This area includes no-fee time-restricted parking, handicapped parking
and decal parking. All parking shall be as the signage indicates.
(1) There shall be two handicapped spaces, 10 two-hour spaces on the
north end of the lot, and five two-hour spaces on the south end of
the lot.
(2) South of the two-hour parking shall be parking for business owners
and residents in the area.
(3) At the far end of the lot are three overflow spots which will be
designated as decal parking only.
(4) Each business owner whose property is located on that property
bordered by Semmens and LaRoche shall be given a placard
allowing them one parking space in the two-hour Municipal Parking
Area C entitling them to park between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. Each such business owner may request of the Chief of
Police additional placards; the Chief shall have the authority to
issue temporary placards, for use by employees of business owners,
on a temporary basis. [Added 9-9-2019 by Ord. No. 741]
D. Municipal Area D, Borough Hall parking lot: off-street municipal
property located at 85 Harriot Avenue, between Herring Street and
Kline Street.
E. Municipal Area E, Highland Field parking lot: off-street municipal
property located off Tappan Road between Van Orden Road and the
Norwood Borough Line. All vehicles are restricted to parking at a
ninety-degree angle in this area.
F. Municipal Area F, Police Headquarters parking lot: off-street municipal
property located off LaRoche Avenue between Schraalenburgh Road
§ 331-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 331-19
1:435
§ 331-20. Schedule XI: Turn Restrictions; Lane Use Reservations;
"Do Not Enter" Areas.
The following areas, designated as Schedule XI, are designated as turn
restrictions and/or lane use reservations areas and/or "do not enter" areas:
and Elm Street. All vehicles are restricted to parking at a ninety-degree
angle in the areas designated. Only those vehicles designated will park
in the spaces provided for police vehicles only, visitors only, police
officers only. All visitor parking will be restricted to two hours. All
violators will be towed at the owner's expense.
A. Right turn prohibitions. No person shall make a right turn at any of the
following locations:
Location
East on West Shore Road to south on Lafayette Road
B. Left turn prohibitions. No person shall make a left turn at any of the
following locations:
Location
North on Lafayette Road to west on West Shore Road
C. Lane use reservations. All vehicles shall move as described below:
(1) Schraalenburgh Road and Tappan Road. The right lane of the
northerly approach of Schraalenburgh Road shall be for right turns
only.
(2) Tappan Road and Lafayette Road. The left lane of the westerly
approach of Tappan Road shall be for left turns only.
D. No right turn on red. No person shall make a right turn on red at any of
the following locations:
Location
The intersection of Schraalenburgh Road and Tappan Road
E. Do not enter. The following intersection will be designated as "Do Not
Enter":
Location
Borough Hall parking lot (Area D), 85 Harriot Avenue, at the
intersection of the Borough of Harrington Park Fire Department
parking lot, 13 Kline Street
Exiting the Borough Hall parking lot in a westerly direction into the
Harrington Park Fire Department designated parking lot is prohibited
Penn Street at the intersection of Park Avenue and Ward Way
§ 331-19 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 331-21
1:436
§ 331-21. Schedule XII: Four-Way Stop Intersections.
The following intersections are declared to be four-way stop intersections.
Stop signs shall be installed on all four corners of the intersection.
Intersection
George Street and Glen Avenue West
Lynn Street and Hackensack Avenue
§ 331-22. Schedule XIII: Board of Education Property.
Property known and specified as "Harrington Park Board of Education
Property" shall be posted/signed for no parking, roadway direction and use,
and time limit parking as detailed on the site plan attached hereto, as
amended and referred to as Schedule XIII. Any violation of this provision
shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in § 331-7. The Harrington Park
Board of Education property shall be signed and marked with respect to
lane usage/parking/turning/entering as described on the attached plan.136
§ 331-23. Schedule XIV: Paid Parking Spaces and Decal Parking
Space.
From time to time and as otherwise authorized by the Mayor and Council,
the Borough shall make available certain decal parking spaces, which are to
be used by residents of the Borough only for no fee, and paid decal spaces
which shall be for paid parking in certain and municipal parking areas as
referred to in Schedule X. Spaces with limited time usage as indicated by
the signage shall be allowed in certain municipal parking areas as otherwise
provided in Schedule X.
§ 331-24. School zone pedestrian access and vehicle traffic. [Added
11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 718]
A. Harriott Avenue.
(1) On Harriot Avenue the existing flashing school zone signs shall be
relocated as follows:
(a) The most westerly flashing sign shall be erected at a location
immediately west of Martha Road and its intersection with
Harriot Avenue directing traffic moving eastward.
(b) The most easterly sign shall be located between Dean Street
and Carmen Road directing traffic in moving westward.
(2) Each sign when activated shall state "School Speed Limit 25 mph."
(3) The total distance running east and west between the two signs on
Harriot Avenue shall be approximately 1,700 feet.
136. Editor's Note: The Board of Education site plan is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 331-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 331-24
1:437
Chapter 336
VEHICLES, TOWING AND STORAGE OF
§ 336-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49:
§ 336-2. Application and licensure.
B. Additional areas.
Location Regulation
Herring Avenue Install Ladder crosswalk and
pedestrian crossing signage
Kline Street No markings, no signage
Between Kline Street and Dean
Street
Apply "Slow School Zone"
Markings; "School Crossing
Ahead" for westbound traffic
Dean Street No markings
Carmen Road No crosswalk
Spring Street Ladder crosswalk applied at
westerly side of intersection;
school crossing signage installed
Lynn Street Ladder crosswalk to be applied to
cross driveway and westerly side
of intersection (L-shaped)
Public school entrance driveway No markings, no signage
Public school exit Ladder crosswalk to be reinstalled
(diagonal); school crossing
signage
Elliot Road No crosswalk, no signage
Downing Place No crosswalk, no signage
Martha Road Ladder crosswalk
Florence Road No crosswalk, no signage
George Street No crosswalk, no signage
A. A list of towing contractors to provide towing services for the Borough
of Harrington Park on a rotating basis ("towing list"); and
B. Regulations governing operators engaged in the removal of motor
vehicles.
§ 331-24 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 336-2
1:438
A. An individual or entity seeking placement on the towing list shall be
required to submit an application and receive the approval of the Police
Department of the Borough of Harrington Park ("Police Department")
prior to the issuance of a license.
B. All applicants are required to complete a form furnished by the Police
Department, providing any and all information prescribed by the Chief
of Police of the Borough of Harrington Park ("Chief of Police"). Any
application deemed incomplete will be disregarded without any further
notification.
C. Each towing contractor ("towing contractor") must be able to
demonstrate to the Borough that it is thoroughly qualified and
experienced in the towing and removal of vehicles of all types, and that
it has adequate facilities, equipment, expertise, licensing, and
personnel to perform the services required by these specifications in a
manner satisfactory to the Police Department.
D. The Police Department shall conduct a background check of the towing
contractor, its officers and employees prior to making a determination
of placement on the towing list.
E. A license may be denied, suspended, or revoked upon any of the
following grounds:
(1) Submitting a fraudulent or misleading application.
(2) A criminal conviction of the towing operator or a named principal
of the towing operator.
(3) Failure to respond reliably to calls for assistance or any other
unsatisfactory performance action which interferes with the proper
operation of the rotating system maintained by the Police
Department.
(4) Failure to utilize safe and adequate equipment as defined herein.
(5) Violations of motor vehicle laws and/or municipal ordinances.
(6) Failure or refusal to tow or remove a motor vehicle when requested
to do so by an appropriate municipal official.
(7) Violations of the zoning ordinance137 or any other applicable
ordinances or codes of the Borough of Harrington Park pertaining
to the use or condition of the premises used by the towing
contractor in conducting the towing business.
(8) Violations of the provisions of this chapter or any of its rules,
regulations, and policies promulgated hereto.
137. Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning.
§ 336-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 336-2
1:439
§ 336-3. Denial, suspension or revocation of license; hearing.
§ 336-4. Towing list rotation.
F. Licenses shall be applicable for a one-year term, which shall commence
January 1 through December 31. An application must be submitted to
the Police Department on or before December 1 for review to serve for
the succeeding year. All applications shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee in the amount of $125.
G. Licenses shall be renewed annually by December 31 of the preceding
year. Towing contractors already on the towing list will receive a
renewal application by mail. The renewal fee shall be in the amount of
$75.
A. When an application for a license is denied by the Borough of
Harrington Park, the applicant may serve a notice requesting a hearing.
Said notice shall be served on the Borough Clerk and the applicant shall
set a hearing at a regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body.
B. Proceedings for the suspension or revocation of a license shall be
initiated by the service of a notice setting forth the charges proffered
against the towing contractor. Said notice shall be served by the Chief
of Police or his/her designee, either personally or via certified mail,
return receipt requested, and shall contain a date, time and place for a
hearing to be held by the governing body of the Borough of Harrington
Park. The towing contractor shall have the right to file an answer to the
notice and to appear in person, or be represented by counsel, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed for the hearing.
A. A towing list of the accepted towing contractors shall be kept with the
Chief of Police. Each new towing contractor shall be placed on the
bottom of the towing list upon registration with the Borough. The
towing list shall be a rotating list as provided in Subsections B, C and D
of this section.
B. The Police Department will call the towing contractor on the top of the
towing list on the towing rotation schedule, on an as-needed basis. The
towing contractor that is called, if it shall perform any of the services
covered by this chapter, shall be placed at the bottom of the towing list
and not called again until all other on-call towing contractors on the
towing list have been called.
C. If a towing contractor is unavailable to perform required services when
called upon by the Police Department, for any reason whatsoever, the
towing contractor shall be charged with a call and placed at the bottom
of the towing list, and the next available on-call towing contractor shall
be called.
D. If a towing contractor, after being dispatched, is recalled and is not
required to perform any duties or services covered by this chapter, the
§ 336-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 336-4
1:440
§ 336-5. Rules and regulations.
towing contractor shall remain on the top of the towing list. However,
if a towing contractor arrives at the scene of an incident in which its
services are required and cannot perform said services, it shall lose its
place on the towing list, and the next on-call towing contractor on the
towing list shall be called.
A. All towing contractors placed on the towing list shall be available 24
hours per day seven days per week, to respond to a call in accordance
with the towing rotation schedule of on-call status established by the
Chief of Police.
B. All towing contractors shall respond to a call in any part of the Borough
within 15 minutes. If a towing contractor does not respond within 15
minutes of a call, the towing contractor next on the list shall be called
and entitled to provide services as needed, and the first towing
contractor shall forfeit any claim to compensation.
C. All drivers and operators of towing vehicles shall be properly licensed
to operate a motor vehicle within the State of New Jersey and are
subject to driver's license checks by the Police Department at the time
of registration and at least on an annual basis thereafter. All towing
vehicles shall be properly registered and inspected in accordance with
the applicable laws.
D. All drivers and operators of towing vehicles must tow their vehicles in a
safe manner.
E. All towing contractors shall be capable of providing reasonable
roadside services to disabled vehicles such as, but not limited to, jumpstarting,
changing of flat tires and providing fuel. Such services shall
only be performed if they can be done safely, as determined by the
police officer on the scene.
F. All towing contractors shall make available a copy of their basic rates
and a business card to all owners and operators of motor vehicles which
will be towed.
G. All towing contractors shall keep accurate records of all motor vehicles
towed and stored at the direction of the Police Department. A copy of
such records shall be provided to the Borough upon request.
H. Towing contractors shall not remove any motor vehicle which has been
abandoned or involved in an accident in any public roadway without
first notifying the Police Department.
I. The owner of a motor vehicle shall have the right to request a towing
service only if there is no emergency situation or imminent road hazard
as determined by the Police Department.
§ 336-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 336-5
1:441
§ 336-6. Storage facilities.
§ 336-7. Towing and storage rates.
The following fees are established as being the usual and customary rates
for towing and storage of automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles, mopeds,
and scooters:
J. The towing contractor shall notify the Police Department of all vehicles
found by the towing contractor to have been abandoned and not
claimed within 14 days after being stored. The Police Department shall,
upon notification, expeditiously process the vehicle in accordance with
the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Code concerning abandoned and
unclaimed motor vehicles.
K. In the case of multiple vehicles, the towing contractor or the Police
Department may request the help of another towing contractor on the
towing list.
A. All storage facilities operated or used by towing contractor shall meet
all local zoning and code requirements, and must be located within four
miles of the geographic center of the Borough of Harrington Park or
within the Borough.
B. All towing contractors shall have an indoor storage facility at their
disposal for motor vehicles which have been involved in criminal
activity and impounded by the Police Department.
C. All storage facilities shall have a business office open to the public
between normal business hours at least five days a week, excluding
holidays.
D. All outside storage facilities shall be secured and fully enclosed by a
sturdy fence having a minimum height of six feet, with a lockable gate
for ingress and egress, and shall be lighted from dusk to dawn.
E. A towing contractor shall not charge a release fee or other fee for
releasing motor vehicles to their owners after normal business hours or
on weekends.
A. A fee in connection with towing services for impounded or abandoned
vehicles shall be in the amount of $100 per vehicle and includes
mileage.
B. Towing in connection with accident calls shall be at a minimum in the
amount of $100 per vehicle. Additional time spent at the accident scene
over 1/2 hour shall be in the amount of $70 per hour.
C. Storage fees shall be in the amount of $35 per day.
D. Service calls, which constitute any service other than towing, use of
flatbed, or winching, shall be in the amount of $75 per call to the scene.
§ 336-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 336-7
1:442
§ 336-8. Rights of owners/operators of motor vehicles.
§ 336-9. Equipment requirements.
§ 336-10. Collection of fees.
Owners of vehicles towed shall be responsible for all fees for services
rendered. The tow operator shall look solely to the owner for payment of
fees.
§ 336-11. Insurance requirements.
Towing contractors shall be required to purchase, maintain and provide,
during the time of service on the towing list, proof of insurance furnished by
a reputable insurance company licensed to do business in the State of New
Jersey containing the following coverage:
E. A decoupling fee shall not exceed $25.
F. Towing and storage of vehicles 16,000 pounds and over shall not exceed
those fees established for towing vehicles as established and accepted
by the New Jersey State Police.
A. The owner or operator of any motor vehicle requiring towing or storage
shall have the right to remove all personal items and effects from the
motor vehicle unless the Police Department has placed a police hold on
any such items.
B. The motor vehicle owner or his or her representative shall have the
right to take photographs of any stored vehicle for insurance purposes.
C. Upon request of the motor vehicle owner or his or her representative, a
towing contractor shall provide a detailed and itemized bill for all
services rendered.
A. All towing vehicles providing towing services herein shall meet all of
the requirements of Revised Statutes Title 39, "Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Regulation".
B. All towing vehicles must have radio equipment with a twenty-four-hour
dispatch service or a cellular telephone for the purpose of maintaining
communications with the Police Department radio desk.
C. All towing vehicles must be equipped with at least one fire extinguisher,
safety chains, substances for application to small liquid spills, and stiff
push brooms to clean debris at the scenes, one broom and shovel,
emergency warning lights, and one set of dolly wheels.
A. Fire, theft, collision and comprehensive including vandalism and
malicious mischief in the minimum amount of $50,000.
B. Liability and property damage insurance covering the towing
contractor's business, equipment and other vehicles in the minimum
§ 336-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 336-11
1:443
§ 336-12. Violations and penalties; suspension or removal from
towing list.
§ 336-13. Indemnity clause.
The towing contractor shall execute a separate certification stating that
it will hold harmless, indemnify and defend, at the towing contractor's
expense, the Borough, its employee and officials from any and all claims,
demands, suits or actions for personal injury or property damage brought
against the Borough, its employees, and officials for any activities which
arise out of any services performed pursuant to this chapter.
§ 336-14. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent or in conflict with this
chapter are hereby repealed as to said inconsistencies and conflicts.
amount of $500,000 for single-limit coverage and $100,000 for all
damages arising from the injury.
C. Worker's compensation insurance as required by law, including but not
limited to statutory New Jersey worker's compensation benefits, and
employers' liability in the minimum amount of $100,000.
A. All violations of this chapter, and all complaints by the public or Police
Department against any towing contractor, shall be forwarded to the
Mayor and Borough Council.
B. The Mayor and Borough Council, in their discretion, shall determine if
any complaint or violation against a towing contractor is of such a
serious nature as to warrant a hearing and possible disciplinary
measures. If the Mayor and Borough Council decide that a hearing is
required, it shall, upon proper notice to all interested parties, conduct a
hearing in which all parties may present evidence. If, after a hearing,
the Mayor and Borough Council find that a towing contractor has
violated any provision of this chapter, it may in accordance with the
gravity of the offense:
(1) Fine the violating party an amount not exceeding the sum of
$1,000.
(2) Suspend the violating party from the towing list for a period of time
not exceeding three months for a first offense; not exceeding six
months for a second offense; and not exceeding one year for a third
offense.
(3) Permanently remove the violating party from the towing list for any
violation after its third offense.
§ 336-11 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 336-15
1:444
§ 336-15. Severability.
If any section, part of any section, or clause or phrase of this chapter
is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision
shall not affect the remaining provisions of this chapter, and each section
and subsection thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of
the subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases may be declared
unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 336-16. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
Chapter 350
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affordable housing — See Ch. 85.
Certificates of continued occupancy — See
Ch. 118.
Commercial vehicles — See Ch. 127.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131.
Fees — See Ch. 153.
Fines and penalties — See Ch. 164.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 179.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 202.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 248.
Riparian zones — See Ch. 253.
Sewer use — See Ch. 262.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 284.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 286.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
303.
§ 336-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 336-16
1:445

ARTICLE I
Title; Definitions and Word Usage
§ 350-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "1983 Final Zoning Ordinance of the
Borough of Harrington Park."
§ 350-2. Word usage.
§ 350-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVERTISE — When used in reference to signs, the giving or attempting or
intending to give of any notice or information or any activity which gives or
attempts to give or intends to give notice, information or warning.[Added
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
ALTER; ALTERATION — Any action which changes or modifies, in a
perceptible manner, any aspect of development which is regulated by this
chapter. "Alteration" means the result of any such action.[Added
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the size or height of a
building or change in its position on the lot or any change in the supporting
A. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words or terms used herein
shall be interpreted or defined as follows: the word "person" includes a
corporation as well as an individual; words used in the present tense
include the future, and the plural includes the singular; the word "lot"
includes the word "plot"; the word "building" includes the word
"structure"; the word "shall" is intended to be mandatory; and
"occupied" or "used" shall be considered as though followed by the
words "or intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied."
B. Whenever in the administration of this chapter it shall be necessary or
desirable to define a term that has not hereinbefore been defined,
reference shall be made to the definition (if any) of such term in:
(1) The Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
(2) The State Uniform Construction Code Act138 and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
(3) The Code of the Borough of Harrington Park, as amended from time
to time.
(4) The State of New Jersey Statutes Annotated, cumulative
supplement, and New Jersey statutes.
138. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. and Ch. 131, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 350-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-3
1:447
members of a building, such as exterior walls, bearing walls or partitions,
columns, beams or girders. Wherever the word "alter" or "alteration"
appears, it shall be deemed to be a structural alteration, as defined in this
definition.
APARTMENT — One or more dwelling rooms, with private bath and kitchen
facilities, comprising an independent self-contained dwelling unit in a larger
building.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
AREA, BUILDING — The maximum horizontal projected area of the building
and its accessories. Roofed-over porches or similar extensions of a building
shall be considered parts of the building. Any eave or similar projection in
excess of four inches shall be considered as part of the building for the
computation of side yards and land coverage.
AREA, LOT — The total area within the lot lines, excluding external streets.
AREA OF SIGN — The area within a line drawn around the surface of a sign,
including all decorations, but excluding any supports, whether decorative or
not, and in computing sign area, the area of all surfaces used or employed
or designed for use as a sign for sign purposes shall be included and
totaled.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
ATTIC — The open, nonhabitable space between the ceiling beams of the
top habitable story and the roof rafters in any building.[Added 4-18-2011
by Ord. No. 658]
AWNING — A retractable roof-like cover made of fabric over a frame, which
projects from the wall of a building, the purposes for which may include
the shielding of a doorway, window or sidewalk from the elements and the
display of signs.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
BASEMENT — An interior space or a portion of an interior space having
a floor level at least three feet below the average elevation of the finished
ground level at the foundation wall of the structure in which it is
contained.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
BEDROOM — That area reserved primarily for sleeping, wherein are
located beds/sleeping sofa apparatus, with a door, screen or partition
separating the sleeping area from other areas of the house.[Added
1-27-1997 by Ord. No. 492]
BLOCK — A lot or lots completely bounded by streets or by streets and
streams or Borough boundary lines.
BUILDABLE AREA — A rectangular area on a lot, located and having
dimensions as specified by the zone district regulations, and encompassing
as much as possible of the principal building and above-grade structures
attached to the principal building. In the case of a substandard lot having a
rectangular area with dimensions less than required, the usable area shall
be construed to be the largest rectangular area having dimensions less
than or equal to the required dimensions and encompassing as much as
possible of the principal building and above-grade structures attached to
the principal building.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
§ 350-3 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-3
1:448
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.[Added
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building subordinate to the principal building
on a lot, the use of which is customarily incidental to the use of the
principal building. "Accessory building" shall not include any structure
lacking a permanent foundation [except as set forth in "structure, accessory
(residential districts)"], including but not limited to shipping containers,
trailers or offices, truck bodies (with or without wheels or carriages) or
other constructions used for temporary or permanent storage or
habitation.[Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 400; 6-23-2004 by Ord.
No. 566]
BUILDING ENVELOPE — That portion of a lot within which a principal
building is permitted to be located by law. The building envelope excludes
the minimum front, side and rear yards required by the zoning regulations
as well as wetlands, approved wetland transition areas, floodways, utility
easements, access easements, conservation easements and all other areas
within which buildings are prohibited.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance between the average elevation
of the natural grade of the lot adjacent to the perimeter of the foundation of
the building and the elevation of the highest point of a building. The average
elevation of a lot shall be determined by averaging the natural grade
adjacent to the perimeter of the building at points 10 feet apart starting
at the lowest elevation. Natural grade shall be the grade as determined
prior to movement of any soil or the demolition of any existing structures.
Chimneys, antennas and similar appurtenances shall not be considered the
highest point of a building unless they extend greater than four feet above
the highest point of a building, in which event they shall be considered
the highest point of a building.[Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 403;
5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 602]
CANOPY — A nonretractable roof-like cover made of rigid building
materials and which projects from the wall of a building, the purpose of
which may include the shielding of a doorway, window or sidewalk from
the elements. In the case of a gasoline service station, "canopy" is a rooflike
cover that is supported by one or more columns or stanchions, does
not have any side walls and is used primarily to shield the pumps from the
elements.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
CERTIFICATE OF CONTINUED OCCUPANCY — A certificate stating that
the continued occupancy of an existing building or structure may
occur.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate stating that all work has
been completed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and
the Uniform Construction Code and that the building or structure may be
occupied or used.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
§ 350-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-3
1:449
CHANGE OF USE — Any use which substantially differs from the previous
use of a building or land. A change of use does not necessarily involve
modifications to existing improvements or construction of new
improvements.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
CHANNEL — The bed and banks of a watercourse which convey the normal
flow of the stream.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
CHILD-CARE CENTER — Any facility which is maintained for the care,
development or supervision of six or more children who attend the facility
for fewer than 24 hours a day and which is licensed as a child-care center by
the Department of Human Services. This term shall not include any of those
facilities or uses which are not included within the definition of "child-care
center" contained in the Child Care Center Licensing Act (N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1
to 30:5B-15).[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
COMMUNITY RESIDENCES AND SHELTERS — Any of the
following:[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
A community residence for persons with head injuries, which is a
community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448
(N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.), providing food, shelter and personal
guidance, under such supervision as required, to not more than 15
persons with head injuries, who require assistance, temporarily or
permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include, but
not be limited to, group homes, halfway houses, supervised apartment
living arrangements and hostels.
A.
A community residence for the developmentally disabled, which is any
community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448
(N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.), providing food, shelter and personal
guidance, under such supervision as required, to not more than 15
developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons, who require
assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the
community, and shall include, but not be limited to, group homes,
halfway houses, intermediate care facilities, supervised apartment
living arrangements and hostels.
B.
A community residence for the terminally ill, which is any community
residential facility operated as a hospice program, providing food,
shelter, personal guidance and health care services, under such
supervision as required, to no more than 15 terminally ill persons.
C.
A community shelter for victims of domestic violence, which is any
shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified
pursuant to standards and procedures established by regulation of
the Department of Human Services, providing food, shelter, medical
care, legal assistance, personal guidance and other services to not
more than 15 persons who have been victims of domestic violence,
including any children of such victims, who temporarily require shelter
and assistance in order to protect their physical or psychological
welfare.
D.
§ 350-3 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-3
1:450
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with the
conditions and standards for location or operation of such use as contained
in this chapter and upon the issuance of an authorization therefor by the
Planning Board.[Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 401]
COVERAGE BY ABOVE-GRADE STRUCTURES — The combined area of
all buildings and other above-grade structures on a lot, including but not
limited to porches, decks, balconies and cantilevered parts of the building
at any level, but excluding, however, cornices, eaves and other structures
which are specifically excluded by this chapter.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 658]
COVERAGE BY IMPROVEMENTS or IMPROVEMENTS COVERAGE — The
coverage by buildings and other above-grade structures on a lot as defined
by this chapter, plus the coverage of any other structures, including but
not limited to driveways, sidewalks, patios, decks, swimming pools, tennis
courts, parking areas and other paved areas, whether constructed of
asphalt, concrete, brick, stone, gravel or other paving materials, but
excluding structures, or portions of structures, that are located below the
surface of the ground and which are not visible from above the surface of
the ground. (Thus, subsurface structures such as dry wells, underground
tanks, etc., are typically excluded from such coverage, whereas swimming
pools, which may be located below the surface of the ground, but which
are visible from above the surface of the ground, are not excluded.) This
definition is intended to include all man-made features except vegetation,
organic mulch, soil (including soil retained by retaining walls) and
structures that may be specifically excluded by this chapter.[Added
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
DAYS — Calendar days.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land
to be developed.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
DISTRICT — See "zoning district" below.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be
used for living or sleeping quarters by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or groups of rooms located within a building
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or are
intended to be used by one family for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EASEMENT — An encumbrance or grant of an estate in lands, distinct from
ownership, to use in some way the land of another.[Added 4-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 658]
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall
include the painting of wall signs.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living privately together as a single
housekeeping unit and using certain rooms and cooking facilities in
§ 350-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-3
1:451
common, but not including the residents of a boardinghouse or dormitory
serving more than five paying guests.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — The private residence of a family day-care
provider which is registered as a family day-care home pursuant to the
Family Day Care Provider Registration Act, P.L. 1987, c. 27 (N.J.S.A.
30:5B-16 et seq.), and in which child-care services are regularly provided to
no fewer than three and no more than five children for no less than 15 hours
per week, not including children legally related to the provider or being
cared for as part of a cooperative agreement between parents for the care
of their children where no payment for the care is being provided.[Added
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — Any establishment whose principal business
is the sale of foods, frozen desserts or beverages to the customer in a readyto-
consume state for consumption either within the restaurant building
or for carry-out with consumption off the premises and whose principal
method of operation includes the following characteristic: foods, frozen
desserts or beverages are usually served in edible containers or in paper,
plastic or other disposable containers.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
FENCE — An artificially constructed freestanding barrier, typically
constructed of wood, wire, metal, vinyl or other materials and typically
erected for the enclosure and/or screening of areas of land.[Added
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
FILLING STATION — Buildings or premises or a portion thereof arranged,
intended or designed to be used for the sale of gasoline or other motor fuel.
FLOOR AREA OF A BUILDING — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of
the several floors of a building, excluding garages, cellar, basement floor
areas not devoted to residential use, breezeways, porches and terraces. All
dimensions should be measured between exterior faces of walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — In the case of residential uses in residential zones,
the habitable floor area of the building(s) divided by the total area of the
site, expressed as a percentage. In the case of any use in the nonresidential
zones or nonresidential use in the residential zones, the gross floor area
of all buildings which are enclosed by an exterior wall divided by the total
area of the site, expressed as a percentage.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
FREESTANDING WALL — An artificially constructed freestanding barrier,
typically of heavier-duty construction than a fence, typically constructed of
wood, stone, brick, concrete or other masonry materials, often containing
a footing and/or foundation, and typically erected for the enclosure and/or
screening of areas of land.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed space for the storage of one or more
motor vehicles.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any garage which is not a private garage and which
is used for storage, repair, or servicing of motor vehicles, but not including
§ 350-3 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-3
1:452
detailing or washing of motor vehicles, or supplying of gasoline or oil to
motor vehicles.[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
GARDEN APARTMENT — A building situated on one lot which contains
separate dwelling units for more than two families, and which contains
no more than two stories, and in which individual dwelling units may be
located above one another. Garden apartments may also provide access to
dwelling units from a common entrance and utilize shared parking, utilities
and open space.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — See "garage, public."[Added 4-18-2011
by Ord. No. 658]
GRADE — A reference plane representing the average of finished ground
level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. When the finished ground
level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be
established by the lowest points within the area between the building and
the lot line or, when the lot line is more than six feet (1,829 millimeters)
from the building, between the building and a point six feet (1,829
millimeters) from the building.[Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 403]
GROSS BUILDING AREA — The sum of the horizontal area or areas of
each story or half story of all principal and accessory buildings on a site,
measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls of such buildings.
"Gross building area" shall not include basements, areas not enclosed by
walls, screening, windows, etc., and areas having a vertical dimension of
less than seven feet between the floor (or if there is no floor, then the joists)
and the bottom of the roof structure. "Gross building area" shall include but
not necessarily be limited to the following:[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
A. The horizontal area of habitable and nonhabitable floor area.
B. The horizontal area of interior and exterior walls.
The horizontal area of the portion of attics or other similar areas below
the roof having a vertical dimension of at least seven feet between the
floor (or if there is no floor, then the joists) and the bottom of the roof
structure.
C.
The horizontal area of all stairs and stairwells on each floor. The gross
building area shall be calculated as the area of stairs and stairwells
times the number of stories through which the stairs and stairwells
project.
D.
The horizontal area of spaces that project through two or more stories.
The gross building area shall be calculated as the area of the space
times the number of stories through which the space projects.
E.
The horizontal area of enclosed porches, decks and similar features
enclosed by screening, windows or similar enclosures.
F.
The horizontal area of attached garages, storage rooms and similar
areas.
G.
§ 350-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-3
1:453
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The aggregate area of all floors in a building
enclosed by an exterior wall and measured from the exterior face of exterior
walls or from the center line of walls separating two buildings, excluding
any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet, and
excluding basements and cellars, attics, garages and other interior parking
and loading space used by motor vehicles. Notwithstanding the above, if
any part of the area of an attic, basement or cellar in a building or any part
of a garage shall be devoted to a principal use, including but not limited to a
dwelling unit, display space, sales space, work areas, food preparation and
service areas, offices, meeting rooms, drafting rooms or facilities, waiting
rooms, laboratories or patient treatment or therapy facilities, such part or
area shall be included in the computation of gross floor area. This shall not
be construed to include within the calculation of gross floor area the use of
such areas for storage and similar support functions.[Added 4-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 658]
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — The area of that portion of a building or
structure designed, intended and furnished for year-round human
occupancy measured on each floor from the inside face of exterior walls or
from the center line of walls separating two buildings, and including but
not limited to interior walls and stairwells. "Habitable floor area" shall not
include attic spaces, basements or cellars, open porches, breezeways and
garages.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation which:[Amended 5-16-1988 by
Ord. No. 402]
INSTITUTIONAL USE — A nonprofit or quasi-public use operated by
nonprofit institutions and limited to churches, public or private schools
covering grades kindergarten through 12 accredited by the State
Department of Education, and public utility buildings and structures.
Specifically excluded from this definition are hospitals and any land,
structure or use owned or operated by the Borough of Harrington
Park.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
LINE, BUILDING — A setback line as required by this chapter or as shown
on maps approved by the Borough Council or Planning Board and filed in
the County Clerk's office.
LINE, STREET — The boundary of a lot which is along an existing or
dedicated public street.
A. Is customarily carried on in a dwelling unit.
Is carried on by one or more members of the family residing in the
dwelling unit and constitutes, either entirely or partly, the means of
livelihood of such member or members.
B.
Is clearly incidental and secondary to the primary use of the dwelling
unit for residential purposes.
C.
Complies with all of the provisions of the conditional use ordinance as
referenced in Article IV, § 350-9A, of this chapter.
D.
§ 350-3 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-3
1:454
LOT — A parcel of land, the location, dimensions and boundaries of which
are determined by the latest official record on the Borough Assessment
Map, and occupied or intended to be occupied by one building or one unit
group of buildings and its accessory buildings and uses, and including such
open spaces as are required by this chapter.
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land at the junction of and fronting on two or
more intersecting streets.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of lot area which is improved with
principal and accessory buildings, structures and uses, including but not
limited to tennis courts, garages, swimming pools, decks and other related
building appurtenances.[Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 402]
LOT DEPTH — The distance between the front and rear lot lines measured
perpendicularly to the front building line along the axis of the lot.
LOT FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot which is contiguous with a street
right-of-way. In the case of a through lot, the lot frontage shall be considered
that frontage upon which the majority of the buildings in the same block
front, provided that in case there has been no clearly defined frontage
established, the owner may, when applying for a building permit, specify on
his permit application which lot line shall be considered the lot frontage. A
corner lot shall be deemed to have frontage on any abutting street.[Added
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot fronting on one street only.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way.
On corner lots, all lot lines separating a lot from a street right-of-way are
front lot lines.[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front
lot line. On corner lots, the rear lot line shall be that line opposite and most
distant from the shortest front lot line.[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. On corner
lots, the side lot line shall be that lot line which is opposite and most distant
from the longest front lot line.[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
LOT, THROUGH — A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lines of the lot measured at
the setback line.
MARQUEE — A permanent roof-like cover made of rigid building materials
constructed as an integral part of the building and which extends from the
building over an entrance or sidewalk, the purposes of which may include
the shielding of a doorway, window or sidewalk from the elements and the
display of signs or other messages.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
MOBILE HOME — A dwelling unit, factory-built and factory-assembled,
designed for conveyance after fabrication on streets and highways on its
own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers and arriving at the site where
§ 350-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-3
1:455
it is to be occupied as a dwelling unit complete and ready for occupancy,
except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, such
as locating on jacks or other foundation or connection to utilities. A
prefabricated home or structure shall not be included in this definition.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motorized means of conveyance of persons or
property, including but not limited to those vehicles covered by N.J.S.A.
39:1-1 et seq.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
MULTIUNIT DWELLING — Any dwelling containing three or more dwelling
units.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning
regulations but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of the zoning regulations but which fails to conform to the requirements of
the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision
or amendment.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
NONCONFORMING USE — A structure or land lawfully occupied by a
use that does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is
situated.
OCCUPANCY or OCCUPIED — The residing of a person or persons in a
dwelling unit overnight or the installation, storage or use of equipment,
merchandise or machinery in any commercial, residential, public or
industrial building. Excluded from the definition is the use of any
construction equipment or machinery not considered part of the building
or the storage of product, merchandise, raw material or other personal
property or the use of a structure by those engaged in its
construction.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any eating establishment where food and other
refreshments are served or consumed outside the interior of the eating
establishment on private property or upon the public right-of-way, namely,
the sidewalks immediately in front of any restaurant, cafe, cafeteria or place
of business where food and/or other refreshments are served or consumed
or where permitted on private property pursuant to this chapter.[Added
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
§ 350-3 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-3
1:456
PARKING AREA — An open area, other than a street or other public way,
used for the parking of motor vehicles, including parking spaces and
adjacent service aisles, but not including access drives from a public
thoroughfare.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
PREMISES — A building or structure or a piece or tract of land or real
estate, vacant or otherwise.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the site on which it is located.[Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 398;
amended 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 566]
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominant use of any lot. A principal
structure is one devoted to the principal use.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 658]
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a recognized profession, such as
that of a physician, certified public accountant, osteopath, dentist, surgeon,
architect, professional licensed engineer, optometrist, podiatrist,
chiropractor, attorney and other professions requiring similar amounts of
education or training.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES — Telephone and electric lines, poles,
equipment and structures, water or gas pipes, mains, valves or structures
or sewer pipes, valves or structures maintained, operated and conducted
for the service, convenience, necessity, health and welfare of the general
public, whether owned by any arm or creature of the local, state or federal
government or by any privately owned public utility corporation.[Added
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system comprising structures which,
operating alone or with other structures, results in the enclosure,
derivation, conveyance, transmission or distribution of water for potable
or domestic purposes to consumers in 20 or more dwellings or
properties.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
SATELLITE ANTENNA — Any apparatus which is designed for the purpose
of receiving television, radio, microwave, satellite or similar signals, with
the exception of conventional television antennas. No satellite antenna
apparatus which is designed for sending signals is allowed in any residential
district.[Added 12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 349]
SENIOR CITIZEN — A person 55 years or older.
SENIOR CITIZEN DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit which shall be
occupied by a family, all of the members of which are senior citizens, except
that if the household consists of married persons, then one spouse must be a
senior citizen. In no event may any person residing in senior citizen housing
be less than 18 years of age, except that an offspring of a senior citizen
who is born after said senior citizen has become a resident of the senior
citizen dwelling unit may reside with his or her parents in the senior citizen
dwelling unit.
SETBACK — See "line, building."
§ 350-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-3
1:457
SIGN — Any inscription written, printed, painted or otherwise placed or
attached on a board, plate, wall, window, banner upon any material object,
or any device whatsoever, which, by reason of its form, color, wording,
activity, design, or otherwise, attracts attention to itself as a means of
identification, advertisement, or announcement. As used herein, the term
shall apply only to signs which are outdoors or are visible from
outdoors.[Amended 7-31-1989 by Ord. No. 417; 7-20-1998 by Ord. No.
512]
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere
than on the premises where the sign is displayed. This definition includes
billboards.[Added 7-31-1989 by Ord. No. 417; amended 7-20-1998 by
Ord. No. 512]
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign intended to make known to the public the nature
of a business, commodity, service, or entertainment and/or the name of the
proprietor of the business conducted at the premises on which the sign
is located.[Added 7-31-1989 by Ord. No. 417; amended 7-20-1998 by
Ord. No. 512]
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION — A temporary sign erected by the builder,
architect, or developer and/or engineer on the construction site during the
course of building or developing operations.[Added 7-31-1989 by Ord.
No. 417; amended 7-20-1998 by Ord. No. 512]
STORAGE — The placement of any vehicle, boat, trailer, machine,
equipment or material upon the particular premises or property on a
regular or recurring basis.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it,
then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement
shall be considered to be a story where the finished surface of the floor
above the basement meets any one of the following:[Amended 2-19-2008
by Ord. No. 624139]
STORY, HALF — A space under a sloping roof that has the line of
intersection of the roof decking and wall face not more than three feet
above the top floor level and in which space the possible floor area with a
headroom of five feet or less occupies at least 40% of the total floor area of
the story directly beneath.[Added 2-19-2008 by Ord. No. 624]
A. Is more than six feet above grade plane.
Is more than six feet above the finished ground level for more than 50%
of the total building perimeter.
B.
C. Is more than 12 feet above the finished ground level at any point.
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 350-3 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-3
1:458
STREET — A road, avenue, street, lane or other way set aside for common
street purposes.
STREET GRADE — The officially established or existing grade of the street
in front of the midpoint of a lot.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.[Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 398]
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY (RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS) — A combination of
materials to form a construction for use or ornamentation, whether installed
on, above or below the surface of a parcel of land, including but not limited
to a private swimming pool, tennis court or heating, ventilating and airconditioning
equipment, the primary use of which is to service the dwelling
located on the subject premises. Sheds without permanent foundations and
not exceeding 100 square feet shall be permitted accessory structures in
all residential districts but such structures must be located in the rear of
the yard and must comply with all minimum side and rear yard dimensions
applicable to the zone in which located.[Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No.
400; amended 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 566]
STRUCTURE, INCIDENTAL — Structures of an insignificant nature, not
intended for occupancy and not constituting a separate use, normally
incidental to uses on a site, including sidewalks, driveways, mailboxes,
light posts, signs, walls, fences, flower boxes or planters, ornamental
decorations, and utility services. In residential zones, such structures may
also include swing sets, swimming pools and basketball backboards. Such
structures shall be subject to any specific provisions of this chapter
intended to regulate them. Unless otherwise regulated by provisions of this
chapter, such structures may be placed in any required yard area.[Added
6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 566]
STRUCTURE, PROHIBITED — Any structure other than incidental
structures and accessory structures (residential districts) lacking a
permanent foundation, located upon any lot and used for storage of any kind
or duration or for human habitation. Prohibited structures include, but are
not limited to, shipping containers, trailers, construction trailers or offices,
storage boxes or units, except as authorized by § 248-9 of this Code, and
truck bodies, with or without wheels, unless part of an operational motor
vehicle lawfully on site and which is located on the site for an intermittent
basis and not for the purpose of storage. During a period of construction
on site a container, the sole purpose of which is collection of debris for
removal from the site, shall be permitted as long as a valid construction
or demolition permit is in effect.[Added 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 566;
amended 11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 719]
USE, ACCESSORY — A use incidental to the principal use of a building. In
buildings restricted to residence use, professional offices, home occupations
and workshops not conducted for compensation shall be deemed accessory
uses.
§ 350-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-3
1:459
USE, MUNICIPAL — A use which is for or pertains to the advancement of
municipal purposes in which the Borough is either the owner of this subject
property or the applicant for the use.[Added 10-19-1998 by Ord. No.
513]
USE, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming use."
WINDOW — Any opening in the exterior wall or roof of any structure for the
purpose of admitting air or light, whether or not covered with glass, plastic
or other coverings.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
YARD, FRONT — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a main
building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the front
lot line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the
lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the nearest part
of the building and the front lot line.
YARD, REAR — An open, unoccupied space (except for permitted accessory
buildings) on the same lot with a main building, extending the full width of
the lot and situated between the rear lot line and the nearest part of the
building projected to the side lines of the lot.
YARD, SIDE — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a main
building, situated between the side line of the lot and the parts of a building
nearest thereto and extending through from the front to the rear yard.
ZONING DISTRICT — An area delineated by this chapter within which
uniform regulations and requirements govern the use, placement, spacing
and size of land and buildings.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the administrative officer which
is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the commencement of
a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion,
or installation of a structure or building and which acknowledges that such
use, structure, or building complies with the provisions of this chapter or
variance therefrom, duly authorized by a municipal agency pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 and 40:55D-70.[Added 3-19-2007 by Ord. No. 611]
§ 350-3 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-3
1:460
ARTICLE II
Zoning Districts; Zoning Map
§ 350-4. Designation of districts; Zoning Map.
§ 350-5. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
aforesaid districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall
apply:
A. For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the community, the Borough of Harrington Park is
hereby divided into the following types of districts: [Amended
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658; 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 705; 6-17-2019
by Ord. No. 735]
R-1 Residential
R-2 Residential
R-3 Residential
S-1 Senior Citizen Dwelling Unit
B-1 Business
B-2 Business
I-1 Industry
OALSR Office/Assisted Living/Senior Residential Community
Multifamily Residential Overlay
AHO Affordable Housing Overlay
B. Said districts are bounded and defined as shown on a map entitled
"Zoning Map of Borough of Harrington Park, Bergen County, New
Jersey, December 1978," which map is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter.140
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
center lines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way
lines, such center lines, street lines or highway right-of-way lines shall
be construed to be such boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said
boundaries.
C. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to the center line or street lines of streets or the center lines or
right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be
construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as
140. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 350-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-5
1:461
indicated on the Zoning Map. If no distance is given, such dimension
shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said Zoning Map.
D. Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such boundary
shall be deemed to be located midway between the main tracks of said
railroad line.
E. Where the boundary of a district follows a stream, lake or other body of
water along the boundary of the Borough, said boundary line shall be
deemed to be at the limit of the jurisdiction of the Borough of
Harrington Park, unless otherwise indicated.
§ 350-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-5
1:462
ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 350-6. Compliance required; general restrictions.
Except as hereinafter provided:
§ 350-7. Improved lot coverage. [Added 5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 545]
A. No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building
or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless in conformity
with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is
located.
B. No building shall hereafter be erected or altered to exceed the height,
to accommodate or house a greater number of families, to occupy a
greater percentage of lot area or to have narrower or smaller rear
yards, front yards, side yards or inner or outer courts than specified
herein for the district in which such building is located.
C. No part of a yard or other open space required about any building for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for
another building.
A. Legislative statement. The purpose of this section is to establish the
limits of development of all lots within all of the zones within the
Borough. This section is intended to replace and supersede all previous
zoning reference to "impervious coverage" as otherwise previously
defined in the Borough Code. The purposes of improved lot coverage
are:
(1) To manage surface stormwater runoff, so that the quantity and/or
rate of runoff (discharge) from each individual lot does not increase
to the extent that it might adversely affect neighboring properties;
(2) To protect and improve the quality of surface stormwater runoff, so
that the water quality of receiving waters is not impaired;
(3) To improve the visual quality of our residential and nonresidential
neighborhoods by reducing the aerial extent of improvements on
lots and by increasing the expanse of vegetated areas;
(4) To improve the visual quality of our residential and nonresidential
neighborhoods by reducing the bulk of structures on individual
lots; and
(5) To maximize the flow of air and access to sunlight between
buildings by reducing the bulk of man-made improvements on
individual lots.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
§ 350-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-7
1:463
§ 350-8. Change in use. [Added 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 567]
IMPROVEMENT — Any constructed or man-made object or structure
or any structure made from natural materials but used for a purpose
otherwise provided by man-made objects (e.g., stone driveways).
Typically, this would exclude only landscaped areas.
C. In order to achieve these purposes, the maximum quantity of
improvements on residential and nonresidential lots has been
established as a percentage of the total area of the lot as follows:
(1) R-1 Zone: 45%.
(2) R-2 Zone: 42%.
(3) R-3 Zone: 35%.
(4) B-1 Zone: 80%.
(5) B-2 Zone: 80%.
(6) S-1 Zone: 45%.
(7) I-1 Zone: 80%.
(8) OALSR Zone: 40%. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 705]
A. Any change in use, ownership or occupancy of an existing
nonresidential structure or use shall require approval.
B. Upon change of use, the Construction Code Official shall determine
whether the use is of a nature, extent and intensity so similar to the
previous use that a use permit shall not be required. The Construction
Code Official may either issue a continuing certificate of occupancy or
refer the matter to the Planning Board. In either event, the applicant for
a certificate of occupancy shall pay the fee established for use permits.
C. The applicant shall be required to submit a change of use application
and an accompanying sketch plat indicating the location and layout of
all existing structures, lot configuration, general parking and loading
areas, lighting, drainage, landscaping and other general site factors. In
lieu of such sketch plat, the applicant may refer to prior site plans for
the premises filed with the approving authority, with appropriate
notations indicating any changes made on the premises since the
earlier site plan approval.
D. If the Construction Code Official determines that the change of the
nature of the use, extent or intensity of activity does not require
additional improvements, the Construction Code Official shall approve
the application or conditionally approve the application.
E. If the Construction Code Official determines that certain improvements
are required or the nature, extent of use or intensity should be
reviewed, he shall deny the application and require submission to the
§ 350-7 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-8
1:464
Planning Board of the use permit and partial or complete site plan
application as provided by this chapter.
§ 350-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-8
1:465

ARTICLE IV
Residential Districts
§ 350-9. R-1 Districts.
The following regulations shall apply to R-1 Districts:
A. Uses permitted, prohibited and/or conditional. The following uses are
permitted, prohibited and/or conditional in R-1 Districts: [Amended
12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 349; 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 398;
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 401]
(1) Uses permitted:
(a) One-family dwellings.
(b) Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses and
convents.
(c) Elementary and secondary day schools accredited by the State
Department of Education and public institutions for higher
education.
(d) Public parks and playgrounds and other municipal recreation
uses.
(e) Public libraries, museums and municipal facilities.141
(f) Customary accessory uses and buildings, provided that such
uses are incidental to the principal use. Any accessory building
shall be located on the same lot with the principal building.
(g) Public utility distribution lines and mains necessary for the
service of the area.
(h) Reservoir on water supply reservation.
(i) One sign advertising the sale or rent of the land or buildings
upon which it is located. Such sign shall not exceed six square
feet in area and shall be distant from the street lines not less
than 10 feet.
(2) Uses prohibited: [Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 402]
(a) No required front or side yard shall be used for the overnight
parking or storage of any boats, house trailers, mobile homes,
recreation vehicles or unregistered, uninspected or dismantled
motor vehicles.
(b) The leasing or renting of private garage space for motor
vehicles to a nonresident of the premises shall be limited to one
141. Editor's Note: Original Subsection A(1)(f) and (g), regarding home occupations and
professional offices, which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 4-18-2011
by Ord. No. 658. See now Subsection A(3)(b).
§ 350-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-9
1:467
motor vehicle. In the event that the owner or lessee of the
premises does not own or lease any motor vehicle for his or her
family's personal use, said owner or lessee may lease or rent
two spaces for storage of motor vehicles to a nonresident of
said premises.
(c) Not more than one principal building shall be permitted on any
lot described in this section.
(d) All uses and structures not specifically permitted are
prohibited. [Added 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 566]
(3) Permitted conditional uses:
(a) A satellite antenna which complies with the following
requirements:
[1] The surface area of any reflective dish shall not exceed
seven square feet.
[2] The dish shall be erected on a secure ground-mounted
foundation.
[3] The overall height from the mean ground level to the
highest point of the antenna or any attachment thereto
when extended to its full height shall be no more than five
feet.
[4] The antenna shall be located in the rear yard of a singlefamily
dwelling and shall not violate the yard and setback
requirements for the main building.
[5] The antenna shall be located and screened to minimize
motor noise and visibility from the street and adjacent
properties. The ability of the applicant to install the dish in
an unobtrusive location and to minimize the noise impact
on adjacent properties shall be a major factor in
determining whether or not the conditional use is
approved.
[6] The antenna shall be designed for use by residents of the
main building only.
[7] There shall be only one antenna per building lot.
(b) Home occupations and professional offices.
[1] Home occupations, subject to the following restrictions:
[a] The occupation shall be one that is customarily carried
on in a dwelling unit.
[b] The occupation shall be carried on by a member of the
family residing in the dwelling unit.
§ 350-9 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-9
1:468
[c] The occupation must be clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for
residential purposes.
[d] The occupational profession shall be carried on wholly
within the principal building or within a building or
other structure accessory thereto.
[e] Not more than two persons outside the family shall be
employed full time or part time in the home
occupation.
[f] There shall be no exterior display, no exterior sign and
no exterior storage materials or other exterior
indication of the home occupation or variation from
the residential character of the principal building or
accessory structure other than a small announcement
or sign not exceeding one square foot in area.
[g] Only one occupation shall be permitted in any one
residence.
[h] The actual area utilized for the home occupation shall
not exceed 15% of the total living area of the dwelling
unit, but in no event more than 450 square feet, no
matter in what type of structure the activity is being
conducted.
[i] No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dirt, odor, light,
heat or glare shall be produced.
[2] Professional offices, subject to the restrictions applicable
to home occupations as set forth in Subsection A(3)(b)[1]
of this section, provided that the professional resides in
the dwelling unit and that the use of the dwelling unit for a
professional office is clearly incidental and secondary to
the primary use of the dwelling as a unit for residential
purposes.
[3] Parking restrictions. There shall be one parking space for
each 200 square feet of floor area which is utilized for a
home occupation or professional use as hereinabove
defined. Parking shall be permitted in the side and rear
yards, provided that said parking area is not closer than 10
feet to any adjoining property line. Any such parking area
shall be shielded by shrubbery which will act as a buffer
between the parking area and the adjoining property line.
B. Building height limit: not less than 15 feet and not more than 35 feet
nor more than 2 1/2 stories. [Amended 2-19-2008 by Ord. No. 624;
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
§ 350-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-9
1:469
§ 350-10. R-2 Districts.
The following regulations shall apply in R-2 Districts:
C. Required lot area: not less than 10,000 square feet, a lot width of not
less than 75 feet, a frontage of not less than 80% of the lot width and a
depth of not less than 100 feet, provided that any owner of any parcel of
land existing as a separate lot as of March 19, 1962, and shown on the
then-current Official Assessment Map of the Borough of Harrington
Park or a subdivision map then on file in the Bergen County Clerk's
office and having a lot width of 72 feet or more and an area of 7,500
square feet or more may be issued a building permit upon compliance
with all other conditions of this chapter.
D. Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings, including accessory buildings,
shall not cover more than 25% of the area of the lot. [Amended
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 402]
E. Yards required. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards not less
than the depths or widths following:
(1) Front yard depth: 35 feet, except that where adjoining houses have
front yards of lesser depth, this requirement may be reduced, but in
no case to less than 25 feet.
(2) Side yard width: 15 feet. [Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 402]
(3) Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
F. 142There shall be a minimum of 2,500 square feet of lot area for each
bedroom provided in a dwelling. [Added 1-27-1997 by Ord. No. 492]
A. Uses permitted and/or prohibited. The following uses are permitted
and/or prohibited in R-2 Districts: [Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No.
401; 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 402]
(1) Uses permitted:
(a) One-family dwellings.
(b) Customary accessory uses and buildings, provided that such
uses are incidental to the principal use. Any accessory building
shall be located on the same lot with the principal building.
(c) Public utility distribution lines and mains necessary for the
service of the area.
(d) Reservoir on water supply reservation.
(e) One sign advertising the sale or rent of the land or buildings
upon which it is located. Such sign shall not exceed six square
142. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Supplementary regulations, was repealed 5-6-1988 by
Ord. No. 401.
§ 350-9 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-10
1:470
§ 350-11. R-3 Districts.
The following regulations shall apply in R-3 Districts:
feet in area and shall be distant from the street lines not less
than 10 feet.
(2) Uses prohibited:
(a) All uses prohibited in the R-1 District.
(b) All uses and structures not specifically permitted are
prohibited. [Added 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 566]
B. Building height limit: not less than 15 feet and not more than 35 feet or
2 1/2 stories. [Amended 2-19-2008 by Ord. No. 624]
C. Required lot area: not less than 12,000 square feet, a lot width of not
less than 100 feet, a frontage of not less than 80% of the lot width and a
depth of not less than 100 feet.
D. Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings, including accessory buildings,
shall not cover more than 25% of the area of the lot.
E. Yards required. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards not less
than the depths or width following:
(1) Front yard depth: 35 feet.
(2) Side yard width: 15 feet on each side. [Amended 5-16-1988 by
Ord. No. 402]
(3) Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
F. Supplementary regulations. See Article X.
G. There shall be a minimum of 2,500 square feet of lot area for each
bedroom provided in a dwelling. [Added 1-27-1997 by Ord. No. 492]
A. Uses permitted and/or prohibited. The following uses are permitted
and/or prohibited in R-3 Districts: [Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No.
401; 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 402]
(1) Uses permitted:
(a) One-family dwellings.
(b) Customary accessory uses and buildings, provided that such
uses are incidental to the principal use. Any accessory building
shall be located on the same lot with the principal building.
(c) Public utility distribution lines and mains necessary for the
service of the area.
(d) Reservoir on water supply reservation.
§ 350-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-11
1:471
§ 350-12. S-1 Districts.
The following regulations shall apply to S-1 Districts:
(e) One sign advertising the sale or rent of the land or buildings
upon which it is located. Such sign shall not exceed six square
feet in area and shall be distant from the street lines not less
than 10 feet.
(2) Uses prohibited:
(a) All uses prohibited in the R-1 District.
(b) All uses and structures not specifically permitted are
prohibited. [Added 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 566]
B. Building height: not less than 15 feet and not more than 35 feet or 2 1/2
stories. [Amended 2-19-2008 by Ord. No. 624]
C. Required lot area: not less than 18,000 square feet, a lot width of not
less than 125 feet, a frontage of not less than 80% of the lot width and a
minimum depth of 100 feet.
D. Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings, including accessory buildings,
shall not cover more than 25% of the area of the lot.
E. Yards required. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards not less
than the depths or width following:
(1) Front yard depth: 35 feet.
(2) Side yard width: 15 feet.
(3) Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
F. Supplementary regulations. See Article X.
G. There shall be a minimum of 2,500 square feet of lot area for each
bedroom provided in a dwelling. [Added 1-27-1997 by Ord. No. 492]
A. Uses shall be limited to senior citizen dwelling units. [Amended
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 404]
B. Building height limit: not less than 15 feet and not more than 35 feet.
C. Required lot area: not less than one acre. The total number of dwelling
units shall not exceed an average of 12 per acre.
D. Building area. No building shall have more than two floors. No dwelling
unit shall have more than two bedrooms. No single-bedroom dwelling
unit shall have less than 800 square feet, and no multiple-bedroom
dwelling unit shall have less than 800 square feet plus 180 square feet
for each additional bedroom. (This size requirement shall not apply to
§ 350-11 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-12
1:472
any Mt. Laurel or other affordable housing units.143) [Amended
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 404]
E. Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings, including accessory buildings,
shall not cover more than 25% of the area of the lot.
F. Yards required. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards not less
than the depths or width following:
(1) Front yard depth: 35 feet. All buildings shall have a front yard
facing on an approved and accepted public street, road or highway
(provided that, if a building faces two or more streets, the front
yard shall face on such approved and accepted public street, road
or highway as shall be designated by the Planning Board) and shall
be required to be landscaped in accordance with the following
regulations: All that area not used as drives or pedestrian walks
shall be devoted to the planting of grass, trees, shrubs, flowers or
other appropriate plant materials and shall be suitably landscaped.
No loading or unloading or parking of vehicles shall be permitted in
the front yard.
(2) Side yard width: 25 feet. Side yards shall be required between
buildings where more than one building is permitted on a single lot,
tract or parcel of land, which side yards shall be not less than the
average height of the two adjacent buildings.
(3) Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
G. Parking requirements in the Senior Citizen Dwelling Unit District:
[Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 404]
(1) Two parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
(2) See § 350-41C for additional parking requirements in the Senior
Citizen Dwelling Unit District. [Amended 11-20-2017 by Ord.
No. 719]
(3) (Reserved)144
(4) (Reserved)145
H. Supplementary regulations.
(1) Outdoor storage of materials or equipment shall be prohibited
unless such stored materials or equipment is shielded and prior
approval has been obtained from the fire prevention or other
appropriate Borough agency.
143. Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Affordable Housing.
144. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G(3), providing minimum off-street parking space
dimensions, was repealed 11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 71.
145. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G(4), Construction standards, was repealed 11-20-2017
by Ord. No. 71.
§ 350-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-12
1:473
§ 350-12.1. Affordable Housing Overlay Zone. [Added 6-17-2019 by
Ord. No. 735]
(2) Other supplementary regulations. See Article X.
A. Purpose. To permit the development of inclusionary multifamily
residential development in which a certain proportion of dwelling units
are set aside for occupancy by low- and moderate-income households.
B. Conflict in requirements. The requirements of the remaining provisions
of Chapter 350 apply to the Affordable Housing Overlay Zone (AHO)
except where those requirements conflict with this section. In the event
of such a conflict, the terms of this § 350-12.1 shall prevail.
C. The AHO Affordable Housing Overlay Zone is located on the following
specific sites within the Borough:
(1) Block 1204, Lots 4 and 5, presently zoned B-1;
(2) Block 1204, Lots 6, 9, 10 and 11, presently zoned B-1;
(3) Block 1205, Lot 1, presently zoned B-1;
(4) Block 1205, Lot 4, presently zoned I-1;
(5) Block 1206, Lot 1, presently zoned I-1;
(6) Block 1207, Lot 2, presently zoned I-1; and
(7) Block 1316, Lot 1-7, 9 and 11, presently zoned B-2.
D. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the AHO
Affordable Housing Overlay Zone, all of which must contain affordable
housing in accordance with this § 350-12.1:
(1) Apartments.
(2) Townhouses.
(3) Mixed-use, with retail on the first floor and apartments above.
E. Development standards. The bulk standards that are applicable within
the AHO Affordable Housing Overlay Zone shall be those of the
underlying zone in which they are located.
F. Parking. The following parking requirements are applicable to the AHO
Affordable Housing Overlay Zone:
(1) Parking space size and number requirements shall be in
compliance with the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards (RSIS).
(2) All parking shall be located 10 feet from any front property line and
five feet from any side or rear yard property line.
§ 350-12 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-12.1
1:474
(3) All perimeter open space surrounding a parking lot must be
densely landscaped with year-round screening materials, including
but not limited to evergreen shrubs.
G. Affordable housing requirements. All development in the AHO
Affordable Housing Overlay Zone shall provide for affordable housing in
accordance with the following requirements:
(1) All developments within the AHO Affordable Housing Overlay Zone
shall provide dwelling units which qualify for credit as low- and
moderate-income housing per the requirements of New Jersey's
Fair Housing Act and which meet the income, bedroom distribution
and other requirements of the Uniform Housing Affordability
Controls (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.), in the following minimum
percentages:
(a) Rental projects: 15% of the total units.
(b) For-sale projects: 20% of the total units.
(2) At least 13% of the affordable units shall be very-low-income units,
as mandated by the Fair Housing Act.
(3) The developer shall utilize the Borough's administrative agent or
Borough-approved equivalent. The developer shall be solely
responsible for the cost and expense of administering the low- and
moderate-units for the lifetime of the deed restriction. This shall
include the initial rental/sale of the unit and the ongoing
compliance.
H. Other requirements. Development in the AHO Affordable Housing
Overlay Zone shall also comply with the following requirements:
(1) Landscape buffer. A landscaped buffer shall be provided along the
site's perimeter. The buffer shall be planted with grass, deciduous
and evergreen trees, shrubs and all other landscape material and
treatments as required by the Planning Board and Environmental
Commission. No retaining walls shall be located within the buffer.
Site-identifying signage and driveways perpendicular to the buffer
may encroach into the buffer.
(2) Mechanical equipment. Any rooftop mechanical equipment,
inclusive of solar equipment, shall be concealed within the roof of
the building so it is not visible from all vantage points at-grade or
below the roof. Any ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall
be screened appropriately.
(3) Architectural design guidelines.
(a) Primary materials for buildings shall be brick, wood,
HardiePlank® panels or similar fiber cement siding, stone,
precast and cast stone and manufactured stone, and glass.
§ 350-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-12.1
1:475
(b) No more than three different primary materials shall be used
on each building facade. Within the primary materials,
variations in colors, texture and pattern may be employed to
further break up the mass or bulk of a building.
(c) The architectural treatment of the front facade shall be
continued in its major features around all visibly exposed sides
of a building.
(d) Fenestration shall be architecturally compatible with the style,
materials, colors and details of the building. Windows shall be
vertically proportioned.
(e) All entrances to a building shall be defined and articulated by
architectural elements such as lintels, pediments, pilasters,
columns, porticoes, porches, overhangs, railings, etc. Buildings
shall avoid long, monotonous, uninterrupted walls or roof
planes.
(f) Building wall offsets, including projections such as canopies
and recesses, may also be used in order to add architectural
interest and variety and to relieve the visual effect of a simple,
long wall.
(g) Similarly, in the case of a pitched roof, roofline offsets, dormers
or gables shall be provided in order to provide architectural
interest and variety to the massing of a building and to relieve
the effect of a single, long roof.
§ 350-12.1 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-12.1
1:476
ARTICLE V
Business Districts
§ 350-13. B-1 Districts. [Amended 12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 349;
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 398; 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 566; 4-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 658; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 695]
The following regulations shall apply in all B-1 Districts:
A. Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in B-1 Districts:
(1) All uses permitted in any residential district, subject to all the
provisions specified for such residential districts.
(2) Stores and shops for the conducting of any retail business.
(3) Personal service shops, such as barbershops or beauty parlors.
(4) Banks, theaters, offices, restaurants (excluding fast-food
establishments) and similar community service establishments.
(5) Affordable housing, including special needs housing, provided that
it is in conformance with the Borough's Fair Share Plan. This use is
permitted on any or all floors of the building and may be included in
a mixed-use building.
(6) Accessory buildings and accessory uses.
(7) Other uses, including mixed uses, which, in the opinion of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, are of the same general character as
those listed as permitted uses and which will not be detrimental to
the district in which they are located.
B. Uses conditionally permitted. The following uses are conditionally
permitted in B-1 Districts:
(1) A satellite antenna which complies with the following
requirements:
(a) The surface area of any reflective dish shall not exceed 12
square feet.
(b) The dish shall be erected on a secure ground-mounted
foundation.
(c) The overall height from the mean ground level to the highest
point of the antenna or any attachments thereto when
extended to their full height shall be no more than seven feet.
(d) The antenna shall be located in the rear yard and shall not
violate the yard and setback requirements for the main
building.
§ 350-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-13
1:477
(e) The antenna shall be located and screened to minimize motor
noise and visibility from the street and adjacent properties.
The ability of the applicant to install the dish in an unobtrusive
location and to minimize the noise impact on adjacent
properties shall be a major factor in determining whether or
not the conditional use is approved.
(f) The antenna shall be designed for use by occupants of the main
building only.
(g) There shall be only one antenna per building lot.
(h) One roof-mounted satellite antenna per building lot shall also
be conditionally permitted, provided that it is fully screened
from view by parapet walls or other similar devices.
C. Uses prohibited. The following uses are prohibited in B-1 Districts:
(1) Fast-food establishments.
(2) Public garages and filling stations.
(3) Establishments for the servicing of vehicles, including car washes,
oil change facilities, and similar establishments. Not prohibited
under this citation are retail establishments for sale of vehicle
parts.
(4) Outdoor storage of any materials.
(5) Industrial uses, including but not limited to any facility used for the
purpose of fabricating, manufacturing, converting, altering,
assembling, storing or warehousing of articles, except as incidental
to the particular retail trade to be conducted.
D. Building height limit: not less than 10 feet and not more than 35 feet.
E. Required lot area. The minimum lot area for business purposes shall be
5,000 square feet. Any building used for residence purposes shall have
a lot width and lot area at least equal to that required for a similar
dwelling in the least restricted residence district.
F. Percentage of lot coverage. Any building, including accessory buildings,
shall not cover more than 40% of the area of the lot. No building shall
be erected having less than 1,000 square feet of ground floor area.
G. Yards required. Each lot shall have front and rear yards not less than
the following depths:
(1) Front yard: 25 feet.
(2) Side yard: six feet.
(3) Rear yard: 15 feet.
§ 350-13 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-13
1:478
§ 350-14. B-2 Districts. [Amended 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 695]
The following regulations shall apply in all B-2 Districts:
H. Principal building limit. Not more than one principal building shall be
permitted on any lot described in this section.
I. All uses or structures not specifically permitted are prohibited.
A. Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in B-2 Districts:
(1) All uses permitted in any residential district, subject to all the
provisions specified for such residential districts.
(2) Stores and shops for the conducting of any retail business.
(3) Personal service shops, such as barbershops or beauty parlors.
(4) Banks, theaters, offices (excluding medical offices), restaurants
(excluding fast-food establishments) and similar community service
establishments.
(5) Affordable housing, including special needs housing, provided that
it is in conformance with the Borough's Fair Share Plan. This use is
permitted on upper floors of the building only and may be included
in a mixed-use building.
(6) Accessory buildings and accessory uses.
(7) Other uses, including mixed uses, which, in the opinion of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, are of the same general character as
those listed as permitted uses and which will not be detrimental to
the district in which they are located.
B. Uses conditionally permitted. The following uses are conditionally
permitted in B-2 Districts:
(1) A satellite antenna which complies with the following
requirements:
(a) The surface area of any reflective dish shall not exceed 12
square feet.
(b) The dish shall be erected on a secure ground-mounted
foundation.
(c) The overall height from the mean ground level to the highest
point of the antenna or any attachments thereto when
extended to their full height shall be no more than seven feet.
(d) The antenna shall be located in the rear yard and shall not
violate the yard and setback requirements for the main
building.
§ 350-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-14
1:479
(e) The antenna shall be located and screened to minimize motor
noise and visibility from the street and adjacent properties.
The ability of the applicant to install the dish in an unobtrusive
location and to minimize the noise impact on adjacent
properties shall be a major factor in determining whether or
not the conditional use is approved.
(f) The antenna shall be designed for use by occupants of the main
building only.
(g) There shall be only one antenna per building lot.
(h) One roof-mounted satellite antenna per building lot shall also
be conditionally permitted, provided that it is fully screened
from view by parapet walls or other similar devices.
C. Uses prohibited. The following uses are prohibited in B-2 Districts:
(1) Fast-food establishments.
(2) Public garages and filling stations.
(3) Establishments for the servicing of vehicles, including car washes,
oil change facilities, and similar establishments. Not prohibited
under this citation are retail establishments for sale of vehicle
parts.
(4) Outdoor storage of any materials.
(5) Industrial uses, including but not limited to any facility used for the
purpose of fabricating, manufacturing, converting, altering,
assembling, storing or warehousing of articles, except as incidental
to the particular retail trade to be conducted.
D. Building height limit: not less than 10 feet and not more than 35 feet.
E. Required lot area. The minimum lot area for business purposes shall be
5,000 square feet. Any building used for residence purposes shall have
a lot width and lot area at least equal to that required for a similar
dwelling in the least restricted residence district.
F. Percentage of lot coverage. Any building, including accessory buildings,
shall not cover more than 40% of the area of the lot. No building shall
be erected having less than 1,000 square feet of ground floor area.
G. Yards required. Each lot shall have front and rear yards not less than
the following depths:
(1) Front yard: 25 feet.
(2) Side yard: six feet.
(3) Rear yard: 15 feet.
§ 350-14 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-14
1:480
H. Principal building limit. Not more than one principal building shall be
permitted on any lot described in this section.
I. All uses or structures not specifically permitted are prohibited.
§ 350-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-14
1:481

ARTICLE VI
Industrial Districts
§ 350-15. I-1 Districts.
The following regulations shall apply in all I-1 Districts:
A. Uses permitted: any of the following, provided that they are not noxious
or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, gas, smoke or noise
or are not a menace or hazard to public welfare, health, safety or
morals:
(1) Office buildings.
(2) Cabinetmaking.
(3) Film processing.
(4) Manufacture of any of the following:
(a) Clocks and watches.
(b) Handcraft products.
(c) Hearing aids.
(d) Optical instruments.
(e) Precision instruments.
(f) Surgical dressings.
(5) Radio and television studios, but not transmitters.
(6) Scientific research laboratories not involving the dumping of waste
products.
(7) Other uses, including mixed uses, which, in the opinion of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, are of the same general character as
those listed as permitted uses and which will not be detrimental to
the district in which they are located.
(8) Any use permitted in the B-2 District, except residential uses,
subject to all the provisions specified for use in such district.
(9) Permitted conditional uses: [Added 12-17-1984 by Ord. No.
349]
(a) A satellite antenna which complies with the following
requirements:
[1] The surface of any reflective dish shall not exceed 12
square feet.
§ 350-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-15
1:483
[2] The dish shall be erected on a secure ground-mounted
foundation.
[3] The overall height from the mean ground level to the
highest point of the antenna or any attachments thereto
when extended to their full height shall be no more than
seven feet.
[4] The antenna shall be located in the rear yard and shall not
violate the yard and setback requirements of the main
building.
[5] The antenna shall be located and screened to minimize
motor noise and visibility from the street and adjacent
properties. The ability of the applicant to install the dish in
an unobtrusive location and to minimize the noise impact
on adjacent properties shall be a major factor in
determining whether or not the conditional use is
approved.
[6] The antenna shall be designed for use by residents of the
main building only.
[7] There shall be only one antenna per building lot.
B. All uses or structures not specifically permitted are prohibited.
[Amended 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 566]
C. Building height limit: not less than 10 feet and not more than 35 feet.
D. Percentage of lot coverage: 50%.
E. Yards required.
(1) Front yard: 25 feet.
(2) Side yards: 15 feet each.
(3) Rear yard: 25 feet.
F. Supplementary regulations. See Article X.
G. Principal building limit. Not more than one principal building shall be
permitted on any lot described in this section. [Added 5-16-1988 by
Ord. No. 398]
§ 350-15 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-15
1:484
ARTICLE VII
Office, Assisted Living and Senior Residential Districts
§ 350-16. Office/Assisted Living/Senior Residential Community
District (OALSR). [Amended 12-7-1984 by Ord. No. 349; 5-16-1988
by Ord. No. 398; 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 705]
A. Purpose and intent. For the purpose of guidance for applicants and land
use reviewers only, it is the intent of this building zone for all land uses
to fulfill the following objectives:
(1) To maintain the highest standards for environmental quality;
(2) To be compatible with their surroundings; and
(3) To provide for and/or contribute to their fair share of affordable
housing in accordance with a formula devised by the Borough. This
formula may emanate from a jurisdictional NJ State agency, the
courts, or a local ordinance that was prepared pursuant to state
guidance and/or direction.
B. Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the OALSR
District:
(1) Housing for special use groups. Each of these housing types is
permitted only where in conjunction with a blend of other of these
housing types in this group, and each type may not stand alone or
exceed the maximum percentage of housing for each type as herein
defined:
(a) Independent living age-restricted housing, provided that: (a)
the residents meet the Borough's definition of "senior citizen";
and (b) the individual dwelling units meet the Borough's
definition of "senior citizen dwelling unit." All such dwellings
shall be either one- or two-bedroom units, except that not more
than 20% of the total independent living units may instead be
efficiency units. Two-bedroom dwelling units shall comprise a
minimum of 50% of the total independent living unit count.
Floor area sizes: No efficiency dwelling unit shall have fewer
than 550 square feet; no single-bedroom dwelling unit shall
have fewer than 700 square feet; and no two-bedroom dwelling
unit shall have fewer than 870 square feet. This housing type
shall not comprise more than 60% of all housing types on any
individual site. The size and bedroom count requirements shall
not apply to any Mt. Laurel or other affordable housing units.
(b) Assisted-living facilities, provided that: (a) the assisted-living
dwelling units meet the definition of "assisted living residence"
as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:36-1.3; and (b) the professional services
provided to the residents meet or exceed the definition of
"assisted living" as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:36-1.3. All such
dwelling units shall be efficiency, one-bedroom or two-bedroom
§ 350-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-16
1:485
units, no one size of which shall comprise more than 60% of
the total assisted-living units. Floor area sizes: No efficiency
dwelling unit shall have fewer than 450 square feet; no singlebedroom
dwelling unit shall have fewer than 600 square feet;
and no two-bedroom dwelling unit shall have fewer than 900
square feet. This housing type shall not comprise more than
50% of all housing types on any individual site. The size and
bedroom count requirements shall not apply to any Mt. Laurel
or other affordable housing units.
(c) Memory care facilities, provided they offer living facilities and
specialized care, including licensed skilled nursing and nursing
aides and programs for people diagnosed with dementia or
Alzheimer's disease. In general, these facilities provide secure
residential facilities specializing in memory care based on
fostering trust and emotional well-being. They are
characterized by formal professional care involving nursing
and other supportive care. This housing type shall not
comprise more than 25% of all housing types on any individual
site.
(d) Nursing homes, provided they offer licensed skilled nursing
and nursing aides with coverage 24 hours a day, seven days a
week. Nursing homes, also known as convalescent homes,
skilled nursing facilities, and rest homes, provide a type of
highly skilled medical residential care. Their residents are
people who require continual nursing care and have significant
difficulty coping with the required activities of daily living. This
housing type shall not comprise more than 20% of all housing
types on any individual site.
(e) Special needs housing, provided they provide housing for
people who meet the Borough's definition of "individuals with
special needs"; and provided the housing structure and
operation meet the Borough's definition of "permanent
supportive housing" or "supportive and special needs housing."
In general, the term "special needs" describes individuals who
require assistance for medical, mental, or psychological
disabilities. Some examples include but are not limited to
people with autism, Down syndrome, dyslexia, blindness,
ADHD, cystic fibrosis, cleft lips and/or palates, port-wine
stains, or missing limbs. These shall be efficiency units
measuring no less than 250 square feet in floor area. This
housing type shall not comprise more than 20% of all housing
types on any individual site.
(f) Affordable housing, provided it qualifies as one of the other
permitted special use housing groups above, meets the State of
New Jersey's definition of "Affordable Housing," meets the
Borough's definitions of "affordable" and "affordable housing
development" and would meet enough of the state's Mt. Laurel
§ 350-16 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-16
1:486
affordable housing requirements to qualify the Borough of
Harrington Park with credit against its affordable housing
obligations. This subcategory of one of the housing types above
shall not comprise more than 20% of all housing types on any
individual site.
(2) Office buildings for executive, administrative, educational or
medical purposes; and scientific, medical, engineering or research
laboratories devoted to research, design and/or experiments or
processing and fabricating incidental thereto, provided that no
materials, finished products or medicines shall be manufactured,
processed or fabricated on said premises for sale, at wholesale,
retail or otherwise, except such as are incidental to said laboratory
research, design or experiments conducted on said premises; and
employee educational programs as accessory to the principal use,
provided that no more than one building or structurally
interconnected buildings, other than accessory buildings as herein
otherwise permitted, shall be located on any one lot, which lot shall
fully comply with the requirements herein specified for this district.
(3) Museums, libraries, community cultural buildings and uses related
thereto.
(4) Horticultural parks, together with related hothouses, for the
growing of plant life and the exhibition thereof.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) A satellite antenna which complies with the following
requirements:
(a) The surface area of any reflective dish shall not exceed 50
square feet.
(b) The dish shall be erected on either: a secure ground-mounted
foundation; or a rooftop, provided it does not exceed building
height limitations; and provided it is securely mounted and
fully screened from off-site views by parapet walls or
otherwise.
(c) For ground-mounted satellite antennas, the overall height from
the mean ground level to the highest point of the antenna or
any attachments thereto when extended to their full height
shall not exceed 11 feet. For roof-mounted satellite antennas,
the overall height from its roof mounting to the highest point of
the antenna or any attachments thereto when extended to their
full height shall not exceed four feet.
(d) The ground-mounted satellite antenna shall be located in the
rear yard and shall not violate the yard and setback
requirements of the main building.
§ 350-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-16
1:487
(e) The antenna shall be located and screened to minimize motor
noise and visibility from the street and adjacent properties.
The ability of the applicant to install the dish in an unobtrusive
location and to minimize the noise impact on adjacent
properties shall be a major factor in determining whether or
not the conditional use is approved.
(f) The antenna shall be designed for use by occupants of the main
building only.
(g) There shall be no more than three antennas per building lot.
(2) Support retail shops which comply with the following conditions:
(a) This use may be approved if it is in support of independent
living age-restricted housing only. Examples of conditionally
permissible support retail shops include but are not limited to
news/magazine shop, delicatessen, grocer, barber or hair
salon, and coffee shop. Examples of support retail
establishments that are prohibited include but are not limited
to dry cleaners, laundromats, restaurants, fast food services,
banks (except for an ATM within another shop for the
convenience of on-site residents), nail salons, real estate
offices, pet shops, etc.
(b) Retail facility size and number shall be limited to only that
which can serve the needs of the independent living agerestricted
residents. No more than one such facility per 25
qualifying dwelling units is permitted on any site. No single
such facility shall have more than 500 square feet of floor area.
(3) Outdoor recreational facilities (including, for example swimming
pools, putting greens, and individual gardens) and outbuildings
related thereto, ponding areas, lakes and streams; provided,
however, that said uses shall not be operated for hire.
(4) Parking areas for passenger and service vehicles necessary to or in
connection with the above permitted uses in accordance with the
standards herein elsewhere established.
(5) Signs in accordance with the standards herein elsewhere
established.146
(6) Tennis courts and platform tennis courts; provided, however, that
said uses shall not be operated for hire. No lighting of tennis courts
shall be permitted.
D. Uses and structures prohibited. Any uses other than those permitted
uses or accessory uses permitted by Subsection B or C of this section
shall be prohibited. Without in any way limiting the generality and
146. Editor's Note: See § 350-43, Signs.
§ 350-16 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-16
1:488
prohibition of this section, nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed to permit any of the following uses in the OALSR District:
(1) No more than one building for OALSR use shall be located on any
one lot, other than: accessory buildings as herein otherwise
permitted; and support retail shops in one additional building as
herein otherwise permitted as accessory, and each such lot shall
fully comply with the requirements herein specified for the district.
(2) Pilot plants.
(3) The erection, alteration, repurposing or adaptive reuse of a
building for dwelling purposes other than those residential uses
included in Subsection B or C of this section.
(4) Trailers or mobile homes; excluding marketing sales trailers for
permitted uses under Subsection D(1) above, for periods not to
exceed 12 months, and in locations approved by the Planning
Board.
(5) The processing of garbage by the use of an incinerator, transfer
station or any other means designed to aid in the disposal of animal
or vegetable matter, trash or ashes or other refuse matter, and
including the use of land for the dumping of garbage for the
purpose of using same as landfill in connection with a sanitary
landfill plan.
(6) Research, testing or laboratory facilities devoted to chemical,
biological, nuclear or radiological use, except as incidental to a
permitted use.
(7) Zoos or animal parks.
(8) Facilities for the manufacturing, processing, fabrication or storage
of goods. This prohibition would also include all industrial facilities
including warehousing and distribution centers.
(9) Retail establishments other than the support retail shops described
in Subsection C(2) of this section.
(10) Residential uses other than those specifically identified in
Subsection B of this section.
E. Building height limit: 45 feet, measured as required by the definition of
"building height" in this chapter. However, if the applicant provides
certifications from the Harrington Park Fire Department, the
Harrington Park Ambulance Corps, and the Harrington Park Police
Department, that provisions have been made to permit them to
adequately and fully service these buildings (especially during
emergencies), the building height limit shall be 70 feet measured in the
same manner as described above. In the case of the Fire Department,
the certification must affirmatively state that, and describe how, they
can both fight a fire on the top floor of the building and rescue people
§ 350-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-16
1:489
from upper floors if normal means of pedestrian egress are not
available. All buildings except for accessory buildings shall have a
minimum height of 15 feet. All roofs shall be free of towers, portable
equipment, outdoor storage, stacks and the like. All roofs shall have
no accessory structures located thereon other than vents, cupolas,
elevator towers, chimneys, HVAC equipment or ventilators, all of which
shall be properly screened from off-site views. It is the intention of this
provision to prevent the impairment of views, as well as the obstruction
of the passage of light and air.
F. Required lot area: not less than five acres of contiguously owned
property within the district to be used exclusively for OALSR buildings.
G. Minimum lot dimensions, width: 600 feet; depth: 300 feet; frontage:
600 feet; front yard: 65 feet; side yard (one side): 125 feet; rear yard: 85
feet.
H. Yards required. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of
dimensions not less than those specified above.
I. Front yards. Permitted uses in front yards include landscaping,
conforming signs, and access and exit drives. Corner lots shall have two
front yards. Prohibited uses in front yards include all other uses not
mentioned above and especially loading and unloading or storage of
any kind. Parking is permitted in the front yard to the extent that it is
set back a minimum of 35 feet and fully screened from views from the
public right-of-way. All buildings shall have a frontage on an approved
and accepted public street, road or highway. All front yards shall be
required to be landscaped in accordance with the following regulations:
All the area not used as drives or pedestrian walks shall be devoted to
the planting of grass, trees, shrubs, flowers or other appropriate plant
and landscape materials and shall be suitably landscaped to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board.
J. Side yards. All lots shall have at least two side yards, except that foursided
corner lots shall have only one side yard. Side yards shall also be
required between buildings in the limited cases where more than one
building is permitted on a single lot, tract or parcel of land. This
internal side yard shall measure at least 30 feet or a dimension at least
equal to 1 1/2 times the height of the highest of the buildings which the
side yard shall separate, whichever is greater. Parking is permitted to
the extent that it is set back a minimum of two feet from the property
line and adequately screened to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
K. Rear yards. Parking is permitted to the extent that it is set back a
minimum of 50 feet from the property line.
L. Building area. No building shall be erected having fewer than 2,000
square feet or more than 25,000 square feet of gross floor space per
acre of lot area, excluding public streets. [Amended 10-5-2016 by
Ord. No. 708]
§ 350-16 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-16
1:490
M. Maximum building coverage. All buildings, including accessory
buildings, shall not cover more than 25% of the area of the lot.
N. Maximum improved lot coverage (as meets the definition of 'coverage
by improvements or improvements coverage" in this chapter): 45%.
O. Minimum open space (as meets the definition of "open space" in this
chapter): 35%.
P. Parking requirements. Except for the parking requirements in the yard
requirements above, all off-street parking shall conform to § 350-41,
Off-street parking, of this chapter, and as hereafter amended. For those
permitted uses not addressed in § 350-41, the following minimum
parking requirements shall apply. For:
(1) Affordable housing: one stall per bedroom, and no less than one
stall per dwelling unit.
(2) Independent living age-restricted housing and special needs
housing: one stall per dwelling unit.
(3) Assisted-living facilities and memory care facilities: 0.5 stall per
dwelling unit.
(4) Nursing homes: 0.5 stall per bed.
Q. Loading requirements: at least one loading bay per building.
R. Performance standards.
(1) The issuance of any building permit or certificate of occupancy for
any use in the OALSR District is subject to the compliance at all
times with all of the following regulations:147
(a) Vibration. No vibration shall be discernible at the lot lines or
beyond.
(b) Smoke; steam. No emission of processed steam and no
emission of visible gray smoke of a shade equal to or darker
than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart shall be permitted.
(c) Odors. No odor shall be noticeable at the lot line or beyond.
(d) Fly ash; dust. No fly ash or dust emission which can cause any
damage to health, animals or vegetation or other forms of
property or any excessive soiling shall be permitted.
(e) Glare. No sky-reflected glare shall be visible at the lot line or
beyond.
(f) Liquid or solid wastes. No discharge into any disposal system,
public or private, or streams or into the ground of any
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 350-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-16
1:491
materials of such nature or temperature that can contaminate
any water supply, including the groundwater supply, shall be
permitted. Any discharge of liquid or solid wastes shall
conform to the requirements of the agreement between the
Borough of Harrington Park and the Bergen County Sewer
Authority in effect as of the date of this chapter and as
hereafter amended.
(g) Radioactivity. No activities which emit dangerous radioactivity
at any point as covered by federal government standards shall
be permitted.
(h) Noise. No continuous hum, intermittent noise or noise with any
noticeable shrillness of a volume of more than 50 decibels
emanating from the facilities shall be discernible at the lot line
or beyond.
(i) Fire and explosion hazard. No processing or storage of
material on the premises that may unduly create hazard by fire
or explosion shall be permitted.
(j) Any electronic device that would interfere with Internet,
television, radio or other similar home entertainment device
reception shall be prohibited.
(2) The Planning Board may require submission of expert advice by
and at the expense of the applicant, regarding performance
standards of site plans. Where appropriate, the Planning Board, as
part of its site plan review as hereinafter required, may require the
installation, maintenance and operation by the applicant of
continuous recording instruments to demonstrate the operation or
effect of the operation of any machine or devices which create or
are used to control or lessen noise, glare, odor, air pollution, water
pollution, fire, safety or electronic interference hazards.
S. Buffer strips.
(1) A twenty-five-foot buffer strip measured from the front property
line in the OALSR District shall be required. No buffers are
required for side and rear yards; however, they are encouraged.
Buffer strips may be included within the setbacks as herein
required.
(2) Construction of any kind except as described below and parking of
vehicles shall be prohibited in all buffer strips.
(3) Within the buffer strip and subject to approval of the Planning
Board in its site plan review, there shall be permitted:
(a) Landscaping and planting sufficient to form and maintain an
effective screen, reforestation plantings, one identifying sign
per access drive, and fences or walls not to exceed five feet in
§ 350-16 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-16
1:492
height, provided that same shall have finish facing on both
sides.
(b) Entrance and exit drives not to exceed 30 feet in width,
provided that such entrance and exit drives do not intersect
the buffer strip at an angle greater than 45° from a line
through the buffer strip perpendicular to the street line.
T. Supplementary regulations.
(1) The supplementary regulations applicable in Senior Citizen
Dwelling Unit Districts (§ 350-12H) shall be applicable in OALSR
Districts.
(2) The following additional supplementary regulations shall be
applicable in OALSR Districts:
(a) Floodlighting of OALSR buildings is permitted, provided that
all such lights shall be shaded and beams so directed as not to
cause glare in adjoining buildings or properties. No floodlight,
spotlight or other light shall be erected in such a manner that
its beam shall be directed, in whole or in part, skyward, toward
a street, road or highway or toward adjoining property or in
any way or manner that will cause a traffic hazard due to its
glare.
(b) All lights used for the illumination of any use of a building or
the areas surrounding it shall be completely shielded from the
view of the vehicular traffic using the road or roads abutting
such properties. Floodlights used for the illumination of said
premises in OALSR Districts or of any sign thereon, whether or
not such floodlights are attached to or separate from the
building, shall not project more than 18 inches above the
highest elevation of the front wall of the building or more than
40 feet above the street level of the premises, whichever is
less.
(c) Any lot in a OALSR District shall consist of a single parcel of
land containing not less than five contiguous acres, with title
thereto in a common ownership; provided, however, that a
tract consisting of several existing parcels of land may be made
the subject of an application under this chapter if the owner or
owners thereof shall have submitted an application to and
received approval from the Planning Board to resubdivide or
join said lots, tracts or parcels to form a single contiguous
parcel, and provided that:
[1] The owner shall submit an affidavit that he is ready, willing
and able to proceed with the development as set forth on
the plan filed in all details and that all utility, parking and
road improvements as set forth thereon shall be installed
prior to occupancy or use of the premises, or in lieu
§ 350-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-16
1:493
thereof, a bond in amounts and form sufficient to ensure
completion of such improvements shall be posted prior to
the issuance of any building permit. The Planning Board
may require, prior to the issuance of a building permit or
certificate of occupancy, the posting of a bond in amounts
sufficient to ensure the completion of such other details of
the plan as in its judgment it deems essential.
[2] No application to use any premises for the purposes
permitted under this section shall be considered by the
Planning Board unless and until the owner shall have
submitted a site or development plan of such use that is in
compliance with all the details, standards and conditions
required by this chapter without variance therefrom and,
further, proof that the owner has submitted therewith all
other statements, affidavits, approvals and documents as
are customarily required for major subdivision and/or site
plan approval and as are required under this chapter.
U. Principal building limit. Except as noted elsewhere within this chapter,
not more than one principal building shall be permitted on any lot
described in this section.
§ 350-16 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-16
1:494
ARTICLE VIII
Multifamily Residential Overlay Zone
[Added 2-20-2001 by Ord. No. 542]148
§ 350-17. Minimum tract size.
The minimum tract size in the Multifamily Residential Overlay Zone shall be
two acres.
§ 350-18. Internal development standards.
Internal development standards in the Multifamily Residential Overlay Zone
shall be as follows:
A. Minimum distance between structures (exclusive of stoops and
porches):
(1) Side to side: 20 feet.
(2) Rear to rear: 60 feet.
(3) Rear to side: 20 feet.
(4) Front to side: 65 feet.
(5) Front to front: 65 feet.
B. Minimum building setback to property line: 30 feet with 10 feet of deck
encroachment into yard except as noted in Subsection C below. At no
point can any structure be closer than 20 feet to the property line.
C. Minimum building setback, front yard:
(1) Blanch Avenue: 30 feet.
(2) Tappan Road: 20 feet.
(3) Demarest Place: 20 feet.
(4) Internal cartway: 20 feet.
D. Mean roof height: 20 feet from the average finished grade to the mean
roof height; 35 feet; three stories. The mean height of the roof is the
average distance between the building peak and eave.149
E. Maximum length in one direction: 140 feet.
F. Maximum units per structure: six.
148. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 542 provided that "the attached overlay zone with limiting
schedule shall apply to Harrington Commons, Block 111, Lots 5 and 5.01, and Stone
Brook, Block 1021, Lots 1 and 2." This limiting schedule is on file in the Clerk's office.
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 350-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-18
1:495
§ 350-19. Improvement standards.
G. Minimum number of garages per unit: one.
H. Driveway width. Minimum driveway widths shall be as follows:
(1) One-car garage: 12 feet.
(2) Two-car garage: 20 feet.
I. Buffer requirements. The side and rear yards between building units
and property lines shall not be less than 20 feet, exclusive of
underground utilities and stormwater detention facilities.
J. Density requirements. Densities shall not exceed an overall average of
eight dwelling units per acre of gross development site area and
stormwater detention facilities.
K. Common recreation areas are not required.
L. Maximum impervious coverage: 62%.
M. The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be as follows:
(1) Two-bedroom unit: 2.3 per unit.
(2) Three-bedroom unit: 2.4 per unit.
N. Pavement width; cul-de-sac. There shall be adequate provision for
ingress and egress to all parking spaces. Cartway, aisle width and culde-
sac shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Pavement width for cartway: 28 feet.
(2) Minimum radius of cul-de-sac: cartway turning radius of 40 feet.
O. Maximum distance of porches/stoops from buildings (exclusive of
stairs/steps): four feet six inches.
P. Minimum distance of parking areas and paved areas from property line:
five feet.
Q. Each off-street parking space shall measure nine feet in width by 18
feet in length. Parking spaces for people with disabilities shall be in
accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C.
5:23-7) or the Americans with Disabilities Act, as applicable.
R. Walls located adjacent to public roadways shall be located behind the
required line of sight and have a maximum height of three feet. A
design waiver from this height restriction may be approved at the
discretion of the Planning Board. A decorative privacy wall and/or
identification sign shall be approved by the Planning Board. Signage
details must comply with § 350-43, Signs, and all such other applicable
sections of the Code of the Borough of Harrington Park. [Amended
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
§ 350-18 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-19
1:496
§ 350-20. Landscaping.
A landscaping plan shall be submitted with each development application.
All such plans shall be prepared by a New Jersey certified landscape
architect and shall also be submitted for review and recommendation by the
Borough's Environmental Commission.
A. Sanitary sewer cleanouts shall be located a minimum distance behind
the curb of two feet.
B. Easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide for sanitary sewers that
are not more than 15 feet deep. For sewers that are more than 15 feet
deep, easements shall be a minimum of 30 feet wide.
C. Sidewalks, where required, shall be four feet wide and four inches
thick, except crossing driveways, where the thickness shall be
increased to six inches, reinforced with welded wire fabric.
D. Bituminous concrete pavement shall have an equivalent structural
depth of at least 7 1/2 inches for parking aisles, access drives, cartways,
minor streets, and collector streets having a minimum wearing surface
of not less than 1 1/2 inches of pavement, Mix 1-5, a minimum
bituminous stabilized base course of not less than two inches, Mix 1-2,
and a dense graded aggregate base course to provide the remaining
depth.
E. Curbing can either be concrete curb or granite block curb as those set
forth in the Residential Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21.
A. Landscaping design and planning shall be integrated into the overall
design and shall not be considered as an afterthought. Proposed
landscape design schemes shall be evaluated in their relationship to the
existing natural landscape or to the developed or proposed landscape,
including those on adjacent properties.
B. Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall site plan, designed
and integrated into building arrangements, topography, parking
setback and buffering requirements. Landscaping shall include trees,
bushes, shrubs, ground cover, perennials, plants and the use of building
and paving materials in an appropriate manner.
C. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state insofar as
practicable and, where desirable, by minimizing tree and soil removal.
Any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of
neighboring developed areas. Treatment and design of proposed
screening shall be shown and shall be such as may be maintained
throughout the year. Areas of the lot not occupied by buildings, parking
or walkways shall be planted with grass, shrubs or other decorative
landscaping.
D. The plan shall identify existing and proposed trees, shrubs, plant
material, ground cover and natural features such as boulders or rock
§ 350-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-20
1:497
outcroppings. It should show where they are or will be located and the
planting details. An area inventory showing existing site conditions and
proposed landscaping shall be required.
E. One of the uses of landscaping will be to buffer and accentuate
boundaries and to involve the masking out or concealing of any
objectionable area. Buffering shall be employed to mask from the public
view or adjacent properties such service areas as trash and garbage
areas, outside equipment of an unaesthetic character and accessory
buildings or areas not enhancing or in keeping with the aesthetic of the
project or neighborhood.
F. Buffering, where required, shall be located around the perimeter of the
site to minimize headlights of vehicles, noise, light from structures and
the movement of people and vehicles and to shield activities from
adjacent properties. Buffering may consist of fencing, evergreens,
shrubs, deciduous trees or combinations thereof to achieve the stated
objectives.
G. Buffers may consist of walls, fences, landscaping and berms that shall
be used to minimize any adverse impacts or nuisances on the site or
from adjacent areas. Buffer areas shall be required for the following
areas:
(1) Along property lines shielding various uses from one another.
(2) Where interior roads or driveways run parallel with roadways
exterior to the site.
(3) Where parking areas abut other properties.
(4) In the general areas of garbage storage areas, loading and
unloading areas and outdoor storage areas.
(5) As windbreak areas.
(6) To shield areas from deleterious noise or other adverse conditions.
H. In parking lots, at least 5% of the parking areas shall be landscaped.
The landscaping should be located in protected areas, along walkways,
at center islands and at the end of bays. In narrow islands, lowspreading
plants such at creeping juniper, English ivy, myrtle or
pachysandra are appropriate.
I. All landscaping in parking areas shall be carefully located so as not to
obstruct vision. A variety of different types of trees should be grouped
to break up the mass of cars.
J. Foundation plantings shall be provided, with the exception of singlefamily
detached dwellings which will be left to the discretion of
applicant. All foundation plantings shall consist of a continuous
mulched landscape meandering along the entire facade length,
wherever primary unit entrances occur. The landscape bed shall consist
§ 350-20 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-20
1:498
§ 350-21. Building elevations.
All external elevations of proposed buildings shall be submitted with each
developer's application. All such plans shall be prepared by a New Jersey
registered architect.
§ 350-22. Soil removal.
Soil removal shall be as set forth in Article XI, Soil Removal.
§ 350-23. Tree removal.
Tree removal shall be as set forth in Article XII, Tree Preservation and
Removal.
§ 350-24. Fees. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
Fees shall be the same as those set forth in Chapter 202, Land Use
Procedures, § 202-27.150
of an appropriate mix of deciduous evergreens and ornamental trees,
shrubs and ground covers.
K. Landscaping within utility easements is subject to the requirements of
the specific utility company.
150. Editor's Note: See, in particular, § 202-27A(5).
§ 350-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-24
1:499

ARTICLE IX
Location of Accessory Buildings in Residential Districts
§ 350-25. Parking facilities required.
No permit shall hereafter be issued for the erection or alteration of a
residence building unless the arrangement of the building on the lot makes
ample provisions for either a garage, a prospective garage or a parking
space with necessary driveway adequate in size and width.
§ 350-26. Location near rear and side lot lines.
No accessory building shall be placed nearer than five feet to a rear or side
lot line. No accessory building or buildings located in the rear yard shall
occupy an area greater than 30% of the area of the rear yard.
§ 350-27. Location near adjacent property.
No accessory building shall be located within 10 feet of a rear or side lot
line when such line forms part of the front half of the side line of an adjacent
lot or the front quarter of the side line of an adjacent through lot.
§ 350-28. Interior lot restrictions.
In the case of an interior lot, no accessory building shall be erected or
altered so as to encroach upon that half of the lot depth nearest the street.
§ 350-29. Through lot restrictions.
In the case of a through lot, no accessory building shall be erected or
altered so as to encroach upon that fourth of the lot depth nearest each and
every street.
§ 350-30. Corner lot restrictions.
In the case of a corner lot fronting upon two streets, no accessory building
shall be erected or altered so as to encroach upon the area between each
respective street and a line drawn parallel to each such street in a manner
to divide the lot into two equal parts.
§ 350-31. Restrictions on corner lots fronting on more than two
streets.
In the case of a corner lot fronting upon three or more streets, no accessory
building shall be erected or altered so as to encroach upon that fourth of
the lot depth nearest each and every street.
§ 350-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-32
1:501
§ 350-32. Projection beyond setback line.
In no case shall an accessory building project beyond the setback line
controlling the adjoining main buildings on the same side of the street
within the block.
§ 350-33. Distance from street line.
Notwithstanding any requirement in this article, the foregoing rules shall
not prohibit any accessory building 70 feet or more from any street line
bounding the block.151
§ 350-33.1. Height of accessory buildings. [Added 9-19-2011 by
Ord. No. 663]
An accessory building in a residential district shall not exceed a height of
16 feet.
§ 350-34. Exceptions.
The limitations imposed by this article upon the location of an accessory
building shall be waived when the accessory building is incorporated as an
integral part of the building to which it is accessory.
151. Editor's Note: Original § 53-22, Masonry garages restricted by ground height, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658.
§ 350-32 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-34
1:502
ARTICLE X
Supplementary Regulations
§ 350-35. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to such exceptions, additions
or modifications as herein provided by the following supplementary
regulations.152
§ 350-36. Exceptions to height limitations.
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires,
belfries, cupolas, penthouses and domes not used for human occupancy, nor
to chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, bulkheads, similar features
and necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried above the roof
level. Such features, however, shall be erected only to such height as is
necessary to accomplish the purpose they are to serve.
§ 350-36.1. Height limitation; accessory buildings in nonresidential
district. [Added 9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 663]
An accessory building in a nonresidential district shall not exceed a height
of 16 feet.
§ 350-37. Reduced lot area.
No lot shall be so reduced in area that the required open space will be
smaller than prescribed in the regulations for the district in which said lot is
located. Whenever such reduction in lot area occurs, no building located on
said lot shall thereafter be used until such building is altered, reconstructed
or relocated so as to comply with the area and yard requirements applicable
thereto.
§ 350-38. Visibility at intersections.
On a corner lot in any residential district, no wall, hedge or other structure
or planting over three feet in height, except for trimmed trees, shall be
erected, placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the
intersecting curblines and a straight line joining said curblines at points
which are 30 feet distant from the point of intersection measured along
said curblines. Any existing obstruction which curtails the view of drivers
of vehicles approaching the intersection shall be removed by and at the
expense of the owners of such corner lots. Where there are no curbs at the
intersection and corner lot in question, the term "curblines," as used herein,
shall mean and include the pertinent pavement lines.
§ 350-39. Yards.
152. Editor's Note: Original § 53-25, Stripping of topsoil, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 399. For current provisions, see Art. XI of this
chapter.
§ 350-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-39
1:503
§ 350-40. Transitions.
A. Patios. A patio shall not be considered in the determination of yard sizes
or lot coverage. Such a patio, however, shall not be closer than 10 feet
to any side or rear property line. [Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No.
400; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
B. Porches and decks. Any two-story or any enclosed porch or deck shall
be considered a part of the building in the determination of the size of
yard or lot coverage. No porch or deck (decking) shall be closer than 15
feet to any side or rear property line. [Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord.
No. 400; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
C. Projecting architectural features. The space in any required yard shall
be open and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of
windowsills, belt courses, cornices, eaves and other architectural
features; provided, however, that such features shall not project more
than two feet into any required yard.
D. Bay windows. Bay windows, including their cornices and eaves, may
project into any required yard not more than two feet; provided,
however, that the sum of such projections on any wall does not exceed
1/3 the length of said wall.
E. Fire escapes. Open fire escapes may extend into any required yard not
more than four feet six inches.
F. Reduction in rear yards. When a lot is less than 100 feet deep at the
time of the passage of this chapter, such rear yard may be decreased 1/
4 of the distance that the lot depth is less than said 100 feet; provided,
however, that no rear yard shall be less than 20 feet in depth.153
A. Side yard and rear yard transition. Where a lot in a business or
industrial district abuts a lot in a residential district, there shall be
provided along such abutting lines a yard equal in width or depth to
that required in the residential district.
B. Front yard transition. Where the frontage on one side of a street
between two intersecting streets is zoned partly as residential and
partly as business or industrial, the front yard depth in the business or
industrial district shall be equal to the required front yard depth of the
residential district.154
C. Corner lot transition. On every corner lot in a residential district, there
shall be provided on the side street a side yard equal in depth to the
required front yard depth on said side street.
153. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, regarding driveways, which immediately followed this
subsection, was redesignated 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658. See now § 350-41C(5)(e) below.
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 350-39 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-41
1:504
§ 350-41. Off-street parking.
A. The following parking spaces shall be provided and satisfactorily
maintained by the owner of the property for each building which, after
the date when this chapter becomes effective, is erected, enlarged or
altered for use for any of the following purposes:
(1) Dwelling: at least one parking space for each dwelling unit in the
building or buildings.
(2) Auditorium, theater, church or other places of public assemblage:
at least one parking space for each seven seats provided for
patrons, based on maximum seating capacity.
(3) Restaurant, eating or drinking establishment: at least one parking
space for each four seats, except when it is in a building which
provides parking space, in which case, the number of places
already provided may be taken to be available for the restaurant or
other eating place, plus one for each two employees on a maximum
work shift.
(4) Stores: at least one parking space for each 300 square feet or
fraction thereof in excess of 100 square feet of store floor area.
(5) Office, business and professional buildings located in a business
zone: at least one parking space for each 300 square feet of office
floor area.
(6) Industrial or manufacturing establishments: at least one parking
space for each 400 square feet of floor area or one for each two
employees on the maximum work shift, whichever is greater.
(7) Mixed uses: Mixed uses in the same building shall be calculated as
the sum of the individual uses, unless it is determined by the
agency conducting site plan review that the characteristics of the
individual uses are such that the total parking needs are less than
the sum of the individual uses and that the number of parking
spaces to be provided will satisfy the lesser need.
(8) Other uses: as determined by the Planning Board.
B. All parking spaces provided pursuant to this section shall be on the
same lot with the building, except that the Zoning Board of Adjustment
may permit the parking spaces to be on any lot within 500 feet of the
building if it determines that it is impractical to provide parking on the
same lot with the building.
C. Parking requirements in Office and Research and/or Senior Citizen
Dwelling Unit Districts.
(1) Parking space in the Office and Research District shall be provided
on the lot to adequately accommodate company, employee, service
and visitor motor vehicles at all times, with at least one car space
§ 350-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-41
1:505
for each two employees for which the building on the lot is
designed. [Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 404]
(2) A minimum of 15% of any open air parking area or lot shall be used
exclusively for landscaping, trees, flowers and shrubs.
(3) The maximum size of any single parking area or lot shall be 60,000
square feet. Adjacent parking areas or lots shall be separated by
buffer strips.
(4) An off-street parking space shall have dimensions of not less than
nine feet by 18 feet. Space for maneuvering incidental to parking or
unparking shall not encroach upon any interior road or driveway.
Every off-street parking space shall be accessible from an interior
road or driveway.
(5) Parking requirements.
(a) All parking areas provided pursuant to this subsection shall be
on the same lot with the building.
(b) Parking on ingress and egress ways and driveways shall be
prohibited within 50 feet of the property line.
(c) In the Office and Research District, parking space or access
thereto, except entrances or exit drives as limited in this
section, shall not be less than 50 feet from a street line.
Entrance or exit drives connecting the parking area with the
street shall be permitted within the fifty-foot strip required
above, and these entrances and exit drives on a corner lot shall
be a minimum of 80 feet from the intersecting street lines. All
such parking shall be a minimum of 50 feet from any property
line where said property line adjoins a residential district.
[Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 404]
(d) All off-street parking facilities, drives and aisles shall be paved
and properly graded, lighted and maintained in a clean and
usable condition at all times.
(e) No driveway shall be closer than five feet to any side property
line. [Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 400]
(f) Width.
[1] Driveways, entrance or exit, one-way: minimum of 12 feet
but no wider than 30 feet.
[2] Driveways, entrance or exit, two-way: minimum of 24 feet
but no wider than 36 feet.
[3] All entrance and/or exit drives may be five feet wider at the
curb than the driveway they serve, but in no case wider
than 41 feet.
§ 350-41 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-41
1:506
(g) All off-street parking areas shall be surfaced with an asphalt or
bituminous pavement and shall be graded and drained to
dispose of all surface water, all as approved by the Borough
Engineer.
(h) Any lighting in connection with off-street parking shall be so
arranged and shielded as to reflect the light downwards from
all adjoining residential buildings.
(i) Locations and area of off-street parking facilities, loading and
unloading areas and platforms, driveways, aisles and
pedestrian walks shall be shown on prints submitted at the
time of application for a building permit and on the site plan.
Off-street parking and loading and unloading areas shall be so
arranged and located as to provide maximum safety to
pedestrians and vehicles and a minimum of interference with
the normal flow of both pedestrians and vehicular traffic.
(j) Aisles shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width.
(k) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Construction
Code Official for any use requiring a parking area without a
Planning Board review and written approval of the off-street
parking plans. The Planning Board shall ascertain that all of
the requirements for off-street parking are complied with. The
location and design of entrances, exits, surfacing, landscaping,
marking and lighting, marginal lanes and surface lanes, if
necessary, shall be subject to the approval of the Planning
Board, to ensure adequate relation to traffic safety and
protection of adjacent resident areas, if any.
D. No person shall, without specific approval by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment as appropriate, pave, stone, grade,
designate, delineate, or otherwise prepare or use any portion of any
public right-of-way for the provision of parking for any private motor
vehicle. This prohibition shall not apply to areas or specific spaces
approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or to
that portion of a driveway serving the lot immediately adjacent to the
portion of the public right-of-way, provided that the driveway in the
public right-of-way shall be no wider than the narrowest portion of the
driveway on the lot. A small return immediately adjacent to the roadway
shall be allowed but shall not be used for any parking purpose. [Added
6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 566]
E. In the residential zoning districts, each lot shall be provided with a
paved, stoned, concrete or concrete paver driveway connection with a
public street. Such driveway shall connect directly to the public street
and shall be no wider than 20 feet for a single-car garage or any
residence without a garage (formerly 12 feet) or 24 feet for a two-car
garage with entry facing the public roadway. In the event of a side entry
garage, the driveway from the road to the building setback shall not be
§ 350-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-41
1:507
§ 350-42. Fences and walls.
greater than 12 feet. [Added 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 566; amended
7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 583; 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 725]
F. In the residential zoning districts, no person shall enlarge or increase
the width of any existing driveway, provided for additional parking area,
provide a turnaround area, install a circular driveway, or provide more
than one driveway exit from any lot unless approval has been received
from the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment as appropriate.
The installation, improvement or repaving of any driveway, regardless
of form or nature, shall require a building permit, the cost of which shall
be as provided in the Borough Fee Schedule.155 If the size or location of
the driveway is to be changed, and the change violates any setback or
other ordinance provisions, the homeowner must get the applicable
variance relief from either the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment prior to the work being done. [Added 6-23-2004 by Ord.
No. 566; amended 7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 583156]
A. A permit shall be obtained from the Construction Code Official for the
erection, alteration or reconstruction of any fence which exceeds three
feet in height. As used herein, the term "fence" shall mean and include
fences, walls and fence-like or wall-like structures. Unless otherwise
specified herein, shrubbery, bushes and trees shall not be considered
fences. A sketch showing the fence type, size and location shall
accompany the permit application. All applications for permits shall
state the name of the owner of the property, the lot and block number of
the same on the Tax Map, the street number, the type of fence to be
erected, including length, height and the materials to be used, and the
general part of the lot it will enclose. The fee for such permit shall be as
provided in the Borough Fee Schedule, except that no fee shall be
required for any fence constructed by or for the Borough or the
Borough's boards, authorities, commissions or agencies. [Amended
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658157]
B. No fence erected shall exceed five feet in height above the normal
grade level, except where otherwise authorized in this Code, except
that between the building and the front property line no fence, with the
exception of retaining walls, over three feet high above the normal
grade level shall be erected.158
C. No fence, shrubbery, bushes, trees or other similar obstruction to
visibility, exclusive of existing buildings, shall be built or maintained
155. Editor's Note: The Borough Fee Schedule is available on the Borough website.
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 350-41 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-42
1:508
upon a corner lot within the triangular area formed by the intersecting
curblines and a straight line joining said curblines at points which
are 30 feet distant from the point of intersection measured along said
curblines. Any existing obstruction of this character which, within the
foregoing limits, curtails the view of drivers of vehicles approaching
the intersection shall be removed by and at the expense of the owners
of such corner lots. Where there are no curbs at the intersection and
corner lot in question, the term "curblines," as used herein, shall mean
and include the pertinent pavement lines.
D. No fence over three feet in height shall be placed within 10 feet of the
curbline, and no fence, shrubbery, bushes or trees shall be erected to
encroach on any public right-of-way.
E. The exterior appearance of all fences shall be as attractive as or more
attractive than the interior appearance thereof.
F. Fences shall be erected in a manner so as to permit the flow of natural
drainage and shall not cause surface water to be blocked or dammed to
create ponding.
G. The following fence materials are specifically prohibited: barbed wire,
pointed materials (except as used in picket or stockade fences), cloth
(except to protect shrubbery or bushes), electrically charged materials
and poultry netting.
H. All fences shall be constructed and maintained in a safe, sound and
upright condition.
I. Any fence erected for the purpose of protecting or enclosing natural or
man-made ponds, lakes, reservoirs, streams, brooks, rivers or other
waterways shall be located within 20 feet of said waterway, except that,
where a service road exists, fences shall be located within 10 feet of the
edge of the service road farthest away from said waterway. Where a
floodplain zone exists, said fence shall be erected within 10 feet of the
designated floodplain zone but shall not be erected to encroach on the
floodplain zone.159
J. Any fence over three feet in height which extends in excess of 500
continuous feet or which extends an existing fence in excess of 500
continuous feet shall require Planning Board approval prior to the
issuance of a permit. A fence shall be considered continuous if
pedestrian access is effectively blocked, prohibited or hindered for the
entire length of the fenced area. After a hearing, the Planning Board
shall determine whether the application is in compliance with the
conditions stated herein and shall consider the aesthetic impact of said
fence on the character of the neighborhood. If the aesthetic impact is
deemed negative, the Planning Board may deny or modify the
application for a permit. The Planning Board shall approve, deny or
159. Editor's Note: For regulations pertaining to development within flood hazard areas, see
Ch. 179, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 350-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-42
1:509
§ 350-43. Signs. [Amended 7-31-1989 by Ord. No. 417; 7-20-1998 by
Ord. No. 512]
modify said application within 95 days of the filing of an application,
unless extended by mutual consent of the Planning Board and the
applicant.
K. Fences around swimming pools shall be in accordance with § 350-47.
[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
A. Statement of purpose. This section is intended to help preserve the
general residential character of the community, to enhance the
aesthetic appearance of the business district so as to blend with the
overall character of the community, and to facilitate the safe and
orderly flow of traffic throughout the community. In order to achieve
these goals, the municipal agency administering these regulations shall
ensure that permitted signs are compatible with their immediate
surroundings and with the zone in which the signs are located and shall
ensure that permitted signs are appropriate to the specific type of
activity to which they pertain.
B. General provisions. The following provisions shall be applicable in all
districts of the community:
(1) No sign shall be erected, altered, relocated, maintained or
reconstructed unless it shall conform to these regulations. Plans for
each sign shall be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Officer
prior to the issuance of a permit for such sign. The following signs
shall be exempt from the requirements of Zoning Officer review
and permits:
(a) Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only
property numbers, post box numbers, names of the occupants
or other identification of noncommercial premises.
(b) In residential districts, "for sale" or "for rent" signs which fully
conform to the requirements set forth herein and which
advertise sale or rent by the owner/occupant of the premises.
(c) Legal notices or identification, informational or directional
signs erected or required by governmental bodies as necessary
to the public welfare.
(d) The flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation, state, city or other
governmental agency.
(e) Temporary construction site, mechanic's, painter's or artisan's
sign erected on the property where such work is being
performed and which does not exceed six square feet in area.
Such signs shall be removed promptly upon completion of the
work.
§ 350-42 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-43
1:510
(f) Temporary signs of public or semipublic nature denoting
special community activities, church fairs, or elections,
provided that the signs do not exceed 20 square feet in area.
Such signs shall be removed within two days following the
event noted on the sign.
(g) Temporary signs announcing garage sales or similar activities
not exceeding four square feet in area. Such signs shall be
removed within two days following the event noted on the sign.
(h) Temporary signs in store windows which denote products sold,
special sales or special events may cover no more than 50% of
the store window.160
(2) No advertising signs or billboards are permitted; the governing
body finds that the Borough, being residential in character with no
major highways or thoroughfares, has no appropriate place for
such a use.
(3) Signs shall be constructed and lettered by a professional or in a
manner equal to professional workmanship.
(4) Illumination.
(a) No signs shall be lighted except by a shielded spotlight or an
internal light source.
(b) No flashing, intermittent, or varying illumination shall be
permitted, except for Borough signs or equipment. [Amended
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
(c) Illumination shall be by white light only, except for Borough
signs or equipment. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
(d) Neon signs may be permitted inside of a business only.
(e) All lighting of business signs, including those which are inside
of a business establishment but may be seen from the outside,
must be extinguished when the associated business is closed,
but in no event later than 10:00 p.m., unless said business is
permitted to remain open, by ordinance, past 10:00 p.m.
(f) Sign illumination shall light the sign area only.
(5) Motion.
(a) No sign shall be permitted or caused to rotate, flutter, or
otherwise move.
(b) Computerized signs which convey an image or message by
means of moving or flashing lights or characters shall be
160. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1)(i), regarding size of political signs, was repealed at
time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 350-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-43
1:511
prohibited, except for Borough signs or equipment. [Amended
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
(c) No vehicular or mobile signs shall be utilized to circumvent any
of the Borough's sign regulations This provision shall not be
construed so as to prohibit the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle.
(6) Cloth or fabric signs.
(a) No cloth, paper, oilcloth, canvas, inflated, or fabric signs,
banners, or pennants shall be permitted outdoors without
permission from the Mayor and Council. This provision shall
not be construed to eliminate the display of national or state
flags. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
(b) Awning signs shall only be permitted upon separate application
to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, unless the same are
ancillary to an application whose primary jurisdiction is the
Planning Board, in which case the Planning Board shall
consider the application in considering said awning sign
application. The appropriate board shall review such factors as
the size of the awning, its compatibility with the surrounding
properties and uses, any interference with other signs, and its
aesthetic character.
(7) Roof or projecting signs.
(a) No sign shall be mounted on any building roof.
(b) No wall sign shall be permitted to extend or project above the
highest elevation of the wall to which it is attached.
(c) No wall sign shall be allowed or caused to project more than
one foot outward from the building wall to which it is attached.
(d) Marquee signs, i.e., the rooflike projections used for
advertising which are commonly associated with theaters, are
prohibited.
(8) No sign shall be placed so as to interfere with or be mistaken for a
traffic light or similar safety device, nor shall any glare-producing
signs be allowed.
(9) No signs shall be attached to a fence, pole or rock except where the
Zoning Officer shall deem necessary for purposes of public safety.
No signs shall be attached to trees.
(10)No sign shall be allowed to emit any audible sounds, such as
talking, music or any noise whatsoever.
(11) Unless the requirement would violate a registered federal
trademark, no sign shall contain more than three colors, with such
§ 350-43 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-43
1:512
restriction applying to the total sign, inclusive of background,
frame and communicative parts. No sign shall be painted with
fluorescent or phosphorescent paint, nor shall any unusually
bright, sparking or garish paint or material be used.
(12) Public information signs, including service club, church, public
buildings, charitable or civic organization, and hospital signs, shall
be permitted at roadside within the public-right-of-way. Such signs
shall not exceed three square feet in area and shall be no higher
than five feet at the top of the sign. Plans for such signs shall be
reviewed by the Zoning Officer, who shall restrict the number and
placement as he shall deem necessary to further the public welfare
and the specific purposes of this section. Where such signs are to
be erected by public or nonprofit entities, the required fees may be
waived.
(13) Service station signs shall conform to the following requirements,
which are deemed customary and necessary to the station
business:
(a) One freestanding sign advertising the name of the station or
garage and the principal products sold on the premises,
including any special company or brand name, insignia, or
emblem and denoting pricing, provided that the sign has no
more than two faces, shall not exceed 30 square feet in area on
each side, shall be within 15 feet of the front property line and
shall not exceed 10 feet in height. [Amended 4-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 658]
(b) Signs placed on the face of the building shall be no greater
than 15 square feet in area and limited in number to that
agreed to by the Zoning Officer, but not to exceed three. In no
event shall signage of any nature be permitted on the face of
the building that is either in or faces a residential area.
[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
(c) One sign located inside the property specifically advertising
special servicing is permitted. Such sign may have two faces,
each not exceeding 10 square feet in area.161
(d) Directional signs or lettering displays over individual entrance
doors or bays consisting of only the words "lubrication,"
"repairs" or "mechanic on duty" or other words closely similar
are permitted. Only one such sign will be permitted over each
door or bay. The letters thereon shall not exceed 12 inches in
height and the sign area shall not exceed six square feet in
area. In no event shall signage of any nature be permitted over
bays which either are in residential zones or face residential
uses. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 523]
161. Editor's Note: Subsection (d) of original § 53-33B(13), regarding signs denoting prices,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658.
§ 350-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-43
1:513
(e) Customary lettering on an insignia which is a structural part of
a gasoline pump, consisting only of the brand name of the
gasoline sold, pump nomenclature or instructions, a price
indicator and other signs required by law are permitted. Such
signs will not require a permit or permit fee under this chapter.
(f) A nonilluminated credit card sign not exceeding two square
feet in area, which may be placed on or near the gasoline
pump, is permitted.
C. Residential districts.
(1) Residential identification signs. Signs identifying the name and
profession of the occupant or the street address of the premises
shall be limited to one wall sign and one ground sign. Identification
signs shall not exceed one square foot in area.
(2) Customary warning or "no trespassing" signs shall not exceed one
square foot and shall be limited in number as the Zoning Officer
shall deem appropriate in relation to the size of the site.
(3) "For sale" or "for rent" signs. One sign advertising the sale or rent
of the premises on which the sign is located, which may be doublefaced,
shall be permitted. Each face of the sign shall not exceed six
square feet in area and shall be set back from the street line no less
than 10 feet. Such sign shall be immediately removed upon the sale
or rental of the property.
(4) Temporary ground signs for directional purposes shall not exceed
one square foot in area and shall not be erected for more than two
days.
(5) Churches, libraries, schools or other public buildings shall be
allowed to erect:
(a) Two wall signs or ground signs for identification or
informational purposes, not to exceed three feet by four feet.
(b) Wall signs or ground signs for directional warning purposes.
Such signs shall not exceed one square foot in size and shall be
limited in number as the Zoning Officer deems necessary and
appropriate for public safety.
(6) One sign, not to exceed 12 square feet in area, shall be allowed per
construction site identifying the architect, engineer, general
contractor, and/or developer. Such sign shall not be erected until
the building permit for the premises has been issued and shall be
removed prior to issuance of the last certificate of occupancy.
(7) Miscellaneous. Any other signs which may be proposed in a
residential district shall conform to all general provisions of this
section. Approval of such signs may also be conditioned as to size,
shape, height, placement, material, technique, number, and
§ 350-43 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-43
1:514
duration in such manner as the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
reasonably deem appropriate in order to further the purposes of
this section.
D. Business and industrial districts.
(1) Business signs may be erected subject to the following restrictions:
(a) One wall sign may be erected per established business
frontage. Such signs shall not exceed 5% of the building face
on which they are placed (including window area, if any) and
shall not exceed three feet in height.
(b) In lieu of the wall sign permitted under Subsection D(1)(a), a
business may substitute one window sign. Such sign shall not
exceed 20% of the individual window area or 10% of the glass
area of any door. In no event shall the sign exceed three feet in
height nor 10 feet in width. No flashing or moving signs shall
be permitted to be attached to any window or be visible
through such window from any business frontage.
(c) One freestanding sign may also be erected no greater than five
feet from and wholly within the property line. Such sign shall
be placed at a right angle to the property line and adjacent to
the side lot line nearest to the oncoming traffic. In addition, the
dimensions of such signs shall be restricted as follows:
[1] The total sign area shall not exceed 25 square feet.
[2] The height of said sign shall not exceed five feet,
encompassing total sign area.
[3] The top of said sign shall not be higher than five feet from
the ground at the base of the sign.
(2) Customary warning or "no trespassing" signs shall be permitted,
provided that they shall not exceed one square foot and shall be
limited in number as the Zoning Officer deems appropriate in
relation to the size of the site.
(3) "For sale" or "for rent" signs. One sign advertising the sale or rent
of the premises on which the sign is to be located shall be
permitted. If the sign is a freestanding ground sign, it shall not
exceed six square feet in area and it shall be set back from the
street line no less than 10 feet. If the sign is a wall sign, it shall not
exceed six square feet in area and it shall be mounted flat against
the wall. If placed in a window, so as to be visible from the business
frontage, the sign shall not exceed 20% of the individual window
area. Such sign shall be immediately removed upon the sale or
rental of the property.
(4) Construction signs. One sign, not to exceed 12 square feet in area,
shall be allowed per construction site identifying the architect,
§ 350-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-43
1:515
engineer, general contractor, and/or developer. Such sign shall not
be erected until a building permit for the premises has been issued
and shall be removed prior to the issuance of the last certificate of
occupancy.
(5) Freestanding directional or safety signs shall be permitted, subject
to the following restrictions:
(a) Such signs shall contain the word "entrance," "exit," "one-way,"
or similar directions only.
(b) The display face of such signs shall not exceed one foot in
height nor two feet in width.
(c) The top of such signs shall not be higher than five feet from the
ground at the base of the sign.
(d) Illumination of such signs shall only be by means of shielded
spotlights or interior white diffused light.
(e) The number and placement of such signs shall be restricted as
the Zoning Officer shall deem necessary and appropriate to the
size of the premises in the interest of public safety and welfare.
In the event that Subsection D(5) shall be preempted by county
or state regulations, such superseding regulations shall govern
the review and permit process for such signs, and applicants
shall be required to comply with said county or state
regulations.
(6) Directory signs shall be permitted, subject to the following
regulations:
(a) One directory sign shall be allowed at each entrance to a
business or industrial development in order to direct traffic to
businesses within the development.
(b) Such signs shall contain the name of each business and
appropriate directional symbols.
(c) The display face of directory signs shall be restricted as the
Zoning Officer shall reasonably deem appropriate in relation to
the number of businesses to be identified thereon.
(d) The top of such signs shall not be higher than five feet from the
ground at the base of the sign.
(e) The illumination of such signs shall be by means of shielded
spotlights or interior white diffused light only.
(f) Directory signs shall be placed at right angles to and no
greater than five feet from the property line so as to be readily
visible to oncoming traffic.
§ 350-43 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-43
1:516
(7) Any other signs which may be proposed in a business or industrial
district shall conform to all general provisions of this section.
Approval of such signs may also be conditioned as to size, shape,
height, placement, material, technique, number and duration in
such a manner as the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall reasonably
deem appropriate in order to further the purpose of this section.
E. Senior Citizen Dwelling Unit District.
(1) Identification signs. Signs identifying the name of the occupant or
the street address of the premises shall be permitted, subject to the
following restrictions:
(a) No sign shall be affixed to or displayed in any window.
(b) Wall signs must be attached parallel to the face of the building
and shall not project more than one foot from the building face.
Such signs shall not be greater than 25 square feet in area, nor
shall they exceed five feet horizontally and five feet vertically.
No more than one sign shall be allowed on any building face.
No more than two wall signs shall be allowed on any building.
(c) In lieu of wall signs, one freestanding sign shall be permitted.
Such sign shall be placed on the buffer strip, no less than 20
feet from the property line, and shall not exceed 25 square feet
in area, nor shall the top of said sign be higher than five feet
from the ground at the base of the sign.
(2) Freestanding directional or safety signs shall be permitted, subject
to the following restrictions:
(a) Such signs shall contain the word "entrance," "exit," "one-way,"
or similar directions only.
(b) The display face of such signs shall not exceed one foot in
height nor two feet in width.
(c) The top of such signs shall not be higher than five feet from the
ground at the base of the sign.
(d) Illumination of such signs shall only be by means of shielded
spotlights or interior white diffused light.
(e) The number and placement of such signs shall be restricted as
the Zoning Officer shall deem necessary and appropriate to the
size of the premises in the interest of public safety and welfare.
In the event this Subsection E(2) shall be preempted by county
or state regulations, such superseding regulations shall govern
the review and permit process for such signs, and applications
shall be required to comply with said county or state
regulations.
§ 350-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-43
1:517
(3) Construction signs. One sign, not to exceed 12 square feet in area,
shall be allowed per construction site identifying the architect,
engineer, general contractor, and/or developer. Such sign shall not
be erected until the building permit for the premises has been
issued and shall be removed prior to issuance of the last certificate
of occupancy.
(4) Customary warning or "no trespassing" signs shall be permitted,
provided that they shall not exceed one square foot and shall be
limited in number as the Zoning Officer shall deem appropriate in
relation to the size of the site.
(5) Miscellaneous. Any other sign which may be proposed in a Senior
Citizen Dwelling Unit District shall conform to all general
provisions of this section. Approval of such signs may also be
conditioned as to size, shape, height, placement, material,
technique, number, and duration in such manner as the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall reasonably deem appropriate in order to
further the purpose of this section.
F. Office and Research District.
(1) Identification signs. Signs identifying the name of the occupant or
the address of the premises shall be permitted, subject to the
following restrictions:
(a) No sign shall be affixed to or displayed in any window.
(b) All signs must be attached to the face of the building and shall
not project more than one foot from the building face. Such
signs shall be not greater than 50 square feet in area, nor shall
they exceed 10 feet horizontally or five feet vertically. No more
than one sign shall be allowed on any building face, and no
more than two wall signs shall be allowed on any building.
(c) In lieu of wall signs, one freestanding sign shall be permitted.
Such sign shall be placed on the buffer strip, no less than 15
feet from the property line, and shall not exceed 50 square feet
in area, nor shall the top of said sign be higher than five feet
from the ground at the base of the sign.
(2) Freestanding directional or safety signs shall be permitted, subject
to the following:
(a) Such signs shall contain the word "entrance," "exit," "one-way,"
or similar directions only.
(b) The display face of such signs shall not exceed one foot in
height nor two feet in width.
(c) The top of such signs shall not be higher than five feet from the
ground at the base of the sign.
§ 350-43 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-43
1:518
(d) Illumination of such signs shall only be by means of shielded
spotlights or interior white diffused light.
(e) The number and placement of such signs shall be restricted as
the Zoning Officer shall deem necessary and appropriate to the
size of the premises in the interest of public safety and welfare.
In the event this Subsection F(2) shall be preempted by county
or state regulations, such superseding regulations shall govern
the review and permit process for such signs, and applicants
shall be required to comply with said county or state
regulations.
(3) Construction signs. One sign, not to exceed 12 square feet in area,
shall be allowed per construction site, identifying the architect,
engineer, general contractor, and/or developer. Such sign shall not
be erected until a building permit for the premises has been issued
and shall be removed prior to issuance of the last certificate of
occupancy.
(4) Customary warning or "no trespassing" signs shall be permitted,
provided they shall not exceed one square foot and shall be limited
in number as the Zoning Officer deems appropriate in relation to
the size of the site.
(5) Miscellaneous. Any other signs which may be proposed in an Office
and Research District shall conform to all general provisions of this
section. Approval of such signs may be conditioned as to size,
shape, height, placement, material, technique, number, and
duration in such manner as the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
reasonably deem appropriate in order to further the purposes of
this section.
G. Nonconforming signs. Any signs now in existence, the erection or
placing of which is prohibited hereunder, may be continued on such
building, structure, lot, or land so occupied. At no time, however, shall
such a sign be altered, enlarged, extended, or relocated unless such
action changes a nonconforming sign into a conforming sign as
provided herein, or unless such alterations consist of customary
maintenance. The failure to keep a nonconforming sign in good repair
for a period of one year or the failure to repair such a sign within 30
days after written notice by the Zoning Officer shall constitute
abandonment and such sign must be removed. The provisions of this
section notwithstanding, the sign owner shall have the right to replace
such nonconforming sign in the event of accidental damage or
destruction.
H. Maintenance of signs.
(1) Any sign that is or shall become dangerous or unsafe in any manner
whatsoever, or any sign erected hereafter in a manner contrary to
the provisions of this section, shall be repaired, made safe, made
attractive, and made to conform to the requirements of this section
§ 350-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-43
1:519
or it shall be removed by the owner, lessor, agent or occupant of
the building, property, or land upon which it is placed or to which
it is affixed.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall have the power to order, at his own
discretion or at the request of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the
repair or removal of any sign which is or is likely to become
dangerous or unsafe or which is erected contrary to the provisions
of this chapter. He shall further have the power to remove such sign
after written notice has been given as provided herein.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall serve written notice upon the owner,
agent, or person having control of any sign, requiring him to
repair or to remove the sign, as the case may be, within 48
hours thereafter if, in his judgment, such a necessity exists or
within seven days if, in his judgment, such a time period is
reasonable or just. In case of an emergency, the Zoning Officer
need not provide notice but may take any appropriate action to
maintain the safety of the public.
(b) In the event said owner, agent or person having control shall
fail to comply with such notice, the Zoning Officer, immediately
upon the expiration of the time allowed, shall cause the sign to
be removed. The Zoning Officer shall have the power to issue a
summons for a zoning violation.
(c) Any expenses and disbursements incurred in carrying out the
provisions of this subsection shall be recoverable by the
Borough from the owner, agent, or person in control of such
sign in an action at law in any court of competent jurisdiction
upon his, her, or their neglect or refusal to pay the same within
10 days after service of a statement thereof.
I. Permits, fees and bonds.
(1) No new sign shall be erected or existing sign enlarged, maintained,
relocated or replaced until after the required permit is obtained
from the Zoning Officer, except as specifically exempt herein.
(2) Permit process. An applicant for a sign permit shall submit the
following information to the Zoning Officer:
(a) Name, address and phone number of the applicant;
(b) Location of the building, structure, or lot to which the sign is to
be attached;
(c) Written consent of the property owner, if different from the
applicant;
(d) Proposed location of the sign on the building and/or lot in
relation to nearby buildings, structures and existing signs;
§ 350-43 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-43
1:520
§ 350-44. Miscellaneous restrictions.
§ 350-45. Hoofed animals.164
(e) Plans, specifications and method of construction of the sign
and its supports, including proposed dimensions, materials,
colors, weight and intensity of illumination;
(f) Name of the individual or firm erecting the sign; and
(g) Copies of stress sheets and calculations showing the dead load
and wind pressure design if the Zoning Officer deems it
necessary and appropriate to the evaluation of a particular
sign.
(3) Permit fees. Sign permits shall not be issued until the following fees
have been paid:
(a) All signs in residential districts not exempt under Subsection B
and signs in Senior Citizen Dwelling Unit Districts: fee per
Borough Fee Schedule.162
(b) Signs in business or office and research districts not
specifically exempted under Subsection B: as per fee
ordinance.163 [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
J. Violations and penalties. Any person violating any provisions of this
§ 350-43 shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as
set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties. Each day that a violation
continues shall be considered a new and separate violation of this
§ 350-43. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
A. No storage of manure or odor- or dust-producing substance or use shall
be permitted within 100 feet of any adjoining lot line.
B. No products shall be publicly displayed or offered for sale from the
roadside.
C. No building in which farm animals or poultry are kept shall be closer
than 100 feet to any adjoining lot line, nor shall any run for farm
animals be closer than 25 feet to any lot line.
A. The keeping or sheltering of hoofed animals, as defined herein, on any
land or lands in any zoning district established by this chapter is made
subject to the regulations, requirements and standards set forth herein.
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
163. Editor's Note: Subsection (4), Bond, of original § 53-33I, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658.
164. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 358, Art. I, Hoofed Animals.
§ 350-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-45
1:521
§ 350-46. Smoke detectors or smoke alarms.
B. For purposes of this section, the words and terms used herein shall be
defined as follows:
HOOF — The horny covering protecting the ends of the digits or
encasing the foot.
HOOFED ANIMAL — Any animal which is a solid-hoofed or cleft-hoofed
quadruped, including but not limited to horses, ponies, sheep, goats,
cows, mules, donkeys and swine, whether mature animals or their
young.
STABLE — Any structure designed for the keeping and handling of
hoofed animals.
C. Not more than one hoofed animal may be kept on premises with an area
of at least 15,000 square feet, excluding all structures thereon other
than the within-mentioned stable, provided that such animal is enclosed
in a pen or corral containing at least 800 square feet, including a stable
under a roof of at least 100 square feet, and further provided that the
pen, corral fences or similar enclosures are not closer than 20 feet to
the adjacent property lines or 50 feet to any neighboring dwelling or
structure.
D. No more than two hoofed animals may be kept on premises with an area
devoted to such animals of at least 20,000 square feet, excluding all
structures thereon other than the within-mentioned stable, provided
that such animals are enclosed in a pen or corral containing at least 800
square feet per animal, including a stable under a roof of at least 100
square feet per animal, and further provided that the pen, corral fences
or similar enclosures are not closer than 20 feet to the adjacent
property lines or 50 feet to any neighboring dwelling or structure.
E. Not more than three hoofed animals may be kept on premises with an
area devoted to such animals of at least one acre, excluding all
structures thereon other than the within-mentioned stable, provided
that such animals are enclosed in a pen or corral containing 800 square
feet for the first such animal and 400 square feet for each additional
animal, including a stable under a roof containing at least 100 square
feet per animal, and further provided that the pen, corral fences or
similar enclosures are not closer than 20 feet to the adjacent property
lines or 50 feet to any neighboring dwelling or structure.
F. The pen, corral fences or similar enclosures referred to in Subsections
C, D and E above shall be constructed so as to enclose the pen or corral
area and contain the hoofed animal and shall be of a minimum height of
four feet for animals four feet in height or under and a minimum of five
feet for animals four feet in height or over. The height of such animals
shall be measured from the ground to the withers of the animal.
§ 350-45 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-46
1:522
§ 350-47. Private swimming pools. [Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No.
400; amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SMOKE DETECTOR or SMOKE ALARM — An electrically powered
or battery-operated device designed to detect smoke and provide an
audible alarm which shall bear a seal of Underwriters' Laboratories,
Inc. (UL), Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM) or other
nationally recognized testing laboratory.
B. Installation required. Prior to the transfer of title to any dwelling unit
and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy in connection
with the construction and/or alteration of any dwelling unit, there shall
be installed a minimum of one smoke detector or smoke alarm on each
floor of a dwelling unit, including the basement and excluding the attic,
in locations designated by the Construction Code Official or Fire
Protection Subcode Official in conformance with the current
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.165
C. Enforcement.
(1) Compliance with this section shall be a condition to the issuance by
the Construction Code Official of any construction permit for
alteration or new construction.
(2) The Tax Collector of the Borough of Harrington Park shall provide
to each person requesting a tax search a copy of this section with a
statement advising that the seller of any dwelling unit must install
smoke detectors or alarms prior to the closing in accordance with
the provisions of this section. Prior to such closing, the seller's
attorney must provide a signed affidavit that smoke detectors or
smoke alarms have been installed in accordance with the
provisions of this section. This affidavit must be filed with the
Borough Assessor, Tax Collector and Construction Code Official.
Inspections shall be scheduled with the Fire Protection Subcode
Official. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658166]
A. Definitions. Words, terms and phrases used in and for the purpose of
this section are defined as follows:
FENCE — A permanent barrier of durable construction at least 48
inches in height above grade, containing a self-closing gate of at least
the same height, and so constructed as to permit normal passage from
one side to the other only through a gate. No gate shall be deemed
necessary if the pool and fence are so situated that one side of the
owner's dwelling is considered as the fourth side of the fence, and the
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 350-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-47
1:523
only access to said pool is through the dwelling. It will be incumbent
upon the owner to properly maintain the fence.
PORTABLE POOL — Any structure or other device having a depth of
12 inches or more, constructed of canvas, rubber, plastic and/or other
materials, in which the possessor, his family or guests can swim, dive or
enjoy other aquatic activities, and designed to be assembled and used
during the normal local swimming season and disassembled and stored
during other seasons.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any artificially constructed basin,
structure or other device having a depth of 12 inches or more (whether
above or below grade), in which the possessor, his family or guests can
swim, dive or enjoy other aquatic activities, and which is constructed,
erected or installed in such a manner as to classify it as "permanent" as
opposed to "portable."
B. New pools.
(1) No person, company or other coalition of interests shall erect,
construct, install, or cause to be erected, constructed or installed a
private swimming pool or a portable pool within the confines of the
Borough of Harrington Park without first submitting plans to the
Construction Code Official. Said plans must be accompanied by a
provision for temporary barriers or an enclosure of the excavation
after it has been dug and prior to the completion and filling of the
pool.
(2) A building permit shall be required prior to commencement of
erection, construction or installation work for private swimming
pools. The fee for such permit shall be as provided in the Borough
Fee Schedule.167
(3) No edge of the water basin of any private swimming pool shall be
located closer than 15 feet to any property line of the property upon
which the swimming pool is installed.168
C. Gates. The gate or gates in the fence shall be kept closed at all times,
except when being used for passage, and shall be locked when the pool
is unattended.
D. Aboveground pools.
(1) Pools with vertical sides less than four feet above ground level shall
be enclosed by a fence at least 48 inches in height, so constructed
and placed as to prevent access to the pool by small children.
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 350-47 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-47
1:524
§ 350-48. Tennis courts. [Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 400]
Tennis courts, when used exclusively for private purposes, shall be
permitted as an accessory structure in rear yards in the residential districts,
provided that such tennis courts shall be a minimum distance of 15 feet
from the rear lot line. Fences may be erected around the perimeter of a
tennis court in connection with the use thereof, but in no case more than 10
feet in height, and further provided that no illuminating lights permitting
night playing shall be allowed. Any fence used in connection with a tennis
court shall be of the chain-link variety. Any such fence shall be shielded by
(2) Stairs and steps or ladders leading up to the pool edge shall also be
enclosed as aforesaid or, if portable, shall be removed when not in
use.
E. Facilities for recirculation and reuse of water. All pools not equipped
with facilities for the recirculation and reuse of the pool water shall be
subject to closure by order of the Board of Health during any period of
emergency water shortage.
F. Relationship to zoning ordinances. Nothing herein shall be construed as
modifying, altering or repealing any provision of this chapter.
G. Enforcement officials. Enforcement of this section shall be the duty of
the Construction Code Official and/or the Health Officer of the Borough
of Harrington Park.
H. A private swimming pool meeting the requirements of the Board of
Health shall be permitted as an accessory use in a rear yard, provided
that:
(1) All terms and conditions contained in this section have been
complied with.
(2) The pool shall be located at least 15 feet from any side or rear lot
line. Any patio, decking and other decorative improvements
surrounding such a pool shall be located no closer than 15 feet to
any side or rear lot line.169
(3) Installation of any lighting of the pool shall be such that there shall
be no glare or direct lighting into adjacent properties.
(4) Swimming pools, including railings and other devices attached to
the pool structure, excluding diving boards and slides, shall not
exceed a maximum height above finished ground level of six feet.
On exposed sides facing adjacent property owners, the pool shall
be shrubbed with evergreens equal in height to the exposed portion
of the pool which is over two feet and not enclosed by fencing.
I. The foregoing restrictions shall not apply to movable wading pools.
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 350-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-48
1:525
evergreens or other shrubbery which will act as a buffer between the fence
and the side/rear or front yards.
§ 350-49. Heating, ventilating and air-conditioning equipment,
generators and backup electrical supply apparatus. [Added
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 400; amended 8-18-2014 by Ord. No. 692]
§ 350-50. Community residences. [Added 11-25-1996 by Ord. No.
489; amended 1-20-1997 by Ord. No. 491; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Harrington Park have determined
that, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1, it is in the best interests of the
Borough to establish regulations related to the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the Borough concerning community residences for the
developmentally disabled, community shelters for victims of domestic
violence, community residences for the terminally ill and community
residences for persons with head injuries, housing more than six persons.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67, the aforementioned residences may be
permitted as a conditional use in residential districts, provided that:
A. "Heating, ventilating and air-conditioning equipment and generators
and backup electrical supply apparatus" shall be defined as any
structure, casing or other apparatus located on the outside of the
structure which use has either heating, air-conditioning or electrical
backup supply purposes and commonly referred to as "central airconditioning/
heating units" or "generators/electrical backup supply
apparatus." Such equipment shall not encroach on any side, rear or
front yard setback requirement, as defined by this chapter. All such
equipment shall be shielded by evergreens or other shrubbery which
shall act as a buffer between the equipment and the side/rear or front
yard which is closest in proximity to said equipment. Further, with
respect to generators/electrical backup supply apparatus, such
equipment shall not be permitted in the front of the structure.170
B. For any such equipment which cannot be placed in a position in
conformance with the above subsection, the owner/applicant shall
come before the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment to
request the appropriate variance relief. The applicant is to provide the
Board with a copy of a survey indicating all existing structures on the
property and the proposed location of the equipment.
A. A conditional use permit shall not be granted for such residences
located within 1,500 feet of an existing community residence for
developmentally disabled persons or shelter or school.
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 350-48 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-50
1:526
B. A conditional use permit shall not be granted if existing community
residences or community shelters within the Borough exceed 50
persons or 0.5% of the Borough population, whichever is greater.
C. Applicants for conditional use permits shall demonstrate to the
Planning Board that every resident admitted shall be provided with
assistance in maintaining a basic level of self-care and in developing the
potential to live independently in the Borough. The operator of a
residence for the developmentally disabled shall provide to the Borough
Board of Health proper documentation certifying that each proposed
resident is neither a danger to himself nor to the community. Such
documentation shall be provided for each proposed resident before he
is allowed to take up occupancy in the facility. Provisions shall be made
for properly licensed medical, nursing and supervisory staff as the
Borough Board of Health deems necessary and adequate for the
particular facility in question.
D. The applicant shall supply information to the Planning Board covering
the operation and maintenance of the proposed residence and the rules
and regulations governing the admission and discharge of residents. In
addition to providing said information to the Planning Board, the same
information shall be provided by the operator of a community residence
for the developmentally disabled to the Borough Board of Health, and
the operator shall immediately provide to the Borough Board of Health
copies of any changes to rules and regulations. No such rule or
regulation shall be deemed effective unless and until the Borough
Board of Health has approved said rule or regulation as necessary and
adequate for that particular facility.
E. The applicant shall demonstrate to the Planning Board that essential
life-safety, health and comfort conditions will exist in a homelike
atmosphere in the proposed community residence.
F. Except as specified in these subsections, the use of single-family
dwellings for community residences shall conform to all development
standards of the same district within which the residence is to be
located.
G. Off-street parking shall be provided at a rate of two parking spaces for
the first six occupants, plus one additional space for each additional
three occupants, plus one for each staff member.
H. The applicant shall provide detailed building plans for a community
residence which shall indicate the use of all floor spaces contained
within the dwelling. In addition, the operator of the community
residence for the developmentally disabled shall provide copies of said
plans to the Borough Board of Health, and said plans are subject to the
approval of the Borough Board of Health as to the safety and adequacy
of the particular facility.
I. Community residences shall provide internal and outdoor passive
recreation areas to sufficiently accommodate the occupants of the
§ 350-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-50
1:527
dwelling. In addition, facilities shall be provided for internal recreation
for meetings, games and other similar activities.
J. The applicant shall demonstrate to the Planning Board that adequate
transportation will be continually provided to meet the daily needs of
the occupants of the dwelling.
K. A community residence shall have twenty-four-hour on-site supervision
and security. Security shall also consist of a fence and/or a landscape
screen, or a combination of both fencing and landscaping, surrounding
the facility, adequate to prevent residents of the facility from leaving
unnoticed and to prevent unauthorized persons from entering the
facility, as deemed appropriate by the Planning Board.
L. The applicant shall submit details concerning all life-safety and
emergency facilities and equipment which are to be provided within the
building. The operator of the community residence for the
developmentally disabled shall provide a centrally supervised fire alarm
system with supervised smoke detectors monitored by the Police
Department. The installation of smoke systems shall be in accordance
with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code and the
Bureau of Fire Prevention.
M. The use of any existing or proposed building or structure as a
community residence shall be in accordance with the State Uniform
Construction Code and shall also be subject to the approval of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention.171
N. The applicant shall provide documentation that the proposed residence
has been properly licensed by the New Jersey Department of Human
Services, as well as any other required regulatory governmental or
administrative body. A fully detailed written disclosure shall be
submitted to the Planning Board identifying individuals, with
addresses, involved in a corporation, partnership, society or
association, whether public or private, whether for profit or nonprofit,
involved in the operation and maintenance of such residence.
O. In considering the granting of a conditional use permit for a community
residence, the Planning Board may be guided by standards contained
elsewhere in this chapter for comparable conditions and by common
good practice.
P. The applicant shall demonstrate to the Planning Board that the site
location, existing development pattern of the area, traffic circulation
and pedestrian mobility and safety are suitable for the establishment of
a community residence.
Q. The operator of a community residence shall carry liability insurance
with minimum coverage of $1,000,000 per accident, which shall insure
171. Editor's Note: Original Subsection N of Ord. No. 489, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658.
§ 350-50 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-50
1:528
§ 350-51. Municipal uses. [Added 10-19-1998 by Ord. No. 513]
Municipal uses shall be permitted in all districts in the Borough and in all
respects shall be exempt from the ordinances contained in the Harrington
Park Code.
§ 350-52. Dumpsters, cargo containers and refuse containers.
[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
§ 350-53. Clothing donation bins. [Added 2-17-2009 by Ord. No.
636]
the operator against claims of negligence causing injury to the
residents of the facility and which shall insure the public against any
injury to person or property perpetrated by a resident of the facility.
Said insurance policy shall specifically provide that the mental state of
the facility resident who was injured or who perpetrates an act shall not
be used as a deterrent against recovery on the policy.
R. The operators of a community residence for the developmentally
disabled shall provide detailed information to the Planning Board
concerning its approval and compliance with the Rules and Regulations
Governing Community Mental Health Service and State Aid Under the
Community Mental Health Services Act (N.J.S.A. 30:9A), N.J.A.C.
10:37-1.1 et seq.
A. No dumpster, cargo container or refuse container with a capacity
greater than 100 cubic feet shall at any time be placed outside and upon
any premises within the Borough for a period greater than seven days.
The Borough police officers, Construction Code Official and Zoning
Officer have the authority to extend this period for one additional
seven-day period in order to accommodate the demolition, construction
or alteration of the premises. All other containers, regardless of their
use, shall be specifically approved by the appropriate Harrington Park
board, either planning or zoning. A dumpster permit may be renewed
for a period of 90 days upon approval of the Construction Code
Official.172
B. No lot owner within the Borough shall permit or allow a container to be
placed upon the lot to be used as an accessory structure or shed
without specific approval of the appropriate board.
C. This provision shall be enforced by the police officers, Construction
Code Official and Zoning Officer. Anyone who violates any provision of
this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 164,
Fines and Penalties.173
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 350-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-53
1:529
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following term shall have the
meaning indicated:
SOLICITATION or SOLICIT — The request, directly or indirectly, for
money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of any kind
or value. Solicitation shall include, but not be limited to, the use or
employment of canisters, cards, receptacles or similar devices for the
collection of money or other thing of value. A solicitation shall take
place whether or not the person making the solicitation receives any
contribution.
B. Requirements for placement and use of clothing bin for solicitation
purposes. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
no person shall place, use, or empty a clothing donation bin, for
solicitation purposes, unless all of the following requirements are met:
(1) The person has obtained a permit, valid for a twelve-month period
of time, from the Borough's Zoning Officer, in accordance with the
following:
(a) In applying for such a permit, the person shall include:
[1] The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely
as possible;
[2] The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin would be used,
sold, or dispersed and the method by which the proceeds
of collected donations would be allocated or spent;
[3] The name and telephone number of the bona fide office
required pursuant to Subsection B(7) of this section of any
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin; and
[4] Written consent from the property owner to place the bin
on his property.
(2) The person has secured minor site plan approval for the bin from
the Planning Board and for the specific purpose of ensuring that
the placement of such bin will not constitute a safety hazard.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall not grant an application for a permit to
place, use, or employ a clothing donation bin if he determines that
the placement of the bin could constitute a safety hazard. Such
hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the placement of a
clothing donation bin within 100 yards of any place which stores
large amounts of, or sells, fuel or other flammable liquids or gases.
(4) The Zoning Officer shall impose a fee for such application, in an
amount as provided in the Borough Fee Schedule, to offset the
costs involved in enforcing this section.174
§ 350-53 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-53
1:530
(5) An expiring permit for a clothing donation bin may be renewed
upon application for renewal and payment of a fee as provided in
the Borough Fee Schedule imposed by the Zoning Officer for such
renewal, to offset the costs involved in enforcing this section. Such
application shall include:175
(a) The location where the bin is situated, as precisely as possible,
and, if the person intends to move it, the new location where
the bin would be situated after the renewal is granted and
written consent from the property owner to place the bin on his
property;
(b) The manner in which the person has used, sold, or dispersed
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have
been allocated or spent, and any changes the person
anticipates he may make in these processes during the period
covered by the renewal; and
(c) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office
required pursuant to Subsection B(7) of this section of any
entity which shared or profited from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin and of any entities which may
do so during the period covered by the renewal.
(6) The permit number and its date of expiration shall be clearly and
conspicuously displaced on the exterior of the clothing donation
bin, in addition to the information required pursuant to Subsection
B(8) of this section.
(7) The person, and any other entity which may share or profit from
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, shall maintain
a bona fide office where a representative of the person or other
entity, respectively, can be reached at a telephone information line
during normal business hours for the purpose of offering
information concerning the person or other entity. For the purposes
of this subsection, an answering machine or service unrelated to
the person does not constitute a bona fide office.
(8) The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously
displaced on the exterior of the clothing donation bin:
(a) The name and address of the registered person who owns the
bin and of any other entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin;
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 350-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-53
1:531
(b) The telephone number of the person's bona fide office and, if
applicable, the telephone number of the bona fide office of any
other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or
other donations collected via the bin;
(c) In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the
bin may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily
understandable manner, indicating that clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be
shared by, or given entirely to, an entity other than the person
who owns the bin and identifying all such entities which may
share or profit from such donations; and
(d) A statement, consistent with the information provided to the
appropriate municipal agency in the most recent permit or
renewal application, indicating the manner in which the person
anticipates any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin would be used, sold, or dispersed and the method by which
the proceeds of collected donations would be allocated or
spent.
C. Receipt and investigation of complaints relative to donation clothing
bins.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall receive and investigate, within 30 days,
any complaints from the public about the bin. Whenever it appears
to the Zoning Officer that a person has engaged in or is engaging in
any act or practice in violation of Subsection B hereof, the person
who placed the bin shall be issued a warning stating that if the
violation is not rectified or a hearing with the Zoning Officer is not
requested within 45 days, the bin will be seized or removed at the
expense of the person who placed the bin, and any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin will be sold at public auction or
otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other means used to notify
the person who placed the bin, such warning shall be affixed to the
exterior of the bin itself.
(2) In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the
warning, the Zoning Officer may seize the bin, remove it, or have it
removed, at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and sell
at public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the
donations collected via the bin shall be paid to the Chief Financial
Officer of the municipality.
D. Additional penalties and remedies. In addition to any other penalties or
remedies authorized by the laws of this state, any person who violates
any provision of this section which results in seizure of the donation
clothing bin shall be:
§ 350-53 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-53
1:532
(1) Subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 164, Fines and
Penalties, for each violation. The Zoning Officer may bring this
action in the Municipal Court or Superior Court as a summary
proceeding under the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999, P.L. 1999,
c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.), and any penalty monies collected
shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality; and
[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
(2) Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a clothing donation bin
for solicitation purposes pursuant to Subsection B hereof. A person
disqualified from placing, using, or employing a clothing donation
bin by violating the provisions of this section may apply to the
Zoning Officer to have that person's eligibility restored. The Zoning
Officer may restore the eligibility of a person who:
(a) Acts within the public interest; and
(b) Demonstrates that he or she made a good faith effort to comply
with the provisions of this section and all other applicable laws
and regulations or had no fraudulent intentions.
E. Exemption of clothing donation bins sponsored by departments of the
Borough. The owner of any clothing donation bin which is sponsored by
any department of the Borough shall be required to comply with the
requirements of Subsections B through D hereof but shall specifically
be exempt from the minor site plan approval requirement of Subsection
B(2) and fee requirement of Subsection B(4) and (5) hereof.
§ 350-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-53
1:533

ARTICLE XI
Soil Removal
[Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 399]
§ 350-54. Purpose and findings.
The purpose of this article shall be to prevent the unregulated and
uncontrolled relocation, filling, excavation and removal of soil by any person
which may result in conditions detrimental to the public safety, health
and general welfare, substantially hampering and deterring the efforts
of the Borough to effectuate the general purpose of municipal planning.
The continuation of the unregulated and uncontrolled relocation, filling,
excavation and removal of soil and filling with unsuitable material may
cause serious and irreparable damage to the public welfare by reason
of: consequent soil erosion by water and wind; inadequate and improper
surface water drainage; decrease in or destruction of the fertility of soil;
removal of lateral support of abutting streets, lands and premises; creation
of dust storms and mosquito breeding places; creation of dangerous
depressions or pits; deterioration of property values; rendering of lands
unfit or unsuitable to their most appropriate uses; and creation of other
factors and elements hampering and deterring the coordinated, adjusted
and harmonious physical development of the Borough.
§ 350-55. Definitions.
As used in the article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOT — Any parcel of land or portion thereof, the boundary lines of which
can be ascertained by reference to the maps and records, or either, in the
office of the Tax Assessor of the Borough or in the office of the Bergen
County Clerk. For the purposes of this article, a lot shall also be deemed
to be any contiguous parcels of land under common ownership, which
ownership can be ascertained by reference to the maps and records, or
either, in the office of the Tax Assessor of the Borough or in the office of the
Bergen County Clerk.
MAJOR SOIL MOVING PERMIT — Any soil permit other than a minor soil
moving permit as herein defined.
MINOR SOIL MOVING PERMIT — A permit for the movement of soil
between 35 cubic yards and 350 cubic yards. Further, on application to the
Borough Clerk, on certification of the applicant, a waiver shall be issued
for the movement of any amount of soil less than 35 cubic yards; provided,
however, that, in the event topsoil is being brought to the site, such soil
is clean and being furnished by an individual or company that regularly
deals in the provision of topsoil; further provided that in the event that
less than 35 cubic yards will be disturbed in the building or demolition
of any structure, and that either the Borough Engineer or Construction
Code Official determines such disturbance shall not create drainage or
grade deterioration, then either professional may waive such permit
§ 350-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-55
1:535
compliance.[Amended 7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 583; 9-19-2011 by Ord.
No. 664]
MOVE — To dig, excavate, remove, deposit, place, fill, grade, regrade, level,
transport or otherwise alter or change the location or contours. This term
shall not be construed to include plowing, spading, cultivating, harrowing
of soil or any other operation usually and ordinarily associated with the
tilling of soil for agricultural or horticultural purposes, landscaping and
gardening by homeowners or agents of homeowners, provided that it does
not substantially alter existing drainage patterns.
OWNER — Any person owning any lot or having such other interest therein
as will permit exercise of effective possession thereof. This shall include
contract purchasers of the subject lots.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or matter, including
any synthetic substance used as a substitute for or in conjunction with soil.
SUITABLE FILL — The Borough Engineer shall determine whether the fill
is suitable or unsuitable to the particular location. Suitable materials shall
include but not be limited to materials such as earth, clay, gravel, stone,
dirt, etc.
TOPSOIL — Soil that, in its natural state, constitutes the top layer of earth
and is composed of 2% or more, by weight, of organic matter and has the
ability to support vegetation.
UNSUITABLE FILL — The Borough Engineer shall determine whether the
fill is suitable or unsuitable to the particular location. The unsuitable
materials are materials such as peat moss, organic material vegetation,
leaves, tree stumps, wood chips, sawdust, chemical waste, tires, wooden
logs, etc.
§ 350-56. Permit required. [Amended 5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 544]
A. No person shall move, cause, allow or permit to be moved any soil in or
upon any lot in the Borough unless and until application has been made
for a soil moving permit and the permit has been issued in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
B. All applicants for minor or major site plan approval and minor or major
subdivision approval in the Borough shall comply with and be subject to
this article.
C. An application for soil movement from within the Borough or from
outside of the Borough to a site in Harrington Park shall be preceded by
a certified analysis of the material by a laboratory licensed in the State
of New Jersey. Said testing laboratory shall also certify that the
laboratory, its employees or agents physically went to the source site
and took samples themselves for testing. The number and amount of
samplings taken, as well as the designated location from where they are
taken, shall be subject to the review and supervision of the Borough
Engineer.
§ 350-55 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-56
1:536
§ 350-57. Minor soil moving permits.
The procedure for applying for and issuance of a minor soil moving permit
shall be as follows:
D. All testing shall be performed and analyzed under the Priority Pollutant
+ 40 Analysis Reduced Deliverable. These tests shall include testing for
the following:
(1) Volatile organics.
(2) Base neutrals and acid extractables (petroleum products).
(3) Pesticides and PCBs.
(4) Cyanide and phenols.
(5) Metals: antimony, arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, copper,
lead, mercury, nickel, selenium, silver, thallium and zinc.176
E. Once the certified testing laboratory indicates that the above tests were
positive and do not exceed the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP) maximum limits, it would then be in
order for an applicant to make application for the movement of soil as
outlined above.
F. This provision will be required for both minor and major soil moving
permits.
A. Applications for minor soil moving permits shall be filed with the
Borough Clerk and shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed herein.
Applications shall be made in duplicate and shall be forwarded, upon
receipt by the Borough Clerk, to the Borough Engineer for his review
and approval. The application shall show the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The lot and block numbers of the subject property, including a
street address.
(3) The name and address of the owner of the subject property.
(4) The purpose or reason for the moving of the soil.
(5) The estimated quantity in cubic yards of soil to be moved.
Movement shall include volume of import, volume of export, and
volume of soil moved within the site. [Amended 9-19-2011 by
Ord. No. 664]
(6) A statement as to how the moving of the soil will affect all trees
with a diameter of six inches or more.
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 350-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-57
1:537
§ 350-58. Major soil moving permits.
The procedure for applying for and issuance of a major soil moving permit
shall be as follows:
(7) An impact statement regarding the effects that the proposed
movement of soil will have on drainage and erosion.
(8) Provide length, width and depth dimensions for each area of
excavation in feet. [Added 9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 664]
B. The Borough Engineer, upon receipt of the application, shall make a
field investigation and shall issue the permit or deny it, giving his
reasons for such a denial in writing. The Borough Engineer shall
forward a copy of the approval letter to the Construction Department,
Borough Clerk and the applicant and shall retain one copy on file. The
Borough Engineer shall classify any minor soil moving application as a
major soil application if he determines that the application poses a
substantial drainage or soil erosion problem or adversely affects the
development of the abutting lot or lots. Such a determination will
trigger compliance by the applicant with all provisions governing major
soil moving permits. [Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
C. In addition to the foregoing, the Borough Engineer may, in his
discretion, require other data pertinent to the application.
D. No stormwater improvements are required if: [Added 9-19-2011 by
Ord. No. 664]
(1) No substantial change to grading within building setbacks is
proposed.
(2) All runoff is directed to the interior of the site.
(3) All roof runoff is captured by leaders.
(4) Improved lot coverage pursuant to § 350-7 increases 500 square
feet or less.
E. If stormwater improvements are required, the applicant shall: [Added
9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 664]
(1) Construct an on-site stormwater management system to
accommodate two inches of runoff for the area of the proposed
improvements.
(2) Ensure that no increase in runoff occurs on any adjoining property.
A. On forms prescribed and supplied by the Planning Board, the applicant
shall set forth, in duplicate to the Planning Board, with a copy to the
Borough Engineer and Construction Department: [Amended
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
§ 350-57 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-58
1:538
(2) The lot and block numbers of the subject property, including street
address.
(3) The name and address of the owner of the subject property.
(4) The purpose or reason for moving the soil and whether it will be
done in connection with a proposed subdivision or site plan; if so,
the date the application for subdivision/site plan was made with the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(5) A detailed statement of the method or process to be employed for
the proposed soil movement.
(6) The proposed hours and time periods encompassing the soil
movement.
(7) The type and quantity in cubic yards of the soil to be moved.
(8) In the case of removal or replacement of soil, the place to which the
soil is to be removed, the quantity of soil to be removed or filled
within and the proposed transportation route to be used within the
Borough.
(9) A signed affidavit by the applicant that he has placed or caused to
be placed stakes at each corner of the subject premises and that he
has placed or caused to be placed grade stakes at the existing
elevation points designated on the required topographical map
clearly marked to indicate proposed soil cuts or fill.
(10) A statement as to how the moving of the soil will affect all trees
with a diameter of six inches or more.
B. Signatures. Said application shall bear the signatures of the applicant
and the owner of the subject property indicating the owner's consent to
the proposed soil movement.
C. Topographical map. Accompanying the application shall be eight prints
of a topographical map of the lot upon which the proposed soil moving
operations are to be conducted and of all surrounding lands within 100
feet of the perimeter of said lot, but not beyond the far side of an
abutting street right-of-way, prepared and certified by a licensed
professional engineer or land surveyor of the State of New Jersey. The
map shall be prepared on a scale of not less than one inch to 100 feet,
shall refer to United States Coast and Geodetic Survey data and shall
show:
(1) The dimensions of the lot, including distance and bearings, lot and
block number of the lot and each lot in the surrounding lands
within 100 feet.
(2) The existing elevations of all lands on a one-hundred-foot grid
layout.
§ 350-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-58
1:539
§ 350-59. Fees. [Amended 5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 544; 4-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 658; 9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 664177]
All fees shall be paid to the Municipal Clerk.
(3) The existing elevations of all buildings, structures, streets, streams,
bodies of water and watercourses, natural or artificial.
(4) All existing surface and subsurface water drainage conditions.
(5) All wooded areas, with specific reference being made to all trees
having a diameter of six inches or more at the base.
(6) The limits of the area or areas within the lot in question within
which the soil moving operations are to be conducted and the
existing elevations of said limits at intervals of not more than 100
feet.
(7) The proposed final elevations at each point where existing
elevations are to be altered.
(8) Proposed slopes and lateral supports at the limits of the soil moving
area.
(9) Proposed provisions and facilities for surface water drainage and,
where applicable, channels of any streams, bodies of water and
watercourses, natural or artificial, including detailed cross sections
showing proposed channel widths, bank slopes, grade and method
of erosion control.
A. Application fees for the following items are provided in the Boroughmaintained
Fee Schedule.
(1) Minor soil moving application fee, 35 cubic yards to 350 cubic
yards.
(2) Major soil moving application fee, over 350 cubic yards.
(3) The application fee will be nonrefundable, whether a permit is
issued, denied or withdrawn.
B. Professional escrow fees for the following items are provided in the
Borough-maintained Fee Schedule.
(1) Minor soil-moving escrow fee.
(2) Major soil-moving escrow fee.
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 350-58 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-60
1:540
§ 350-60. Escrow for site plan review and drainage. [Added
7-18-2005 by Ord. No. 583]
Whenever application is made to construct or reconstruct a building or
structure within the Borough of Harrington Park and the Construction Code
Official determines that the grade and drainage are in apparent need of
review by the Borough Engineer, then such application shall include a sum
of $500 to be held in escrow for engineering review of the proposed building
or property alteration. In addition, any time a request for a permit for
demolition of a housing or commercial structure is made and the applicant
does not wish to sign a waiver for future building, then such applicant shall
post an escrow in the amount of $200 for engineering review to determine
if a structure may be rebuilt upon the lot after demolition.
§ 350-61. Payment of taxes; performance bond requirements.
§ 350-62. Topsoil restrictions.
A. Approval of a removal permit shall not be given until the applicant has
submitted proof that there are no taxes or assessments for local
improvements due or delinquent on any property involved in the soil
moving operation.
B. No permit shall issue until the applicant posts with the Borough a
performance bond in form and with surety acceptable to the Borough,
in such amount as the Planning Board shall determine to be sufficient to
ensure the faithful performance of the work to be undertaken pursuant
to the soil moving application. Failure to post said bond shall result in a
rescission of any conditional or unconditional action of approval by the
Planning Board.
C. In the event that a modification or amendment is sought to an approved
soil moving permit, for which a performance bond has been posted, the
applicant shall first submit written consent of the surety on said bond to
the Planning Board. Said consent shall evidence the surety's approval of
the proposed modification or amendments.
D. An application for release of a performance bond shall be accompanied
by an affidavit stating that the soil moving operation has been
completed in accordance with the application and all plans, maps and
other data filed therewith and in accordance with all resolutions and
conditions adopted by the Planning Board.
A. Whenever any person shall move topsoil in or upon any lot, provision
shall be made for the storage of said topsoil within the boundary lines of
said lot.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, all of the topsoil so stored shall be
uniformly replaced over the entire area or surface of the lot on or
before the completion date set forth in the soil permit so that the final
§ 350-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-62
1:541
grade or grades of said replaced topsoil shall be in accordance with the
proposed final grades shown on the topographical map.
C. No person shall remove to any point beyond the boundary lines of the
lot any topsoil whatsoever unless and until topsoil not inferior in quality
to that to be removed shall first have been replaced uniformly to a
depth of not less than six inches, measured from the proposed final
grades as shown on the topographical map, over the entire area of the
lot, excepting only such portions thereof as shall be or shall have
become, since the date of filing of said topographical map, permanently
covered by a building or structure, street pavement, curb, sidewalk,
driveway or other paved area or by any body of water or waterway. In
no event shall any person remove from the lot more topsoil than that
comprising the surplus or excess remaining after the replacement of
the topsoil as aforesaid.
§ 350-62 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-62
1:542
ARTICLE XII
Tree Preservation and Removal
[Added 7-17-1995 by Ord. No. 475]
§ 350-63. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to discourage indiscriminate and excessive
removal, cutting, and destruction of trees and to encourage conditions
and practices which prevent increased surface drainage, sedimentation and
soil erosion, decreased soil fertility, and post-construction mortality and
provide adequate revegetation of the area with appropriate species after
construction. On relevant land, as defined herein, it is the intent of this
article for the applicant's professional design consultants to prepare and
submit plans which consider and place a design priority on the preservation
of existing vegetation and, in particular, trees. It is the further intent of
this article that roadway alignment, building placement, proposed grading,
utility installations and other site improvements be planned and designed
with the preservation of existing trees as a major consideration. The ability
to maximize or increase development density shall not be a legitimate cause
to justify relief from provisions of this article.
§ 350-64. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED TREE PLAN — A tree removal, preservation and planting plan
which has been approved by the Borough of Harrington Park Planning
Board.
COMMUNITY BUILDINGS — Churches, clubs, lodges or any such building
used by any organized group or by the public generally.
DRIP LINE — An imaginary line from the tips of the outermost branches of
a tree projected vertically to the ground.
ENFORCING OFFICER — The Construction Code Official shall be the
enforcing officer for all approved tree plans.
PREFERRED TREES — Trees recommended by the New Jersey Bureau of
Forest Management as best adapted to the climate, soil and topography of
the Borough of Harrington Park. A listing of these trees is on file with the
Harrington Park Borough Clerk.
RELEVANT LAND —
Any real property which:
Is or could be the subject of a major subdivision application, as is
defined in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
and this chapter;
(1)
(2) Is the subject of a site plan application; or
A.
§ 350-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-64
1:543
STREET TREE — Any tree within 12 feet of street pavement.
TREE — Any live, woody perennial having a diameter of six inches or
greater measured at a point 4 1/2 feet above the ground (diameter at breast
height).
TREE REMOVAL, PRESERVATION AND PLANTING PLAN — A plan of tree
removal, preservation and/or planting prepared by the New Jersey Bureau
of Forest Management, an approved forester by the New Jersey Bureau of
Forest Management, a licensed landscape architect or, at the discretion of
the Planning Board, a similarly qualified person.
§ 350-65. Exemptions.
Under this section, the following trees may be removed without filing a plan:
§ 350-66. Compliance required.
No person shall cut, remove, plant or damage any tree upon any relevant
land within the Borough of Harrington Park unless such removal and cutting
is done in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 350-67. Tree removal, preservation and planting plans required.
Is located in the R-3 Zone and is the subject of a minor subdivision
application consisting of three lots.
(3)
Any other land located within the Borough of Harrington Park,
regardless of zone. Tree removal on any land defined in this Subsection
B shall be governed by § 350-73. [Added 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 597]
B.
A. Any tree removed in compliance with the Farmland Assessment Law.178
B. Trees directed to be removed by municipal, county or state authority
pursuant to law.
C. Any tree which is part of a nursery, garden center, Christmas tree
plantation, orchard or cemetery.
D. Trees authorized to be removed at the discretion of the Harrington Park
Construction Code Official for purposes of safety, maintenance or other
reasons relating to the public health or general welfare.
A. No person shall cut or remove any tree upon relevant land within the
Borough of Harrington Park without first obtaining an approved tree
plan.
B. A tree removal, preservation and planting plan shall be filed with every
application relating to relevant land for approval of a subdivision, site
plan, planned development, conditional use or zoning variance or prior
to any other development requiring tree removal or planting, except as
otherwise provided in this article.
178. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.
§ 350-64 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-67
1:544
§ 350-68. Plan application procedure.
The procedure for applying for and issuance of an approved tree plan shall
be as follows:
C. Tree plan approval; guaranties.
(1) No building permit with respect to relevant land shall be issued for
site clearing, grubbing or the construction of any residential,
commercial, industrial, recreational, or community buildings or
accessory buildings unless the property owner or its designated
agent first obtains an approved tree plan.
(2) No permit shall be issued unless the applicant has filed with the
Borough a performance guaranty sufficient in amount to equal the
total cost to the Borough, as estimated by the Borough Engineer, of
complying with the conditions of the approved tree plan, in the
event that the applicant does not complete the work as approved.
The form, sufficiency and execution of the performance guaranty
shall be approved by the Borough Attorney. Posting of the guaranty
shall be detailed and defined in any developer's agreement entered
into by the Planning Board, the Borough and an applicant.
(3) A maintenance guaranty shall be furnished by the applicant upon
the release of the performance guaranty and/or the approval of the
Borough Engineer evidencing that all work has been completed in
accordance with the approved tree plan. The maintenance
guaranty shall begin with the release of the performance guaranty
and shall run for a period of two years pursuant to the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. Provisions governing the
maintenance guaranty shall be contained in the developer's
agreement.
D. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless tree removal and
planting have been performed in accordance with the approved tree
plan. Proof that all trees have been planted in accordance with the
approved plan or that the plantings are insured by a valid performance
guaranty shall be submitted to the Construction Code Official.
E. The Borough of Harrington Park Environmental Commission may
advise the Planning Board, in writing, of the adequacy of a tree
removal, preservation and planting plan.
A. Applications shall be filed with the Planning Board and shall be
accompanied by the fee prescribed herein. Applications for exemptions
shall be filed directly with the Borough Construction Code Official.
B. The applications shall be made in duplicate and a copy shall be filed
simultaneously with the Borough Engineer and the Borough
Environmental Commission. The application shall show the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
§ 350-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-68
1:545
§ 350-69. Criteria for plan approval and compliance.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the relevant land.
(3) The lot and block numbers of the relevant land, including a street
address.
(4) The purpose or reason for the application.
C. Every application shall be accompanied by a map and exhibits showing:
(1) Tax Map, lot and block number.
(2) Area of the subject relevant land.
(3) Tree survey of all existing trees.
(4) Genus, species and size in inches of all trees involved.
(5) General slope and topography of the relevant land.
(6) Location of streams, water bodies and wetlands.
(7) Map of locations and surrounding properties showing wooded
areas.
(8) A list of trees to be planted, as selected from the preferred trees
list; identification of species to be used as street trees.
(9) Tree removal plan and tree planting plan in relation to principal
and accessory buildings, roads and driveways, parking lots, garden
areas, etc., showing also the relation to survey stakes.
(10) Location of buildings (site plan applications only).
(11) Location of roads, driveways, parking lots, staging areas,
recreation areas and garden areas, where applicable.
(12) Grading plan.
(13) Schedule for tree removal and planting.
(14) Maps, as applicable, showing number, type and location of trees
and wooded areas to be removed.
(15) Any other information deemed pertinent to the application by the
Planning Board, Borough Engineer or Construction Code Official.
D. At the discretion of the Planning Board, the applicant shall provide
alternative sketch plan layouts demonstrating that the layout
adequately considers and makes provision for the preservation of
existing trees.
E. All trees on a subject site shall be flagged in the field for identification.
§ 350-68 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-69
1:546
A. If no area other than a wooded area or area with trees can be found to
accommodate the building foundation, sewerage system, or well,
meeting the approval of the enforcement officer, necessary tree
removal shall be permitted.
B. Any grading must protect standing trees from machine operation, soil
storage or material storage by a distance equal to or greater than the
dripline of the tree by means of a brightly painted snow fence or
suitably visible alternative. Where some grading must take place within
the dripline, in the opinion of the Planning Board, tree wells should be
designed and constructed to preserve the trees. Any tree seriously
damaged during construction must be professionally treated or
replaced as deemed appropriate by the enforcing officer and/or the
Borough Engineer.
C. Any tree used in a required planting must be at least 2 1/2 inches
caliper in diameter, must be nursery stock, balled and burlapped, and
guaranteed for two years from the date of planting.
D. The removed trees are to be replaced according to the following
formula:
(1) For removed trees between six inches and 16 inches:
Percentage of Trees
Removed
Percentage of Removed Trees to be
Replaced
(with 2 1/2" trees or greater)
80% to 100% 80%
60% to 79% 60%
40% to 59% 40%
20% to 39% 20%
Less than 20% 10%
(2) For removed trees of 16 inches or greater:
Existing Tree to be
Removed
(inches)
Number of Replacement Trees
(minimum 2 1/2")
From 16 to 18 3
From 18 to 21 4
From 21 to 24 5
From 24 to 27 6
From 27 to 30 7
From 30 to 33 8
From 33 to 36 9
§ 350-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-69
1:547
§ 350-70. Fees and escrows.
The applicant, at the time of filing an application for an approved tree plan,
shall deposit with the Clerk of the Planning Board an amount determined
herein payable to the Borough of Harrington Park. Applications which are
filed together with other development matters, such as subdivision, site
plan and/or variance, shall pay a fee equal to the sum of the fees for
each required approval. In addition, the applicant shall escrow sufficient
funds with the Borough Clerk for payment of the fees of all professionals
whose services are required, including but not limited to any landscape
architect or horticulturist retained by the Borough, the Borough Engineer,
the Borough Attorney and the Planning Board Attorney. The escrow funds
also shall be applied toward the cost of all required inspection fees incurred
in connection with an approved tree plan.
Existing Tree to be
Removed
(inches)
Number of Replacement Trees
(minimum 2 1/2")
From 36 to 39 10
From 39 to 42 14
From 42 and greater 15
E. Trees in the area between the street line and the setback line of the
buildings shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible.
F. Tree removal from any slope or environmentally sensitive area is
prohibited if it will contribute, in the opinion of the Planning Board, to
extra runoff of surface water onto adjoining property and erosion and
silting, unless other means approved by the Bergen County Soil
Conservation District are provided to prevent runoff and erosion.
G. In the event that the replacement of the required number of trees
cannot reasonably be achieved on site, the applicant may request or
may be required by the Planning Board to contribute an amount equal
to the cost of the replacement tree (including supply, delivery,
installation and guarantee) to a fund established by the Borough for the
purpose of tree maintenance, tree preservation, tree planting, and
landscaping, and including the donation of trees to be planted within
the Borough. Said amount referenced above shall be calculated by
multiplying the current wholesale value of each unplanted tree by
three. Wholesale value shall be determined by the applicant's
submission of a current wholesale catalog (or dated copy thereof) from
a regional nursery listing its price for pickup at the nursery. Failing
such a submission by the applicant, the Planning Board may obtain such
information on its own from any local wholesale nursery. [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 546]
A. Application fees for an approved tree plan (minor subdivisions, major
subdivisions, site plans): as provided in Borough Fee Schedule.179
§ 350-69 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-71
1:548
§ 350-71. Expenditure of monies from fund. [Added 4-20-2005 by
Ord. No. 580]
§ 350-72. Penalties for unauthorized tree removal. [Amended
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
A party who removes a tree on relevant land which is not permitted by an
approved tree plan shall be subject to the fine in § 350-73G for each tree
removed and shall be required to replace the tree removed in accordance
with § 350-69D and G of this chapter.
§ 350-73. Large-scale clearing. [Added 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 597]
A. The Mayor and Council, on their own initiative or upon the
recommendation of the Harrington Park Environmental Commission,
which recommendation shall not be binding upon the Council, may
review, evaluate, consider and approve requests for the withdrawal of
monies from the fund for projects within the Borough for the planting of
trees, ornamentals and other such beautification initiatives.
B. Upon approval of any such request for fund withdrawal, the Borough's
Chief Financial Officer shall arrange for the payment of such project
pursuant to the terms and conditions of such approval and subject to
such other conditions as the Chief Financial Officer may impose for the
release of such funds, including but not limited to vouchers.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to control and regulate the
indiscriminate or excessive removal, large-scale clear-cutting and
destruction of trees associated with new construction on single-family
lots and to control and regulate and prevent conditions which cause an
increase in stormwater runoff, sedimentation, soil erosion, or air or
noise pollution or inhibit aquifer recharge or impair the ambiance or
physical appearance of a neighborhood. The intent of this section is to
limit the adverse impact of tree removal while not interfering with the
right of a Borough property owner to appropriately remove trees in
accordance with this section.
B. Restrictions. No person shall:
(1) Cut down or remove any tree or allow or cause such cutting or cut,
destroy or injure any tree in any manner.
(2) Place or maintain upon the ground any substance which will
impede the free access of air and water to the tree's living
components.
(3) Apply any substance to any part of a tree, including roots, with the
intention to injure or destroy the tree.
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 350-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-73
1:549
C. Permitted activities:
(1) The cutting, trimming or maintenance of trees in a manner which is
not harmful to the health of the tree.
(2) The removal of trees which are diseased, dead, partially or
completely fallen by acts of nature, or which endanger the public
safety.
(3) The removal of trees necessary for permitted construction upon the
land, provided that such construction proceeds with a duly issued
construction permit issued by the Construction Code Official. Any
tree not within the footprint of the proposed construction shall
require a tree removal permit.
D. Tree removal permit.
(1) A tree removal permit shall be required for the removal of any tree
not otherwise permitted in this § 350-73.
(2) An application form, provided by the Borough of Harrington Park
for tree removal, shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer, together
with the required fee. The application shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the applicant, the street address and
tax lot and block numbers of the property in question and the
number of trees to be removed.
(b) The reason(s) for removing the tree(s).
(c) A tree removal plan consisting of a diagram showing the
location of all trees to be removed, the species of such trees
and their diameters.
(d) The location of all structures on the property.
(e) The use of an existing survey shall be acceptable for purposes
of the diagram.
(f) A tree mitigation plan if the applicant proposes to plant new
trees elsewhere on the property. Such plan shall set forth the
species of trees, diameter and location on the property. A tree
mitigation plan shall not be required but may be considered by
the Zoning Officer in determining if a tree removal permit
should issue.180
(g) An application fee as provided in Borough Fee Schedule.181
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 350-73 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-73
1:550
(3) The Zoning Officer shall either issue or decline the issuance of a
tree removal permit within seven days from receipt of the
application for tree removal.
(4) No tree removal permit shall issue without the payment of the
application fee.
E. Standard for review. The Zoning Officer shall consider the following:
(1) Physical inspection of the property from which the tree(s) is to be
removed.
(2) Whether the proposed removal would impair the growth and
redevelopment of the remaining trees on the applicant's property
or adjoining property.
(3) Whether the proposed removal would change existing drainage
patterns.
(4) Whether the proposed removal would allow soil erosion or increase
dust.
(5) Whether the proposed removal would constitute a significant
change in the screening between lots or would change the wooded
aspect of the lot as viewed from the adjacent public road.
(6) Whether the proposed removal would constitute a horticulturally
advantageous thinning of an existing overgrown area.
(7) The overall effect of removal of such tree(s) on the physical and
aesthetic value of the property and the neighborhood.
(8) Whether the proposed removal would remediate a safety hazard to
persons or structures.
(9) The applicant may submit any information in support of the
application regarding the above-noted review criteria.
F. Enforcement. The Zoning Officer is designated as the enforcing agent
for this section.
G. Penalty. Any tree removed contrary to the requirements of this article
shall be a violation for which a summons may issue, returnable before
the Municipal Court of Harrington Park. The fine for a violation shall be
as set forth in Chapter 164, Fines and Penalties. Additionally, anyone
found in violation of this article shall plant a replacement tree for each
tree removed in violation hereof, at the discretion of the Court. Each
tree removed shall be considered a separate offense. [Amended
4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
H. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Officer
shall have the right, within 10 days of the issuance of such decision, to
appeal to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall take such
action as it may deem appropriate.
§ 350-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-73
1:551
I. Borough property. This section shall not apply to any property owned by
the Borough of Harrington Park.
J. Emergencies. In the event of an emergency, where a tree poses an
immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of
Harrington Park, or to any structure or property situate in Harrington
Park, as determined by the Harrington Park Police Department, such
tree may be removed immediately without need for a permit.182
182. Editor's Note: The following ordinances, originally adopted to amend the Zoning
Ordinance, have been moved to Ch. 85, Affordable Housing, as Arts. I, II and III,
respectively: Ord. No. 541 (adopted 3-19-2001); Ord. No. 608 (adopted 11-20-2006); and
Ord. No. 623 (adopted 2-17-2007), as amended by Ord. No. 634 (adopted 12-15-2008).
§ 350-73 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-73
1:552
ARTICLE XIII
Wireless Telecommunications Towers
[Added 12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 515]
§ 350-74. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish general guidelines for the siting
of wireless communications towers and antennas. The goals of this article
are to: (1) protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas; (2) encourage the location of towers in
nonresidential areas; (3) minimize the total number of towers throughout
the community; (4) strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing
tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional
single-use towers; (5) encourage users of towers and antennas to locate
them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal; (6) encourage users of towers and antennas to
configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the
towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape, screening,
and innovative camouflaging techniques; (7) consider the public health and
safety of communication towers; and (8) avoid potential damage to adjacent
properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of
tower structures. In furtherance of these goals, the Borough of Harrington
Park shall give due consideration to the communities adjacent to it, their
zoning maps and master plans, existing land uses, and environmentally
sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.
§ 350-75. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals
or other communication signals.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell
sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices and/or longdistance
providers or the public switching telephone network.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the average natural grade as defined elsewhere in the
Borough Code to the highest point on the tower or other structure,
§ 350-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-75
1:553
including the base pad and any antenna.[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No.
658]
PREEXISTING TOWERS and PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower or
antenna for which a building permit or conditional use permit has been
properly issued prior to the effective date of this article, including permitted
towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed, so long as such
approval is current and not expired.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and
similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term
includes the structure and any support thereto.
§ 350-76. Applicability.
§ 350-77. General requirements.
A. New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas in the Borough
shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in Subsections
B, C and D, inclusive.
B. Amateur radio station operator/receive-only antennas. This article shall
not govern the installation of any antenna owned and operated by an
amateur radio operator or which is used exclusively for receive-only
antennas and for private noncommercial purposes, which shall be
regulated elsewhere in the Code of the Borough.
C. Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this article,
other than the requirements of § 350-77F and G, absent any
enlargement or structural modification or the addition of any
structures.
D. AM array. For purposes of implementing this article, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system
which function as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered
one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall
be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM
array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the
AM array by right.
A. Principal or conditional use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or conditional uses. A different existing use of any
existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of
an antenna or tower on such lot. However, all such preexisting uses
must be approved authorized uses.
§ 350-75 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-77
1:554
B. Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with zone development regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
C. Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower
shall provide to the Zoning Officer an inventory of all existing towers,
antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas that are either
within the jurisdiction of the Borough or within one mile of the border
thereof, including specific information about the ownership, location,
height, and design of each tower. The Zoning Officer may share such
information with other applicants applying for approvals under this
article or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the
jurisdiction of the Borough; provided, however that the Zoning Officer
is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or
warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
D. Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to
any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so
as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(2) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural
setting and surrounding buildings.
(3) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must
be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
E. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the
FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
F. State and federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of
the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers
and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the
owners of the towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring
such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations within six months of the effective date of such
standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is
mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring
towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
§ 350-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-77
1:555
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
G. Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local
building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from
time to time. If, upon inspection, the Borough concludes that a tower
fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger
to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of
the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into
compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into
compliance within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal
of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
H. Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located
in the Borough irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional
boundaries.
I. Nonessential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this article and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.
J. Franchises. Franchise owners and/or operators of towers or antennas
shall certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/
or operation of a wireless communication system in the Borough have
been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the
Zoning Officer.
K. Public notice. For purposes of this article, any conditional use request,
variance request, or appeal of an administratively approved use or
conditional use shall require public notice to all abutting property
owners and all property owners of properties that are located within the
corresponding separation distance listed in other sections of this
article.
L. Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower, except for
safety signs.
M. Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements
of § 350-81.
N. Multiple antenna/tower plan. The Borough encourages the users of
towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval of
multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of
multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process.
O. Height. No monopole or tower as provided by this article shall exceed a
maximum height of 125 feet. [Added 3-19-2001 by Ord. No. 538]
§ 350-77 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-78
1:556
§ 350-78. Permitted uses.
§ 350-79. Conditional uses.
A. General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses
and shall not require administrative approval or a conditional use
permit.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted: antennas
or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by
the Borough, provided that a license or lease authorizing such antenna
or tower has been approved by the Borough. Such use shall, however,
require site plan approval. All other uses are prohibited, subject to
§ 350-79 below.
A. General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
conditional approval for antennas:
(1) The Planning Board may grant conditional use approvals for
antennas to be located within the Borough in all Industrial Districts
and Office and Research Districts south of Old Hook Road.
(2) Each applicant for conditional use approval shall apply to the
Planning Board providing the information set forth in § 350-80 of
this article and a nonrefundable fee as established by ordinance.
(3) The Planning Board shall review the application and determine if
the proposed conditional use complies with this article. It may
review any application for variances (other than those specifically
reserved to the Zoning Board of Adjustment) in conjunction
therewith.
(4) If the conditional use permit is denied, the applicant may file an
application for a variance with the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. List of conditional uses. The following uses may be approved by the
Planning Board after conducting an administrative review:
(1) Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with
the terms of Subsections B(1)(a) and (b) below.
(a) Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna which is not
attached to a tower may be approved by the Planning Board as
a conditional use to any commercial, industrial, professional or
institutional use in any such designated zones, provided that:
[1] The antenna does not extend more than the maximum
building height for the zone wherein the structure is
located, and under the Borough's current height
ordinance;
[2] The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations; and
§ 350-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-79
1:557
§ 350-80. Site plan information for towers and antennas.
[3] The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
(b) Antennas on existing towers. An antenna which is attached to
an existing tower may be approved by the Planning Board and,
to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the
proliferation and clustering of towers, co-location of antennas
by more than one carrier on existing towers shall take
precedence over the construction of new towers, provided that
such co-location is accomplished in a manner consistent with
the following:
[1] A tower which is modified or reconstructed to
accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna
shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower.
[2] Height.
[a] An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller
height, not to exceed the maximum tower height
established by this article.
[b] The height change referred to in Subsection
B(1)(b)[2][a] may only occur one time per
communication tower.
[c] The additional height referred to in Subsection
B(1)(b)[2][a] shall not require an additional distance
separation as set forth in § 350-80. The tower's premodification
height shall be used to calculate such
distance separations.
[3] On-site location.
[a] A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the colocation
of an additional antenna may be moved on
site within 50 feet of its existing location.
[b] After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate co-location,
only one tower may remain on the site.
[c] A relocated on-site tower shall continue to be
measured from the original tower location for
purposes of calculating separation distances between
towers pursuant to § 350-80E.
A. Information required. In addition to any information required for
applications for conditional use permits, applicants for a site plan
approval for a tower or antenna shall submit the following information:
(1) A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of
the proposed tower or antenna, on-site land uses and zoning,
§ 350-79 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-80
1:558
adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to other
municipalities), Master Plan classification of the site and all
properties within the applicable separation distances set forth in
Subsection E, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access,
setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed
tower and antenna, and any other structures, topography, parking,
and other information deemed by the Planning Board to be
necessary to assess compliance with this article.
(2) Legal description of the parent tract and lease parcel (if
applicable).
(3) The setback distance between the proposed tower and antenna and
the nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties,
and unplatted residentially zoned proprieties.
(4) The separation distance from other towers/antennas described in
the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to § 350-77C
shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall
also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and
the owner/operator of the existing tower(s) and antenna, if known.
(5) A landscape plan showing specific landscape material.
(6) Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the method
of camouflage and illumination.
(7) A description of compliance with § 350-77C, D, E, F, G, J, L and M,
Subsections D and E of this section and all applicable federal, state
or local laws.
(8) Towers only: a notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of a tower will accommodate co-location of additional
antennas for future users.
(9) Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the
tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned
or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
(10) A description of the suitability of the use of existing, other
structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers
or structures to provide the services to be provided through the use
of the proposed new tower.
(11) A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Borough based upon existing physical,
engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the event
the proposed tower is erected.
(12) A visual study depicting where, within a three-mile radius, any
portion of the proposed tower could be seen. If the application
concerns an antenna on an existing structure, sight measurements
to the point closest to the structure wherein a person standing at
§ 350-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-80
1:559
grade could first observe the antenna shall be provided for all four
building elevations.
(13) A statement of intent on whether excess space will be leased and
how much of the structure's basement or common internal area has
been made available for the storage of equipment accessory to the
antenna.
B. Factors considered in granting site plan approval for towers. In addition
to any standards for consideration of site plan applications pursuant to
the zoning ordinances, the Planning Board shall consider the following
factors in determining whether to issue a site plan approval, although
the Planning Board may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of
one or more of these criteria if the Planning Board concludes the goals
of this article are better served thereby:
(1) Height of the proposed tower and antenna;
(2) Proximity of the tower/antenna to residential structures and
residential district boundaries;
(3) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(4) Surrounding topography;
(5) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(6) Design of the tower or antenna, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness;
(7) Proposed ingress and egress; and
(8) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures as discussed in Subsection C of this section.
C. Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative
technology. No new tower or antenna shall be permitted unless the
applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning
Board or Zoning Board that no existing tower, structure or alternative
technology that does not require the use of towers or structures can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. An applicant shall
submit information requested by the Board related to the availability of
suitable existing towers, other structures or technology. Evidence
submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or
alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna may consist of any of the following (although nothing should be
construed to infer that meeting one, some or all of the following shall
entitle the applicant to approval):
(1) No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic
area which meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
§ 350-80 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-80
1:560
(2) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
the applicant's engineering requirements.
(3) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related
equipment.
(4) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures,
or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause
interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
(5) The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing
tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding
new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable.
(6) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
(7) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable
microcell network using multiple low-powered transmitter/
receivers attached to a wireless system, is unsuitable.
**NOTE: The requirements for each applicant to prove and satisfy
the above conditions shall be an express element of its conditional
use application and shall be required of all applicants, regardless
of whether a use variance is required under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
D. Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers
for which a conditional use permit is required; provided, however, that
the Planning Board may reduce the standard setback requirements if
the goals of this article would be better served thereby:
(1) Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 75% of the
height of the tower from any adjoining lot line.
(2) Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements.
(3) No tower shall exist within required buffer areas, if adjacent to
residential zones and as prescribed under local ordinance.
E. Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to all
towers and antennas for which a conditional use permit is required;
provided, however, that the Planning Board may reduce the standard
separation requirements if the goals of this article would be better
served thereby:
(1) Separation from off-site uses or designated areas.
§ 350-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-80
1:561
(a) Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower
to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated areas as
specified in the following table, except as otherwise provided.
(b) Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the
minimum standards established in Table 1.
Table 1
Off-Site Use/Designated
Area Separation Distance
Residential, schools or houses
of worship1
200 feet or 300% of height of
tower, whichever is greater
Vacant single-family
residentially zoned land which
is either platted or has
preliminary subdivision plan
approval which is not expired
200 feet or 300% of height of
tower, whichever is greater
Vacant unplatted residentially
zoned lands2
200 feet or 300% of height of
tower, whichever is greater
Nonresidentially zoned lands or
nonresidential uses
None; only setbacks apply
Notes:
1 Including nursing homes and other similar uses wherein
people are housed or receive care at least eight hours per day.
2 Includes any unplatted residential use properties without a
valid preliminary subdivision plan or valid development plan
approval and any multifamily residentially zoned land greater
than duplex.
(2) Separation distances between towers.
(a) Separation distances between towers shall be applicable for
and measured between the proposed tower and preexisting
towers. The separation distances shall be measured by
drawing or following a straight line between the base of the
existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan,
of the proposed tower. The separation distances (listed in
linear feet) shall be as shown in Table 2.
§ 350-80 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-80
1:562
§ 350-81. Buildings or other equipment storage.
Table 2
Existing Towers — Types
Lattice Guyed
Monopole
50 feet in
Height
Monopole
Less than 30
Feet in
Height
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 1,000
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 1,000
Monopole
50 feet in
height
1,500 1,500 1,500 1,000
Monopole
less than 30
feet in
height
1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000
F. Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less
than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate
anti-climbing device.
G. Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping
surrounding towers for which a conditional use permit is required:
(1) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials
that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from
property used for residences or planned residences. The standard
buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet wide
outside the perimeter of the compound.
(2) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal,
the landscaping requirement may be reduced.
(3) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases,
such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around
the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
A. Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment cabinet or
structure used in connection with antennas shall comply with the
following:
(1) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 100 square
feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in height. In
addition, for buildings and structures which are less than 40 feet in
height, the related unmanned equipment structure shall be located
on the ground and shall not be located on the roof of the structure.
§ 350-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-81
1:563
§ 350-82. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12
months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or
tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the
Borough notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an
abandoned antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds to remove
the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users
(2) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the
area of the equipment and structures shall not occupy more than
10% of the roof area.
(3) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
B. Antennas mounted on utility pole, light pole or tower. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be located
in accordance with the following:
(1) In a front or side yard, provided that the cabinet or structure is no
greater than six feet in height or 100 square feet of gross floor area
and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of 75 feet from all
lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen
hedge with an ultimate height of at least 42 inches to 48 inches and
a planted height of at least 36 inches.
(2) In a rear yard, provided that the cabinet or structure is no greater
than eight feet in height or 120 square feet in gross floor area. The
cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an
ultimate height of eight feet and a planted height of at least 48
inches.
(3) In all other instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened from
view of all residential properties which abut or are directly across
the street from the structure or cabinet by a solid fence six feet in
height or an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet
and a planted height of at least 72 inches.
(4) Emergency generators shall be located below grade and suitably
soundproofed so that noise volumes measured at all property lines
do not exceed ambient levels. A nighttime restriction of 50 decibels
measured at all lot lines shall be imposed.
C. Equipment storage in a structure's basement. Where an applicant
proposes to store equipment, structures or cabinets required to operate
an antenna within the confines of the structure wherein the antenna is
to be located, the applicant need only make application for a building
permit for this use, which shall be granted so long as in conformance
with all construction codes. The applicant must indicate, to the Board,
why this option is not available from a construction standpoint.
[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658]
§ 350-81 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-82
1:564
of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all
users cease using the tower. The Borough may condition the issuance of
any permit to construct, demolish or remove a tower or antenna on the
posting of an appropriate performance bond or other suitable guarantee
in a face amount of not less than 120% of the cost (as determined by the
Planning Board Engineer) of such removal, grading and restoration to a
state required under all applicable Borough ordinances, including but not
limited to Chapter 248, Property Maintenance.
§ 350-83. Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers
or antennas.
Nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may
not be rebuilt without having to first obtain administrative approval or
a conditional use permit and without having to meet the separation
requirements specified in § 350-80E. The type, height, and location of the
tower on site shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility
approval. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the thenapplicable
building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the
date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if
said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as
specified in § 350-82.
§ 350-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-83
1:565

ARTICLE XIV
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
§ 350-84. Conditions of continuing use.
The lawful use of any building or land existing at the time of the enactment
of this chapter may be continued although such use does not conform to the
provisions of this chapter, subject to the following:
A. Unsafe structure. Any structure or portion thereof declared unsafe by a
proper authority may be restored to a safe condition.
B. A building or structure containing a nonconforming use may not be
reconstructed or structurally altered during its life except with the
prior approval of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, unless said building
is changed to be conforming.
C. A nonconforming use shall not be extended or expanded, but the
construction of a lawful addition or alteration to a nonconforming
structure which existed prior to the enactment of this chapter shall be
permitted as long as the addition or alteration does not enlarge or
expand the nonconformity and shall not require the prior approval of
the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
D. Destruction. No building damaged by fire or other causes to the extent
of more than 50% of its actual value shall be repaired or rebuilt except
in conformity with the regulations of this chapter.
E. Abandonment. Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued
for a period of one year, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished,
and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
F. Changes. Once changed to a conforming use, no building or land shall
be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use.
G. Displacement. No nonconforming use shall be extended to displace a
conforming use.
H. District changes. Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be
changed so as to transfer an area from one district to another district of
a different classification, the foregoing provisions shall also apply to any
nonconforming uses existing therein.
I. Restoration. Any nonconforming building damaged by fire or other
causes to the extent of less than 50% of its actual value may be
repaired, restored, reconstructed and/or used as before, provided that
the area of such use, building or structure shall not exceed the area
which existed prior to such damage. All repairs shall be completed
within one year after damage occurs or such use shall not be rebuilt
except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 350-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-85
1:567
§ 350-85. Certificate of prior existence of use or structure. [Added
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 398]
The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other person
interested in any land upon which a nonconforming use or structure exists
may apply in writing for the issuance of a certificate certifying that the
structure existed before the adoption of this chapter. The applicant shall
have the burden of proof. Application pursuant hereto may be made to
the Zoning Officer within one year of the adoption of this chapter or at
any time to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Officer shall
be entitled to demand and receive for such certificate issued by him a
reasonable fee not in excess of those provided in N.J.S.A. 54:5-14 and
54:5-15. The fees collected by the official shall be paid by him to the
Borough. Denial by the Zoning Officer shall be appealable to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment. Sections 59 through 62 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-72 to 40:55D-75), shall apply to applications or appeals to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 350-85 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-85
1:568
ARTICLE XV
Administration and Enforcement183
§ 350-86. Enforcement official.
The Zoning Officer or his designee is hereby given the duty, power and
authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. He shall examine all
applications for permits and issue permits for the construction, alteration,
enlargement and occupancy of all uses which are in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and all nonconforming uses existing at the
time of passage of this chapter. The Zoning Officer or his designee shall
also record and file all applications for permits with accompanying plans
and documents and make such reports to the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
Planning Board and governing body as may be required. Building permits
for a variance from the requirements of this chapter shall be issued only
upon written order of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the governing
body, as the case may be.
§ 350-87. Building permits.
A. Purpose. To ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, no
person shall erect, alter or convert any structure or building or part
thereof nor alter the use of any land subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter until a building permit has been issued by the Zoning Officer or
his designee.
B. Application for permits. All such applications shall be made in a manner
prescribed in the Building Code of the Borough of Harrington Park and
shall be accompanied by plans in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the
location, shape and dimensions of the lot, the location of and existing
and intended use of each building or part thereof, the height thereof,
the number of dwelling units and square feet of space, the amount and
location of off-street parking and loading and other data as may be
required by ordinance. The applicant shall also give such other
pertinent information respecting the proposed use of property and any
other information as may be necessary to determine the propriety of the
issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy.
C. Issuance of permits. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer or his
designee to issue a building permit, provided that he is satisfied that
the structure, building, sign, parking area and the proposed use
conform to all requirements of this chapter and that all other reviews
and action, if any, called for in this or any other ordinance and other
municipal, county and state requirements have been complied with and
all necessary approvals secured therefor. All building permits shall be
issued in duplicate, and one copy shall be kept conspicuously on the
premises affected and protected from the weather whenever
183. Editor's Note: At the time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. III), this article was amended to change instances of "Construction Code Official" to
"Zoning Officer."
§ 350-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-87
1:569
§ 350-88. Certificates of occupancy.
construction work is being performed thereon. No owner, contractor,
workman or other person shall perform any building operations of
any kind unless a building permit covering such operation has been
displayed as required by this chapter, nor shall he perform building
operations of any kind after notification of the revocation of said
building permit.
D. Denial of permits. When the Zoning Officer or his designee is not
satisfied that the applicant's proposed development will meet the
requirements of this chapter, he shall state on the application the
reason for denial and shall refuse to issue a building permit, and the
applicant may appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment for a reversal
of the Zoning Officer's decision.
E. Revocation of permits. If it shall appear at any time to the Zoning
Officer or his designee that the application or accompanying plan is in
any respect false or misleading or that work is being done upon the
premises differing from that called for in the applications filed with him
under existing laws or ordinances, he may forthwith revoke the building
permit, whereupon it shall be the duty of the person holding the same to
surrender it and all copies thereof to said Zoning Officer. After the
building permit has been revoked, the Zoning Officer may, in his
discretion, before issuing the new building permit, require the
applicant to file an indemnity bond in favor of the Borough of
Harrington Park with sufficient surety conditioned for compliance with
this chapter and all laws and ordinances then in force and in a sum
sufficient to cover the cost of removing the building or structure if it
does not so comply.
A. For new uses.
(1) Compliance with this chapter. It shall be unlawful to use or permit
the use of any building or part thereof hereafter created, erected,
changed, converted, altered or enlarged, wholly or in part, until a
certificate of occupancy shall have been applied for and issued by
the Zoning Officer or other designated official. An application for a
certificate of occupancy shall be made in duplicate upon forms
provided by the Zoning Officer or other designated official. In case
the Zoning Officer or other designated official shall decline to issue
a certificate of occupancy, his reasons for so doing shall be stated in
one copy of the application, and that copy shall be returned to the
applicant.
(2) Compliance with other ordinances. A certificate of occupancy shall
not be issued until the Zoning Officer or other designated official
receives written confirmation that all applicable codes and
ordinances administered and enforced by the Borough of
Harrington Park have been complied with.
§ 350-87 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-88
1:570
§ 350-89. Zoning permits. [Added 3-19-2007 by Ord. No. 611]
B. For existing uses. Upon written request from the owner, tenant,
occupant or purchaser under contract, the Zoning Officer or other
designated official, after inspection, shall issue an certificate of
occupancy for a use legally existing at the time this chapter is made
effective certifying the extent and kind of use and whether any such
existing use conforms to the provisions of this chapter. No change or
extension of use and no alterations shall be made in a nonconforming
use of premises without an certificate of occupancy having first been
issued by the Zoning Officer or other designated official stating that
such change, extension or alteration is in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.184
C. Change of use. No owner, tenant or other person shall use or occupy
any building or structure thereafter erected or altered, the use of which
shall be changed after the passage of this chapter, without first
procuring an certificate of occupancy, provided that an certificate of
occupancy, once granted, shall continue in effect so long as there is no
change of use or other conditions regardless of change in tenancy or
occupancy.185
A. Zoning permit required. No structure shall hereafter be erected, nor
land used, nor change made in the use of any land or structure, nor sign
painted on any structure unless the owner, his agent or contractor shall
first obtain a zoning permit from the Zoning Officer of the Borough of
Harrington Park. A fee as provided in Borough Fee Schedule shall be
charged for a zoning permit. No fee shall be charged if the application
is denied and/or referred to the Planning Board. [Amended 6-19-2012
by Ord. No. 672186]
B. Filing of plans.
(1) All applications for zoning permits shall be made on forms provided
by the Zoning Officer. It shall be accompanied by three copies of
plans drawn to scale, showing the location, shape, and dimensions
of the lot to be built upon; the location and dimensions, including
height, of existing and proposed structures; the existing or
intended use of each building or part thereof, including the number
of families, if any, intended to be accommodated; and the use of all
outdoor areas. Where site plan approval or review is required by
this chapter, 15 copies of said site plan shall be submitted with the
application.
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 350-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-89
1:571
(2) The Zoning Officer shall indicate his approval or disapproval of the
application on the application and plans, attesting to the same with
his signature. One copy shall be returned to the applicant and two
copies shall be retained by the Zoning Officer. If the Zoning Officer
refuses to issue a permit hereunder, he shall state, in writing, the
grounds for his refusal.
(3) The Planning Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment shall require as a
condition for any approval subject to its jurisdiction that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property for which the application is made. [Amended 4-18-2011
by Ord. No. 658]
C. Unless a certificate of occupancy is issued for the structure covered by
the zoning permit within one year from the date of the issuance of said
permit, the permit shall automatically lapse. Application may, however,
be made for the renewal of the permit for an additional period of 90
days only, with the approval of the Mayor and Council.187
187. Editor's Note: Original Subsection D, the definition of "zoning permit," which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 658 and the definition was
moved to § 350-3.
§ 350-89 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-89
1:572
ARTICLE XVI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 350-90. Prevalence of higher standards.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public
health, morals, safety or the general welfare. Whenever the requirements
of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive or that
imposing the highest standards shall govern.
§ 350-91. Amendments.
The regulations, limitations and restrictions of this chapter may from time
to time be amended, changed, modified or repealed and the boundaries
of the districts hereby established changed by ordinance adopted by the
Borough Council, but no amendment or change shall become effective
unless the ordinance proposing such amendment or change shall first have
been submitted to the Planning Board for approval, disapproval or
suggestions pursuant to the requirements of the Municipal Land Use
Law.188
§ 350-92. Violations and penalties.
A. Complaints of violations. Any person may file a complaint if there is any
reason to believe a violation of this chapter exists. All such complaints
must be in writing and shall be filed with the Construction Code Official,
who shall properly record such complaint and immediately investigate.
B. Procedures for abatement of violations. In case any building or
structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired,
converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in
violation of this chapter or of any ordinance or regulation made under
authority conferred hereby, the governing body or, with its approval,
the Construction Code Official or other proper official, in addition to
other remedies, may institute any appropriate legal action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to
prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land or to prevent
any illegal act, conduct, business or use about such premises.
C. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as set forth in Chapter 164,
Fines and Penalties, at the discretion of the Municipal Judge before
whom such a conviction may be had. Each day that a violation occurs or
is committed shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended 4-18-2011
by Ord. No. 658; 11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 719]
188. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 350-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-93
1:573
§ 350-93. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or the
location of any district boundary shown on the Zoning Map that forms a
part hereof is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, such a decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
of this chapter or the Zoning Map. The governing body of the Borough of
Harrington Park hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and
each section or part thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections or parts thereof may be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 350-94. Repealer.
All prior zoning ordinances of the Borough of Harrington Park, together
with all amendments and supplements thereto, are hereby superseded and
repealed; provided, however, that the adoption of this chapter shall not
prevent or bar the continuance or institution of any proceedings for offenses
heretofore committed in violation of any existing ordinances of the Borough
of Harrington Park.
§ 350-93 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-94
1:574
ARTICLE XVII
Unlawful Residential Units
[Added 12-10-2018 by Ord. No. 729]
§ 350-95. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ILLEGAL DWELLING UNIT —
§ 350-96. Rental or payment for use prohibited.
"Dwelling unit" shall mean one or more rooms occupied or intended
for occupancy as a separate living quarters by one or more families,
not common to the main residence and/or has only access from directly
outside and/or has locked doors separating units. Dwelling unit is a
separate area providing cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities.
A.
An additional dwelling unit, within a single family, for which a
certificate of occupancy has not been issued after Harrington Park
Zoning Code was adopted.
B.
Any additional dwelling units that legal documentation cannot be
shown built as "preexisting nonconforming" or a Board "Use Variance"
per Harrington Park Zoning Ordinance.
C.
A dwelling unit which is created without the necessary New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code permits.
D.
Landlord shall be deemed to be owner in fee, irrespective of residency
within building, or any entity that owns or possesses property due
foreclosure.
E.
Any other dwelling or rental unit which is in violation of any state,
county or municipal statute, regulation and/or ordinance.
F.
A. No person shall charge, demand, receive or accept any rent or other
payment for the use or occupancy of any residential premises within the
Borough of Harrington Park which is used or occupied in violation of
the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Harrington Park. Each such
charge, demand, receipt or acceptance of such rent or other payment in
violation hereof shall constitute a separate offense.
B. No person, specifically including but not limited to those persons
commonly known as "real estate agents," "brokers" or "salespersons,"
shall assist, aid or facilitate in the rental, sale, use or occupancy of any
residential premises within the Borough of Harrington Park which is
used or occupied or intended to be used or occupied in violation of the
Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Harrington Park. For purposes of
this article, the acts of listing for rental or sale, advertising or otherwise
offering for rent, lease or sale any residential premises within the
§ 350-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-96
1:575
§ 350-97. Notification of occupants.
§ 350-98. Violations and penalties.
Borough of Harrington Park which are used or occupied or intended
to be used or occupied in violation of the Zoning Ordinance of the
Borough of Harrington Park shall be deemed to constitute a violation
of this article. Any person who is to receive a commission, profit or
other form of remuneration or emolument as a result of a rental, lease
or sale of residential premises shall have a duty to make reasonable
inquiry to determine whether or not the use or occupancy or intended
use or occupancy is or will be in violation of the Zoning Ordinance of
the Borough of Harrington Park.
A. The Zoning Official or designee shall issue a court summons, in
violation of this article, to the owner of record and an order to vacate
shall be posted. Within 10 days following receipt of this notice to abate
an unlawful occupancy in violation of the Zoning Ordinance of the
Borough of Harrington Park or within 10 days following receipt of a
summons for violation of this article or the Zoning Ordinance of the
Borough of Harrington Park or prior to the institution of dispossess
proceedings to correct an illegal occupancy, whichever first occurs, the
owner of residential premises within the Borough of Harrington Park
shall serve upon all of the unlawful occupants using or occupying said
residential premises a copy of this article and shall post a copy of this
article in a common area of the premises accessible to all the occupants
thereof for inspection.
B. Upon written notification or violation by the Zoning Official that the
apartment is illegal, the landlord shall place all prospective and future
rent in an interest-bearing escrow account until finalization of the
municipal action. The landlord shall have an affirmative obligation to
produce proof of this account to the Municipal Court Judge at
summoned hearing.
C. In addition, other action or violations may be issued to the landlord, as
required, by the appropriate Borough officials in regard to the health,
safety and welfare of the occupants.
A. Any person violating and convicted of any provision of this article shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $1,000 or more than $2,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, for each
separate violation of same.
B. In addition to requiring reimbursement from the owner-landlord of the
structure for relocation assistance paid to a displaced tenant, and
notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, the
Municipal Court may impose an additional fine for zoning or housing
code violation for an illegal occupancy up to an amount equal to six
times the monthly rental paid by the displaced person to be paid to the
municipality by the owner-landlord of the structure pursuant to the
§ 350-96 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-98
1:576
§ 350-99. Costs of moving to be borne by violator.
§ 350-100. Findings and declarations.
The Mayor and Council hereby find and declare that there has been a
proliferation of what are commonly known as "illegal apartments," meaning
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1g(c). Notwithstanding the penalties
provided above, a second or subsequent violation for an illegal
occupancy as provided in this subsection by any owner-landlord for
a second or subsequent violation, the Municipal Court may impose a
fine equal to the annual tuition costs of any resident of the illegally
occupied unit attending a public school, which fine shall be recovered in
a civil action by a summary proceeding in the name of the municipality
pursuant to Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et
seq.). The Municipal Court and the Superior Court shall have
jurisdiction of the proceedings for the enforcement of the penalty
provided by this section. The tuition costs shall be determined in the
manner prescribed for nonresident pupils pursuant to N.J.S.A.
18A:38-19, and the payment of the fines shall be remitted to the
appropriate school district.
C. In those instances where a violation of this section is based on the
maintenance of residential dwelling units above the number of units
permitted by the Zoning Ordinance on a particular parcel of land (e.g.,
the maintenance of a structure with two residential dwelling units in a
zoning district where single-family homes are permitted), the defendant
who is the owner of a property shall be required to permanently remove
the kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, point of entrance/egress or any other
offending illegal structure, appliance or fixture. The Borough
Construction Official or his designee shall inspect the premises to
insure that said removal is accomplished within 30 days of the date of
the entry of the judgment of conviction by the Municipal Court.
A. Any tenant who receives a notice of eviction pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.2 that results from zoning or code enforcement
activity for an illegal occupancy shall be considered a displaced person
and shall be entitled to relocation assistance in an amount equal to six
times the monthly rental paid by the displaced person. The ownerlandlord
of the structure shall be liable for the payment of relocation
assistance pursuant to this section.
B. The Borough of Harrington Park may pay relocation assistance to any
displaced person who has not received the required payment from the
owner-landlord of the structure at the time of eviction pursuant to
Subsection A. All relocation assistance costs incurred by a municipality
pursuant to this subsection shall be repaid by the owner-landlord of the
structure to the municipality in the same manner as relocation costs are
billed and collected under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 20:4-4.1 and
N.J.S.A. 20:4-4.2.
§ 350-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-100
1:577
residential dwelling units which are occupied in violation of zoning laws.
These illegal apartments manifest themselves as a second residential unit in
a building in a one-family zone. The Mayor and Council hereby further find
and declare that such illegal units have a deleterious effect on the quality
of life of Borough residents, require the provision of Borough services,
generate young people who attend Borough schools, increase the utilization
of Borough programs and services, contribute to the costs of the Borough
by increasing the generation of refuse (garbage) and sewer flow, contribute
to overcrowding, generate traffic within the Borough, generate automobiles
which contribute to parking shortages throughout the Borough and lead to
the maintenance of dwelling units which often fail to meet health, safety
and building code standards. By their nature, such units generally escape
taxation as their maintenance and existence is normally hidden and not
used for tax assessment purposes. The use and maintenance of said illegal
apartments is also unfair to the vast majority of Borough residents who
abide by zoning laws.
§ 350-101. Restitution to Borough.
The Borough determines that the harm and detriment to the Borough
caused by illegal occupancies to be an unfair and inequitable situation.
Difficult to measure, the Borough hereby determines that the most
reasonable way to calculate same is as a percentage of the rental payment
charged by the owner to the occupant on account of the illegal occupancy.
The Borough determines a percentage of 10% of the rent to be fair and
reasonable as a measure of the damage and detriment caused to the
Borough, and the Mayor and Council may authorize the Borough Attorney
to recover from any person who charges, demands, receives or accepts rent
or payment for such an illegal occupancy to make restitution to the Borough
for the damage and detriment caused to the Borough during a period of
illegal occupancy.
§ 350-100 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 350-101
1:578
Part III: Health Code
Chapter 352
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 350-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-101
1:579

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Health Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 10-3-2011]
§ 352-1. Adoption of Health Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-65, Chapters 352 through 400 are hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the Part III, Health Code, of the
Code of the Borough of Harrington Park, hereinafter known and referred to
as the "Health Code."
§ 352-2. Health Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Health Code shall supersede all other general
and permanent ordinances of the Board of Health enacted prior to the
enactment of this Health Code, except such ordinances as are expressly
saved from repeal or continued in force and effect hereinafter.
§ 352-3. Copy of Health Code on file.
A copy of this ordinance and the Health Code in loose-leaf form have been
filed in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on the
Adopting Ordinance and the Health Code; and if the Adopting Ordinance
and the Health Code shall be adopted, copies shall be certified as provided
by law, and such certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health, to be made available to persons desiring
to examine the same during all times while the Adopting Ordinance and said
Health Code are in effect.
§ 352-4. Amendments to Health Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Health Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board
of Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Health Code so that reference to the "Health Code of the Borough
of Harrington Park" shall be understood and intended to include such
additions and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or
supplements to the Health Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter
be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book
containing said Health Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 352-5. Publication; filing.
The Secretary of the Board of Health, pursuant to law, shall cause the
Adopting Ordinance and the Health Code to be published, if applicable, in
the manner required, in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough
of Harrington Park. Sufficient copies of this ordinance and the Health Code
shall be maintained in the office of the Secretary for inspection by the public
at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of
§ 352-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-5
1:581
the Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Health
Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Health Code for all
purposes.
§ 352-6. Health Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary, or someone authorized and directed by
the Secretary, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Health Code required to be filed in the Secretary's office for the use
of the public. All changes in said Health Code and all ordinances adopted
subsequent to the effective date of the Health Code, which shall be adopted
specifically as part of the Health Code, shall, when finally adopted, be
included therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are
printed as supplements to said Health Code, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 352-7. Altering or tampering with Health Code; penalties for
violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Health Code, or to alter or tamper
with such Health Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law
of the Board of Health to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this
section shall be subject, upon conviction, to punishment as provided by law.
§ 352-8. Severability of Health Code provisions.
Each section of this ordinance and the Health Code and every part of each
section is an independent section or part of a section, and the holding of any
section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or part thereof.
§ 352-9. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance and the Health Code is an independent
section, and the holding of any section or part thereof to be
unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to
affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or part thereof.
§ 352-10. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of
Health and in force on the date of the adoption of this Health Code and not
contained in the Health Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of
this Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 352-5 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 352-11
1:582
§ 352-11. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this ordinance and the Health Code and the repeal of
ordinances provided for in § 352-10 shall not affect the following
ordinances, rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from
repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
D. Any agreement, franchise, license, right, easement or privilege
heretofore granted or conferred.
E. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
F. Any provisions of an ordinance or resolution of the Board of Health
creating employments, positions or offices and fixing salaries and duties
therefor which are not provided in the Health Code hereby adopted and
which are not in conflict or inconsistent therewith, or any ordinance
pertaining to the salaries and compensation of Board of Health officers
and employees.
§ 352-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-11
1:583

ARTICLE II
Definitions; Construction; Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 10-3-2011]
§ 352-12. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless otherwise provided elsewhere in the Health Code, in the
construction of the Health Code or any amendments hereof or any
supplements hereto, words and phrases shall be read and construed:
(1) Within their context and, unless inconsistent with the manifest
intent of the Board, as expressed herein.
(2) Unless another or different meaning is expressly indicated, such
words or phrases shall be given the meanings expressed herein, or
if no such meaning is given, their generally accepted meaning,
according to the approved usage of the language, shall be applied.
(3) Technical, trade or commercial words and phrases and words and
phrases having a special or accepted meaning in the law shall be
construed in accordance with such technical, trade, commercial or
special and accepted meaning.
(4) Unless otherwise indicated by the context, the definitions herein
contained shall apply to the terms used in other definitions.
(5) Unless otherwise indicated by the context, the singular shall
include the plural, and one gender shall include the other genders.
(6) "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
B. For the purpose of the Health Code, unless otherwise provided
elsewhere in the Health Code, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
AGENT — The authorized agent or authorized agents of the Board of
Health of the Borough of Harrington Park.
BOARD OF HEALTH or BOARD — The Board of Health of the Borough
of Harrington Park, or its official representative except where
otherwise specified, when the Board is not in session.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Harrington Park of Bergen County, State
of New Jersey.
FOOD — Includes any article used for food or beverage for people
or animals and every ingredient therein, including, without limitation,
all confectionery, condiments, flavorings and other components of any
such article.
GARBAGE — The accumulation of animal or vegetable matter, or both,
liquid or otherwise, that tends to decay.
§ 352-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-12
1:585
HEALTH CODE — The Health Code of the Borough of Harrington Park
as contained in Part III of the Code of the Borough of Harrington Park,
unless some other code is expressly indicated.
LICENSE or PERMIT — A written authorization which may be granted
by the Board or its agent, upon payment of the required fee, permitting
the conduct of specified acts for the period stipulated and in strict
accordance with the provisions of the Health Code and the Sanitary
Code and laws of the State of New Jersey.
NEW JERSEY STATUTES or N.J.S.A. — The current body of statutory
law of the State of New Jersey which contains the general and
permanent laws, as amended and supplemented.
OFFICER or OFFICIAL (and the title of an officer or official) —
Construed as if the words "of the Board of Health of the Borough of
Harrington Park" followed it.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter
adopted by the Board of Health and including the Health Code, so
long as it is adopted by the procedure required for the adoption of an
ordinance and so long as it remains in force and effect pursuant to law,
and shall include amendments thereto.
OWNER — Any sole owner, part owner, joint owner, tenant in common,
tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the
whole or of a part of a building or land.
PERSON — Any natural person, individual, firm, trust, partnership,
association, corporation or any other legal entity. Whenever the word
"person" is used in any section of the Health Code prescribing a penalty
or fine, as applied to partnerships or associations, corporations or
any other legal entity, the word includes officers, managers, agents or
employees thereof who are responsible for any violation of that section.
PUBLIC PLACE — A place which is visited and is usually accessible
to the neighboring public and in which the public has an interest as
affecting the safety, health, morals and welfare of the community.
RETAIL FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed or mobile
restaurant; coffee shop; cafeteria; short-order cafe; luncheonette; grill;
tearoom; sandwich shop; soda fountain; tavern; bar; cocktail lounge;
nightclub; roadside stand; industrial feeding establishment; private,
public or nonprofit organization or institution serving food; catering
kitchen; commissary; box lunch establishment; retail bakery; meat
market; or similar place in which food or drink is prepared for a
retail eating or drinking establishment or operation where food is
served, handled or provided for the public with or without charge,
except that agricultural markets, covered-dish suppers or similar types
of church or nonprofit-type institutional meal services shall meet the
special provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.
§ 352-12 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 352-12
1:586
§ 352-13. More restrictive provisions to prevail.
In case of conflict with any provision of the State Sanitary Code or any
other state or federal law or regulation, the more restrictive provision shall
prevail. The higher standard shall be enforced in order to promote and
protect the health and safety of the inhabitants of the Borough Harrington
Park.
§ 352-14. Certain material not part of Health Code.
In the construction of the Harrington Park Health Code or any part thereof,
no analysis of any section or part thereof, no cross-reference or crossreference
note, no indication of a source by parenthetical material after a
section, no note, no footnote and no section heading shall be deemed to be
part of the Harrington Park Health Code.
§ 352-15. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Board of Health may adopt such rules and regulations as by law it
is permitted, authorized or empowered to so adopt and which shall, in its
judgment, act in the proper understanding and general enforcement of the
Health Code.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Those rules and regulations prescribing
or directing action or forbearance which are required to be followed by
the Health Code.
STATE HEALTH CODE — The New Jersey State Sanitary Code,
promulgated by the New Jersey State Department of Health, which has
the force and effect of law and is enforceable by the State Department
of Health, the local boards of health, local police authorities and other
enforcement agencies.
§ 352-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-15
1:587

ARTICLE III
Enforcement and Penalties
[Adopted 10-3-2011]
§ 352-16. Violations and penalties.
§ 352-17. Additional penalty for second violation of same ordinance.
In case a defendant shall have been twice convicted, within the space of six
months, of the violation of the same ordinance or of the same provisions
of the Health Code, and due proof of such fact is made, the Court may, in
addition to the imposition of the penalty prescribed by § 352-16, cause the
defendant to be imprisoned in the county jail. (N.J.S.A. 26:3-78)
§ 352-18. Collection of fees and penalties.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq., the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999,
all fees and penalties collected under any provision of any chapter adopted
by the Board of Health shall be paid to the Board of Health of the Borough
of Harrington Park.
§ 352-19. Refusal to pay fines or judgment.
The Judge of the Municipal Court may cause a defendant who refuses or
neglects to pay the amount of a judgment rendered against him and all costs
and charges incident thereto to be committed in the county jail for a period
not exceeding 90 days.
A. Violations of Board of Health Code. Any person violating any of the
provisions of any chapter of the Health Code or ordinance adopted by
the Board of Health of the Borough shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a
penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense.
Complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court of the Borough or
before such other judicial officer having authority under the laws of the
State of New Jersey. In addition, the Court shall have the power to
impose other penalties provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-77 and N.J.S.A.
26:3-78. (N.J.S.A. 26:3-70)
B. For any and every violation of the provisions of the Health Code, the
owner, general agent or contractor of a building or premises where
such violation has been committed or shall exist and the lessee or
tenant of any part of a building or premises in which part such violation
has been committed or shall exist and every person who violates,
commits, takes part or assists in the violation of the Health Code shall,
upon conviction, be liable for the penalty stated above. (N.J.S.A.
26:3-70)
C. Violations of the State Sanitary Code. Each violation of any provision of
the State Sanitary Code shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable by a penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000.
(N.J.S.A. 26:1A-10)
§ 352-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-20
1:589
§ 352-20. Right of entry.
The Board of Health shall have the right to enter in or upon any building
or premises at any hour of the day to determine whether the provisions of
the Health Code are being followed or obeyed. It shall be unlawful for any
person to interfere with any inspection being made by the Board of Health
or any inspector thereof.
§ 352-21. Enforcement officials; inspections.
§ 352-22. Posting of premises.
Whenever the Health Officer or a registered environmental health specialist
(REHS) determines that a retail food service establishment or other public
or private premises contains a health hazard or is in violation of the Health
Code or of applicable state or federal statutes, codes or rules so that a
public health hazard is present or a public health emergency may result, in
addition to actual notice of the hazard or violation to the owner or operator,
the REHS may post the premises with a notice to the public indicating
the health hazard or violation and the date. The posted notice shall not be
removed except by the Health Officer after an inspection has shown that the
hazard has been eliminated or the violation removed.
A. The Health Code shall be enforced by the members of the Board of
Health and the Health Officer or such other person or officers as shall
be designated by the Board of Health.
B. Any member of the Board of Health or any of its agents may make the
inspections and examinations required to be enforced by the Board, any
provision of the Health Code, or any ordinance, regulation, resolution,
or order of the Board, except specific inspections requiring a
professional license (i.e., retail food inspections), upon exhibiting a
certificate of authority under the seal of the Board. In making the
inspection and examination, it shall be lawful for the person to enter in
or upon any premises for the purpose of health protection.
C. Any person who shall prevent, obstruct, or resist any member of the
Board of Health, its officers, or agents acting under and by the
authority of the Board in the performance of his/her duty shall be
subject to a fine, upon conviction, as stated in § 352-16.
D. Every notice or order required to be served by the Board of Health may
be served personally by any member of the Board or any of its agents,
or by any member of the Police Department. Notice may be served by
mail, addressed to the last known place of residence, or by posting it in
a conspicuous place on the premises.
§ 352-20 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 352-22
1:590
ARTICLE IV
Adoption of 2017 Board of Health Code Revisions
[Adopted 12-11-2017]
§ 352-23. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the 2011 Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment and
revision of the Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of
such ordinances and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such
provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All
such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby
reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Board of Health of the Borough
of Harrington Park, and it is the intention of said Board that each such
provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in
said Code.
§ 352-24. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 352-25. Publication; filing.
The Secretary of the Board of Health or the Clerk of the Borough of
Harrington Park, pursuant to law, shall cause this Adoption of Revisions
Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies of the Code shall
be maintained in the office of the Secretary or Clerk for inspection by
the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adoption of Revisions Ordinance, coupled with
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 352-26. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. In compiling and preparing the 2011 Board of Health Code and
subsequent ordinances as the 2017 Code of the Board of Health
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical changes and other
minor changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the
intention of the Board of Health that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature. References to "State Department of Health and Senior
Services" are changed to "Department of Health."
C. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth below
are effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 352-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-26
1:591
(1) Chapter 358, Animals.
(a) Section 358-22.
[1] Subsection A is amended to delete the fee and instead
state that such fee is provided in Chapter 373, Fees.
[2] Subsection C is amended to read: "The Board of Health
will not issue, and may revoke, any permit for the keeping
of live chickens in any place that shall be deemed a
nuisance if it disturbs persons of reasonable sensitivity
residing in the vicinity of the place where such live
chickens are to be kept."
(b) Section 358-27B, prohibiting chickens from being permitted to
fly or run at large, is repealed.
(2) Chapter 373, Fees. Section 373-1 is amended to add Subsection C:
"Chickens. The permit fee for the keeping of live chickens will be
$20."
§ 352-26 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 352-26
1:592
Chapter 358
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dog licensing and control — See Ch. 105, Art.
I.
Nuisances — See Ch. 386.
§ 352-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-26
1:593

ARTICLE I
Hoofed Animals
§ 358-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms when used in this article shall be deemed to
have the meanings herein stated:
CLEANING — The thorough removal of contaminating material or
materials.
HARBORER — Any person feeding and/or sheltering a hoofed animal on
premises for a period longer than 24 consecutive hours.
HOOFED ANIMAL — Any animal which is a solid-hoofed or cleft-hoofed
quadruped, including but not limited to horses, ponies, sheep, goats, cows,
mules, donkeys and swine, whether mature animals or their young.
KEEPER — Any person having the custody, care or control over a hoofed
animal, or knowingly permitting a hoofed animal to remain on his premises
for a period longer than 24 consecutive hours.
OWNER — Any person having a property right or ownership interest in
a hoofed animal or a fee ownership interest in premises where a hoofed
animal is kept, housed or maintained.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association of
persons.
§ 358-2. Permit required; application information.
A. Any person desiring to keep, harbor or maintain one or more hoofed
animals in the Borough of Harrington Park shall obtain a permit for
each said hoofed animal. Application for each said permit shall be made
to the Health Officer of the Borough of Harrington Park on application
forms to be provided by the Board of Health.
(1) Each application for a permit shall specify the following
information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) A description by common address and lot and block number of
the premises on which the applicant desires to keep, harbor or
maintain a hoofed animal.
(c) A description of the type of hoofed animal to be kept, harbored
or maintained.
(d) The dimensions and size of the premises on which the
applicant desires to harbor, maintain or keep a hoofed animal.
(e) The number of hoofed animals that the applicant proposes to
keep, harbor or maintain on the premises.
§ 358-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-2
1:595
§ 358-3. Permit fee; expiration of permit.
An annual permit fee in the amount set forth in Chapter 373, Fees, shall
be paid for each permit issued, which permit fee shall be paid prior to the
issuance of a permit. Each permit shall expire on June 30 of each year
unless sooner revoked by the Board of Health.
§ 358-4. Animals to be properly contained.
(2) Each application shall illustrate by diagram the location and
dimensions on the premises of all buildings, stables and accessory
buildings to be used to house the hoofed animal or animals and the
location of the corral or sty to be used for the outdoor containment
of the hoofed animal or animals. The diagram shall illustrate the
location of each said building, corral or sty in relation to the
dwelling house, if any, on the premises; the boundary lines of the
applicant's property; and all other buildings on said premises; and
all other buildings on the premises immediately adjacent on all
sides of the premises which are the subject of the application.
(3) Each application for a permit to keep, harbor, or maintain a horse,
pony or other hoofed animal shall be accompanied by a laboratory
certificate of a negative equine infectious anemia test dated within
the year of each application for each animal to be licensed.
(4) Each application must comply with Chapter 350, Zoning, of the
Code of the Borough of Harrington Park.189
B. Any person who owns, harbors, keeps or maintains a hoofed animal
within the Borough at the time of the effective date of this article shall
make application, within 15 days after the effective date, to the Health
Officer for a permit pursuant to and in accordance with the terms and
provisions of this article. If an application is not made within the time
prescribed herein, and if said person continues to own, harbor or
maintain a hoofed animal within the Borough thereafter, said person
shall be deemed to be in violation of the terms and provisions of this
article.
C. The offspring of any licensed hoofed animal will be subject to all
provisions of Subsections A and B of this § 358-2 at six months of age.
A. No person who owns, harbors, maintains or is the keeper of a hoofed
animal shall permit a hoofed animal to be kept or maintained in the
Borough of Harrington Park unless the premises on which said animal is
kept, harbored or maintained has a stable or separate building for its
shelter and a fully enclosed corral or sty for the containment of the
hoofed animal.
189. Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning, § 350-45, Hoofed animals.
§ 358-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 358-4
1:596
§ 358-5. Property maintenance.
Every person who owns, keeps, harbors or maintains a hoofed animal within
the Borough of Harrington Park shall keep and maintain the property on
which said animals are kept, and all buildings and facilities thereon, in
accordance with the following:
§ 358-6. Condition of animals.
All hoofed animals kept, harbored or maintained in the Borough shall be
kept free from sickness and contagious disease. In the event that the Health
Officer or the Board of Health of the Borough of Harrington Park shall
have reasonable cause to question the health of any hoofed animal kept,
B. No person who owns, keeps or harbors a hoofed animal shall permit it
to run at large at any time on any public or private property within the
Borough except on private property belonging to the owner, harborer or
keeper of such animal.
A. Barring acts of nature which render compliance with this subsection
impractical:
(1) All stables, buildings, corrals, sties and other places in which a
hoofed animal is kept, harbored or maintained must, where soiled
by urine or feculent matter, be limed or cleaned daily and cleaned
weekly.
(2) Feculent matter and soiled bedding materials must be stored in
closed containers.
(3) All feculent matter and soiled bedding materials must be removed
at least bimonthly from the premises, or they must be so spread
and treated bimonthly with lime and such other chemicals as shall
be necessary to minimize odor and the attraction of insects.
B. No person owning, keeping or harboring a hoofed animal shall willfully
permit such animal to soil or defile or commit any nuisance upon any
public sidewalk, public street, public park, public playground, school
playground or the property of persons other than the owner or the
person or persons owning or having the care, custody or control of such
animal. Said person shall be responsible for cleaning and removing said
material on the same day of occurrence.
C. All stables and buildings in which a hoofed animal is kept, harbored or
maintained shall be fogged or sprayed regularly with a residual
insecticide which is designed to kill flies and insects and regularly used
for that purpose. Spraying must be performed weekly from May 1
through September 30 of each calendar year.
D. Grain feeds, including but not limited to oats and corn, shall be kept in
covered, solid-walled containers to prevent the attraction or sustenance
of rodents.
§ 358-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-6
1:597
harbored or maintained within the Borough, the Health Officer or the Board
of Health shall have the authority to require an examination of said animal
by a doctor of veterinary medicine within 48 hours after notice to the owner,
harborer or keeper of said animal. Said examination shall be conducted at
the expense of the owner, harborer or keeper of the hoofed animal.
§ 358-7. Issuance of permit.
§ 358-8. Revocation of permit.
The Health Officer shall give written notice to the owner, keeper or harborer
of any violations of the provisions of this article, giving notice of specific
violations. Should such violations remain uncorrected for a period of 10
days after the giving of written notice, at least five days' written notice shall
be given by the Health Officer requiring the owner, keeper or harborer to
appear at a hearing before the Board of Health. After findings by the Board
of Health (pursuant to said hearing) of a violation of the provisions of this
article, and the willful continuance of such violation during the entire tenday
period following the receipt of the notice referred to above, the Board of
Health may thereafter revoke any permit. No new permit shall be reissued
to any owner, keeper or harborer whose permit has been revoked pursuant
to this section, except upon a showing of good and sufficient reason and
upon reapplication pursuant to the provisions of this article.
§ 358-9. Enforcement.
The Health Officer and the Board of Health of the Borough of Harrington
Park are charged with the responsibility of administering and enforcing the
provisions of this article. The Health Officer of the Board of Health of the
Borough of Harrington Park is hereby authorized and shall, upon reasonable
notice, be permitted by the adult owner, keeper, harborer or maintainer of
any hoofed animal to enter upon the premises of said person for the purpose
of administering and enforcing the terms and provisions of this article. Prior
to inspection of the premises, the Health Officer of the Board of Health shall
identify himself to said adult owner, keeper, harborer or maintainer.
A. No permit required by this article shall be issued to any person unless
the applicant presents documentary proof that the hoofed animal for
which a permit is being applied for has received such inoculations
required by regulations established from time to time by the Board of
Health and/or appropriate governmental agencies of the State of New
Jersey.
B. No permit shall be issued to any person unless the applicant is in
compliance with all of the terms and provisions of this article and
Chapter 350, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of Harrington Park.
On and after the effective date of this article, no person shall keep,
harbor or maintain a hoofed animal within the Borough of Harrington
Park unless said person is the holder of a permit applied for and issued
pursuant to the terms and provisions of this article.
§ 358-6 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 358-10
1:598
§ 358-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the terms and provisions of this article
shall be in violation of the law and, upon conviction, shall be liable to the
penalties in Chapter 352, Article III, Enforcement and Penalties, for each
offense. Each day for which a violation of this article continues shall be
considered to be a separate violation hereunder.
§ 358-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-10
1:599

ARTICLE II
Cats
§ 358-11. License and vaccination required.
No person shall own, keep or harbor any cat over four months of age within
the Borough of Harrington Park unless such cat has been licensed and
vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian.
§ 358-12. Certificate of vaccination.
A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each cat
vaccinated.
§ 358-13. Application for license.
Written application for a cat license shall be made to the Board of Health
and shall include the name and address of the owner and the name, breed,
color, age and sex of the cat. The applicant shall pay the prescribed
licensing fee and provide proof of current rabies vaccination.
§ 358-14. License period; renewal; time limit for application.
§ 358-15. License fee.
A license shall be issued after payment of a fee as set forth in Chapter 373,
Fees, for each cat.
§ 358-16. (Reserved)
§ 358-17. License tags.
A. The licensing period shall be for one year.
B. Licenses shall be renewed by January 31 of each year.
C. Application for a license must be made within 30 days after obtaining a
cat over four months of age or after a cat has exceeded four months of
age. New residents must apply for a license within 30 days of
establishing residence.
A. Upon acceptance of the license application and fee, the Board of Health
shall issue a durable license tag including an identifying number, year
of issuance, Borough, county and state. The license tag shall be
attached to the collar of the cat so as to assist in the identification of a
lost cat.
B. In case a license tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by
the Clerk upon presentation of a receipt showing the payment of the
license fee for the current year, and the payment of a fee as set forth in
Chapter 373, Fees, for such duplicate.
§ 358-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-17
1:601
§ 358-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or refuses to comply with the regulations of this
article shall be liable to a penalty of not less than as set forth in Chapter
352, Article III, Enforcement and Penalties, for each offense, to be
recovered by and in the name of the Borough. A person who refuses
or neglects to pay forthwith the amount of a judgment rendered against
him and the costs and charges incident thereto may be committed by the
court to the county jail for a period not exceeding 10 days in the case
of a first conviction and, for a second, subsequent or continuing violation,
for a period not exceeding 30 days. The provisions of this article are
supplementary and in addition to any applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 358-19. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Animal Control Officer
of the Borough of Harrington Park or the Board of Health of the Borough
or its designated agent. No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with
anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this article.
C. License tags shall not be transferable from one cat to another, and no
refunds shall be made on any cat license fee because of death of the cat
or the owner's leaving the Borough before expiration of the license
period.
D. The provisions of this section shall not be intended to apply to cats
whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the Borough.
§ 358-17 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 358-19
1:602
ARTICLE III
Chickens
[Added 3-5-2012]
§ 358-20. Definitions.
The following words and terms when used in this article shall be deemed to
have the meanings herein stated:
CHICKEN — A domesticated fowl of the subspecies Gallus gallus
domesticus.
COOP — An enclosure, cage or pen, usually with bars or wire, in which
chickens are confined.
DROPPINGS — The excrement of chickens.
MATURE CHICKEN — A chicken which has attained sexual maturity or an
age of at least three months.
PREDATOR — An animal that poses a threat to chickens such as hawks,
foxes, coyotes, rodents, etc.
ROOST — A perch upon which chickens rest at night.
RUN — An enclosed area in which chickens are allowed to walk or run
about.
§ 358-21. Effective date; permit required; intent.
§ 358-22. Permits.
A. This article and all the provisions herein shall, upon approval of the
Harrington Park Board of Health, become effective March 5, 2012.
B. No person shall raise, keep or harbor any live chickens without first
obtaining a permit for that purpose from the Board of Health covering
the premises intended to be so used.
C. The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to authorize the
keeping of live chickens or their by-products for sale or preparation of
sale.
D. The provisions of this article are intended to regulate the keeping of live
chickens only. The keeping of any other types of poultry is strictly
forbidden within the Borough.
A. The permit fee for the keeping of live chickens is as provided in Chapter
373, Fees. The fee is intended to be an annual fee but, when paid, shall
cover only the balance of the calendar year during which the same is
paid or payable.190
190. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Health Code revisions (see Ch. 352, General
Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 358-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-22
1:603
§ 358-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person found to be noncompliant with the regulations of this article
shall be liable to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 352, Article III,
Enforcement and Penalties, for each offense, to be recovered by and in
the name of the Borough. Each day for which the violation continues shall
be considered a separate violation hereunder. Any person who refuses or
neglects to pay the amount of a judgment against him and the costs and
charges incident thereto may be committed by the court to the county jail
for a period not exceeding 10 days in the event of a first offense or for
a period of not exceeding 30 days for a second, subsequent or continuing
violation. The provisions of this article are supplementary and in addition to
any applicable laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 358-24. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Health Officer of the
Borough of Harrington Park or the Board of Health of Harrington Park or
its designated agent. Any person who shall hinder, molest or interfere with
anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this article
shall be subject to a fine, upon conviction, as stated in § 352-16.
§ 358-25. Regulations.
B. All permits issued under this article shall expire on the 31st of
December following the date of issuance.
C. The Board of Health will not issue, and may revoke, any permit for the
keeping of live chickens in any place that shall be deemed a nuisance if
it disturbs persons of reasonable sensitivity residing in the vicinity of
the place where such live chickens are to be kept.191
A. All mature chickens shall be confined to fully enclosed coops and runs
located outside of and completely apart from any building used wholly
or in part for dwelling purposes, in which people congregate or used as
a food or eating establishment.
B. No live chickens shall be permitted to fly or run at large. Such action is
deemed to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public health and safety.
C. Each animal subject to this article shall be free from sickness or
disease. Should the Board of Health have reasonable cause to question
the health of any animal, it shall have the authority to require, after
notice to the owner, an examination by a doctor of veterinary medicine,
which examination shall be at the expense of the owner.
D. The maximum number of mature chickens per permit shall be based
upon the size of the covered property:
191. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Health Code revisions (see Ch. 352, General
Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 358-22 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 358-25
1:604
§ 358-26. Maintenance.
§ 358-27. Prohibitions.
(1) Up to six chickens for lots up to 20,000 square feet in area.
(2) Up to a maximum of 10 chickens for lots over 20,000 square feet in
area.
A. All chickens subject to this article shall be housed in structures
conducive to the health and safety of both the chickens and the public.
The structures shall have covered tops and provide protection from
predators.
B. A sufficient number of roosts shall be provided for each individual
chicken kept, and adequate flooring to catch all droppings excreted by
each chicken while on the roost shall be provided.
C. Each coop or run shall provide a minimum of three square feet of usable
floor space per chicken.
D. The floors of all coops, runs and the surrounding areas of all such places
shall be kept clean and dry at all times and shall be subject to periodic
inspection by the Health Officer or his representative.
E. All droppings, feculent matter and waste shall be removed weekly from
each coop and buried, removed from the premises or otherwise
disposed of in a manner as shall be to prevent the inhalation of
aerosolized fecal matter, odor and the attraction of insects and rodents.
F. Coops and runs shall be disinfected or otherwise treated, at the owner's
expense, when so directed by the Board of Health.
G. Chickens found to be infested with insects, parasites or pathological
viruses or bacteria that may result in unhealthy conditions to human
habitation may be removed by an animal control officer.
H. All food for immediate consumption shall be placed in suitable feeding
troughs or similar containers, and all other food shall be stored in
rodent-proof containers at all times. No food shall be scattered about
the premises.
I. Odors from chickens, chicken manure or other chicken-related
substances shall not be perceptible at the property boundaries.
A. No other species of poultry beyond chickens shall be raised, harbored
or kept within the limits of the Borough of Harrington Park.
B. (Reserved)192
192. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, prohibiting chickens from being permitted to fly or
run at large, was repealed at time of adoption of Health Code revisions (see Ch. 352,
General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 358-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-27
1:605
C. It shall be unlawful to engage in chicken breeding or fertilizer
production for commercial purposes.
§ 358-27 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 358-27
1:606
Chapter 364
BYLAWS
§ 364-1. Organization.
The Board shall organize annually, on the first day of January in each year
or as soon thereafter as may be feasible, at which time it shall elect, by
a majority vote of all the members of the Board and from its members, a
President and a Vice President.
§ 364-2. Meetings.
§ 364-3. Order of business.
At the meetings of the Board of Health, the order of business shall be as
follows, unless otherwise determined by resolution:
A. All meetings of the Board of Health of the Borough of Harrington Park
shall be held at the Borough Hall, 85 Harriot Avenue, Harrington Park,
New Jersey, at 7:30 p.m. and shall be properly advertised pursuant to
the provisions of the Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.).
B. Regular meetings shall be held on the first Monday of the month, except
in July and August, when no meetings will be held unless a special
meeting is called. Special meetings may be called at any time by the
President or upon request of three members of the Board. Three
members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business by
the Board. All regular meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
Special meetings may be declared closed for the purposes of executive
session by a majority vote of the members present. In the case of a
special meeting, notice shall be given to all members of the Board, in
writing, at least 48 hours prior to the time fixed for holding the same.
C. All meetings shall be conducted according to Robert's Rules of Order,
except as the Health Code provides otherwise.
A. Roll call.
B. Approval of the minutes of the previous meeting.
C. Communications.
D. Report of committees and officers.
E. Report of Health Officer.
F. Reports of Secretary and Registrar of Vital Statistics.
G. Hearings.
H. Public comments.
§ 358-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-3
1:607
§ 364-4. Appointments.
The Board of Health shall appoint by majority vote at its first annual
meeting a Health Officer and Secretary. The Board of Health shall accept
the Attorney and Animal Control Officer as appointed by the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Harrington Park. The Registrar of Vital Statistics
shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:8-13. The
Board shall have the power to employ such additional services as it may
deem necessary and may delegate discretionary authority to appointees of
the Board when such action is dictated by emergency. The salaries or other
forms of compensation of the aforesaid appointees shall be such as is fixed
at the time of their appointment by a resolution of the Board, subject to
review and approval by the appropriate financial agency of the municipal
government.
§ 364-5. Attorney.
The Attorney shall be the legal adviser of the Board of Health and shall,
when required, attend its meetings. The Attorney shall, when authorized
to do so by the Board, represent it in all litigation to which it may be a
party and perform all such other legal services as may, from time to time,
be required.
§ 364-6. Duties of officers.
The President shall preside at all meetings of the Board and shall appoint all
committees. During the intervals between regular meetings, the President
shall represent the Board in all executive and judicial matters.
§ 364-7. Duties of appointees.
I. Unfinished business.
J. New business.
A. The Secretary shall keep the minutes of all the proceedings of the
Board of Health; shall conduct all the official correspondence of the
Board; shall maintain proper copies of the same; shall tabulate and
complete all reports required by any superior authority, local, state or
national; and shall make such other reports as may be required or
directed by the Board. The Secretary shall procure all books, stationery
and other supplies as may be required by the Board and shall keep
adequate records of all applications for permits and licenses and the
action of the Board, if any, thereon and all such other pertinent
information as may be necessary for a complete record of each such
matter.
B. The Registrar of Vital Statistics shall keep all such records of that office
as required by the Bureau of Vital Statistics of the State of New Jersey
and shall perform such other duties as may be required.
§ 364-3 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 364-7
1:608
§ 364-8. Ordinances and resolutions.
C. The REHS shall act as the enforcing officer of the Board and shall, in
addition to such other duties as may be required from time to time,
perform such duties as required by state law or regulations. The REHS
is also responsible for the following:
(1) Investigation of all complaints arising under the Harrington Park
Health Code.
(2) Periodic inspection of each food and food-handling establishment to
establish and report upon the sanitary conditions of such
establishments and to take such steps as are necessary to ensure
that sanitary conditions are maintained in such establishments.
(3) Performance of such duties as may be required in connection with
control of communicable diseases, quarantine of the same and
release from quarantine, together with such duties as may be
required for compliance with the public health laws of the State of
New Jersey having to do with communicable diseases.
(4) Collection of samples of food, water and other materials and
submission of the same to appropriate county or state agencies for
analysis where such analysis appears necessary or desirable in
connection with the maintenance of sanitary conditions within the
Borough.
(5) Supervision of rodent and insect extermination in accordance with
Chapter 386, Article I, Public Health Nuisance Code, of the
Borough Health Code.
(6) Enforcement of the Borough Health Code and the State Sanitary
Code.
A. Ordinances and resolutions shall be prepared for the consideration of
the Board of Health by the Board Attorney upon the instructions of the
Board. No ordinance shall be adopted by the Board without an
affirmative vote of the majority of all members of the Board; however,
resolutions shall be adopted by the Board by vote of the majority of the
members of the Board present, provided that a quorum exists.
B. An ordinance or resolution may be introduced by any member of the
Board. The Secretary shall forthwith provide each member of the Board
with a copy thereof. Each resolution and ordinance shall be limited to a
single subject, which shall be expressed in its title, and shall be
reviewed at a conference meeting prior to submission for public action.
C. All resolutions shall take effect immediately upon final passage by the
Board unless otherwise specified in the resolution as approved.
§ 364-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-8
1:609
Chapter 373
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Collection of fees and penalties — See Ch.
352.
§ 373-1. Animals (Chapter 358).
§ 373-2. Food, beverages and vending machines (Chapter 379).
The following annual fees for permits and licenses are hereby established
for payment by the permittee or licensee:
D. The Board shall and may from time to time amend, supplement or
implement other provisions amendatory thereof or supplementary
thereto.
A. Hoofed animals. The permit to keep hoofed animals shall be $100
annually (§ 358-3).
B. Cats.
(1) The permit for a one-year cat license shall be $10 for each cat
(§ 358-15).
(2) Each duplicate of a license tag shall be $0.25 (§ 358-17B).
C. Chickens. The permit fee for the keeping of live chickens will be $20.193
A. Eating establishments, including restaurants, diners, luncheonettes
and pizza parlors:
(1) With seating capacities of zero to 49: $200.
(2) With seating capacities of 50 to 99: $250.
(3) With seating capacities of 100 or more persons: $350.
B. Food-handling establishments, including delicatessens, meat and food
markets:
Square Feet Fee
Up to 3,000 $150
3,000 to 6,000 $200
6,000 to 10,000 $250
193. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Health Code revisions (see Ch. 352, General
Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 364-8 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 373-2
1:610
§ 373-3. Other fees.
Chapter 379
FOOD AND BEVERAGES
C. Vending machines (per machine):
(1) Coffee, tea, soup, sandwich, etc.: $50.
(2) Candy, ice cream, cookies, etc.: $30.
(3) Soda: $30.
(4) Gum ball machine: $5.
(5) Multiple vending machines at same location: $200.
D. Temporary retail food establishment and events, up to three days: $25.
E. Bakeries: $100.
F. Each vehicle selling or dispensing box lunches or other food products,
including prepackaged ice cream: $250.
G. Food caterers: $150.
H. Selling, dispensing, or storing candy, ice cream or similar products:
$50.
I. All milk and cream licenses: $25.
A. Nursery schools and day camps. The fee for nursery schools and day
camps shall be $75 per inspection for a state license.
B. Swimming pools. The following annual fees for permits and licenses for
swimming pools are hereby established for payment by the permittee or
licensee:
(1) Nonprofit (excluding residential pools): $100.
(2) Operated as a business or for profit: $250.
C. Wells. The fee for drilling or boring of a deep well, per inspection, shall
be $35.
D. Toilets. The following annual fees for permits and licenses for toilets are
hereby established for payment by the permittee or licensee:
(1) Portable: $15.
(2) Additional: $5.
§ 373-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-3
1:611

ARTICLE I
Retail Food Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending
Machines
§ 379-1. Adoption of standards.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:1A-9, the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.,
Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending
Machines, shall be enforced in the Borough of Harrington Park by the Board
of Health.
§ 379-2. License required; posting.
No person shall operate a retail food establishment or food and beverage
vending machine unless a license to operate the same shall have been
issued by the Board of Health. Such license shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in such establishment and/or on such vending machine.
§ 379-3. Fee established.
There shall be a fee established for a license or license approval issued
pursuant to this article. Retail food establishment licenses and associated
fees shall be as established in Chapter 373, Fees.
§ 379-4. License expiration and renewal.
Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall expire annually on December
31 of each year, and the fee therefor shall not be prorated from the date of
issuance. Applications for renewal thereof shall be submitted, together with
the required fee, prior to December 15 of each year.
§ 379-5. Transferability of license.
Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall neither be transferable nor
construed as authorizing the licensee to carry on the business at any place
other than that specified in the license itself.
§ 379-6. Revocation of license.
Licenses issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the Board of
Health for any good or sufficient reason, provided that due notice thereof
shall be given to the licensee and a hearing held before the Board of Health,
at which time an opportunity shall be afforded the licensee to show cause
why the license should not be revoked.
§ 379-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of or order promulgated under this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished as provided in Chapter 352, Article III, Enforcement and Penalties.
Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 379-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-7
1:613

ARTICLE II
Food Handler's Certification
§ 379-8. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish the requirements for the specific
health-related education of those individuals responsible for overseeing
retail food and/or beverage preparation, processing and storage.
§ 379-9. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, and in the interpretation and application of
any amendments adopted hereafter, except as the context may otherwise
require, definitions recited in N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.5 shall apply. For the purpose
of this article, the following additional terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
FOOD HANDLER'S CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued to a person by
the Board of Health certifying successful completion of a course of general
instruction in bacteria characteristics and growth, spread of food-borne
diseases, methods of preventing food poisoning, proper food-handling
techniques, equipment and establishment sanitation, dishwashing and
sanitizing, and insect and rodent control. The prescribed course shall be
given by or have received approval by the Harrington Park Board of Health.
SUPERVISOR — Any person charged with the responsibility of overseeing
the operation of any establishment, including the supervision of employees
engaged in the preparation, processing and storage of food or drink
intended for on- or off-premises human consumption.
§ 379-10. Rules and regulations.
A. No new retail food establishment or establishment which has changed
ownership shall operate for more than 60 days without the supervisor
employed in that establishment applying for a food handler's certificate.
B. No new retail food establishment or establishment which has changed
ownership shall operate for more than six months without the
supervisor employed in that establishment being a holder of a valid food
handler's certificate.
C. Six months from the effective date of this article and thereafter, except
as provided in Subsections A, B and G of this section, no establishment
shall be in operation or open for business in the preparation or
processing of food or drink intended for human consumption without
having a visibly posted certificate and a supervisor who is actively
engaged in the supervisory aspects of the preparation, handling and
storage of food and who has a valid food handler's certificate.
D. A food handler's certificate shall be issued to any person successfully
completing a course of instruction given or approved by the Harrington
§ 379-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-10
1:615
§ 379-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or other organization violating any provision
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as set
forth in Chapter 352, Article III, Enforcement and Penalties.
Park Borough Board of Health. The cost of such course shall be borne
by the applicant.
E. No person to whom a food handler's certificate is issued shall give, loan,
transfer or permit the same to be used by any other person, for any
purpose whatsoever.
F. A food handler's certificate shall be valid for a period of three years
after the date of issue. The holder of this certificate must successfully
complete the food handler's course 30 days prior to its expiration date,
in order to maintain a valid certificate.
G. Agricultural markets and church or nonprofit-type institution meal
service shall be exempt from the requirements of Subsections A, B and
C of this section if because of infrequent, noncontinuous, unique or
limited nature food preparation or processing, the Harrington Park
Borough Board of Health determines that the public health will not be
jeopardized by the absence of a certified food handler on the premises.
The Harrington Park Borough Board of Health will conduct voluntary
food-handling courses for those organizations requesting training or
where a determination is made that such training is necessary.
§ 379-10 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 379-11
1:616
Chapter 386
NUISANCES
§ 379-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-11
1:617

ARTICLE I
Public Health Nuisance Code
§ 386-1. Establishment of Code.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations
is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950 (N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.1 et seq.). A copy of the code is annexed to and made a part of this
article without the inclusion of the text herein.
§ 386-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this article is described and commonly
known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)."
§ 386-3. Public record.
Three copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953) have
been placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the Board of Health and
the Borough Clerk for the use and examination of the public.
§ 386-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
article or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 352,
Article III, Enforcement and Penalties.
§ 386-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-4
1:619

ARTICLE II
Nuisance Abatement
§ 386-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Include an individual, firm, corporation, association, society,
partnership and their agents or employees.
REHS — Registered environmental health specialist.
§ 386-6. Prohibited nuisances.
A. No person shall create, commit or maintain, or allow to be created,
committed or maintained, any nuisance within the Borough of
Harrington Park, New Jersey.
B. For the purposes of this article, the following specific things, conditions
and acts, each and all of them, are hereby defined and declared to be
nuisances:
(1) Maintaining or permitting to be maintained any pool, pond, ditch,
stream or other body of water, or any cistern, privy vault, cesspool,
rain barrel or other receptacle containing liquid, or permitting the
accumulation of any water or liquid in which mosquito larvae or
pupae breed or do exist.
(2) The existence or presence of any accumulation of garbage, refuse,
manure or animal or vegetable matter in which fly larvae or pupae
exist or which attracts flies and other insects or wherein they
breed.
(3) Constructing, maintaining or using any well or permitting the use
of any well or other supply of water for drinking or household
purposes which is polluted or which is so situated or constructed
that it may become polluted.
(4) Polluting or causing or permitting the existence of any condition or
conditions which pollute or cause or threaten the pollution of any
source of potable waters or any water supply.
(5) Permitting ragweed in a flowering state or poison ivy to exist or to
grow upon any public or private property.
(6) Permitting the existence of any imperfect, defective, leaking,
unclean or filthy sink, water closet, urinal, sump pit, slop basin or
other plumbing fixture in any building used or occupied by human
beings.
(7) Depositing, maintaining or permitting the maintenance or
accumulation of any household refuse, wastewater, sewage,
§ 386-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-6
1:621
garbage, tin cans, offal or excrement; any decaying fruit, vegetable,
fish, meat, animal carcass or bones; any oyster or clam shell; or
any other matter, material, substance or thing which serves as food
for insects or rodents and to which they may have access, or which
serves as or constitutes a breeding place or harborage for insects,
rats or other rodents.
(8) Causing or permitting to be created or to exist on any property any
foul or obnoxious odors, gases or vapors.
(9) Depositing or storing or permitting the deposit, storage or
accumulation on any property of any foul, putrid, corrosive or
otherwise obnoxious liquid or substance.
(10) Depositing or storing or permitting the deposit, storage or
accumulation on any property of any chemical or other waste or
flammable, explosive, corrosive or otherwise dangerous liquid,
material or substance, except in a manner and under such
conditions and restrictions as are prescribed by law.
(11) Permitting any garbage, offal, scraps, waste food or other
putrescible material to be held in a container which is not
watertight or which is uncovered, in any store or factory, outside of
any building, on any public or private property or in any building of
multiple occupancy.
(12) Spitting by any person upon any public sidewalk or crossing or
upon the floor of any public building, bus or other public
conveyance.
(13) The keeping of horses, cows, goats, rabbits, guinea pigs, dogs, cats
or other animals under unsanitary conditions.
(14) The keeping of swine, cows, horses or chickens except by special
written permission of the Board of Health.
(15) Permitting any human excrement or material containing human
excrement to remain or flow upon the surface of the ground or to
remain or flow in any open ditch or stream; or burying, plowing
under or otherwise disposing of such excrement or permitting the
same to be done near any stream, well, lake, spring or other source
of water used for drinking or domestic purposes; or depositing or
permitting to be deposited any such material in any place where it
is likely to gain access to such water or appear again above the
surface of the ground.
(16) Permitting any condition which is dangerous to human life or
health or which renders air, water, soil or any type of food
hazardous or injurious to human life or health.
(17) Permitting the formation or accumulation of any pool of stagnant
water.
§ 386-6 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 386-6
1:622
C. The following are hereby declared to be nuisances within the meaning
of this article:
(1) No person shall, within the Borough of Harrington Park, sweep,
throw, place or otherwise deposit in or upon any sidewalk, street,
gutter, public alley, park or parking area or any other public place
any dirt, rubbish, paper, garbage, filth, ashes, glass, rubbish or
refuse of any kind, or suffer or permit the same to be done.
(2) No person shall throw, deposit or otherwise place upon any
sidewalk, crosswalk or other public place used for pedestrian travel
any fruit, vegetable or other substance which, when stepped upon,
is liable to cause or does cause any person to slip or fall.
(3) No person shall, within the Borough of Harrington Park, direct,
discharge or otherwise drain, or cause or permit the direction,
discharge, flow or drainage, into any gutter or upon or across any
sidewalk, street, public alley, park or parking area or any other
public or private place, of any:
(a) Refuse or wastewater from any sink, stable, toilet, septic tank,
cesspool, sewer lateral or sewage disposal unit.
(b) Waste- or washwater from any laundry, automobile filling
station, garage or car-washing establishment.
(c) Stormwater from a cellar drain or sump pump or from any
storm drain, brook, spring, pond, marsh or lowland or from any
swimming pool.
(4) No person shall, within the Borough of Harrington Park, deposit,
empty, drain or discharge any gasoline, fuel or lubricating oil or
other petroleum product or derivatives; or any solvent, thinner,
lacquer, paint, paint remover, varnish, cleaning fluid or other
cleansing preparation; or anything of a corrosive, explosive or
flammable nature, or any effluent containing any of the same, into
any storm sewer, catch basin, ditch, stormwater drain, gutter,
street or other public place.
(5) No person shall, within the Borough of Harrington Park, burn any
substance in any public street or burn or permit to be burned any
garbage, animal remains or offal, or burn any other substance in
such a manner that there is thereby created noxious, nauseating or
annoying smoke, fumes or odors.
(6) No person shall, within the Borough of Harrington Park, bury or
permit to be buried the body of any dead animal, and the owner or
person in charge of any animal having died in the Borough of
Harrington Park shall remove and dispose of the body according to
the directions of the Health Officer or REHS.
§ 386-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-6
1:623
§ 386-7. Inspection of premises.
All places and premises in the Borough of Harrington Park shall be subject
to inspection by the Board of Health, the Health Officer or the REHS.
§ 386-8. Abatement of nuisances.
(7) No owner, tenant, lessee or person in charge of any building, house,
store, room or place shall, within the Borough of Harrington Park,
maintain the same or permit the same to be maintained in any state
of uncleanliness or filthiness or in any unsanitary condition.
(8) The owner, lessee or other person in charge of any barn, stable or
shed in which any horse, goat or other domestic animal is kept shall
keep such barn, stable or shed and the premises thereof in a clean
and sanitary condition at all times, and no such person shall
maintain or permit to be maintained any accumulation of manure
nearer than 30 feet to any dwelling house.
(9) No person shall, within the Borough of Harrington Park, maintain
any shed, coop, pen or runway for fowl or rabbits nearer than 100
feet to the doors or windows of any building, or maintain any such
shed, coop, pen or runway in any unclean or unsanitary condition.
(10) It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause or to suffer or
permit to be made or caused upon any premises owned, occupied
or controlled by him or it, or upon any public street, alley or
thoroughfare in the Borough of Harrington Park, any unnecessary
noises or sounds by means of the human voice or by any other
means or methods which are physically annoying to persons or
which are so harsh or so prolonged or unnatural or unusual in their
use, time and place as to occasion physical discomfort, or which are
injurious to the lives, health, peace and comfort of the inhabitants
of the Borough of Harrington Park.
A. Whenever a nuisance, as declared by this article, is found on any plot of
land, lot, right-of-way or any other private premises or place, notice in
writing shall be given to the owner thereof to remove or abate the same
within such time as shall be specified therein, but not less than five days
from the date of service thereof. A duplicate of the notice shall be left
with one or more of the tenants or occupants of the premises or place.
B. If the owner resides out of the state or cannot be so notified speedily,
such notice shall be left at that place or premises with the tenant or
occupant thereof or be posted on the premises, and such action shall be
considered proper notification to the owner, tenant or occupant thereof.
C. Whenever a nuisance, as declared by this article, is found on any public
property or on any highway or any other public premises or place,
notice in writing shall be given to the person in charge thereof to
remove or abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein.
§ 386-6 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § 386-8
1:624
§ 386-9. Recovery of costs.
The Board of Health may institute an action at law to recover costs incurred
by it in the removal or abatement of any nuisance, as declared by this
article, from any person who shall have caused or allowed such nuisance to
exist or from any owner, tenant or occupant of premises who, after notice
and notification as herein provided, shall fail to remove and abate the same
within the time specified in such notice.
§ 386-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
article or any notice or order issued pursuant thereto shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 352, Article III,
Enforcement and Penalties, for each violation.
If such person fails to comply with such notice within the time specified
therein, the Board of Health may remove or abate such nuisance in the
manner as hereinafter provided in the case of a like condition existing
on a private premises or place.
D. If the owner, tenant or occupant who is notified as provided by this
section shall not comply with such notice within the time specified
therein and fails to remove or abate such nuisance, the Board of Health
shall proceed to abate the nuisance or may cause it to be removed or
abated in a summary manner by such means as said Board shall deem
proper in accordance with law.
§ 386-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-10
1:625
Chapter 392
PUBLIC RECREATIONAL BATHING
§ 392-1. Adoption.
Pursuant to the N.J.S.A. 26:1A-9, the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:26-1.1 et seq.,
Public Recreational Bathing, shall be enforced in the Borough of Harrington
Park by the Board of Health.
§ 392-2. License required; posting; nontransferability.
No person shall operate a public bathing place within the Borough of
Harrington Park unless a license to operate the same shall have been issued
by the Board of Health. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place
at the facility. This license shall not be transferable and shall expire on
December 31 following the date of issuance.
§ 392-3. Fees.
The fee for this license or license approval issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be as established in Chapter 373, Fees.
§ 392-4. Denial or suspension of license.
The Board of Health shall have the right, in addition to other penalties
herein provided under existing state statutes and regulations and the
provisions of this chapter, to deny, revoke or suspend a license for
noncompliance.
§ 392-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
or order promulgated under this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, pay
a penalty as set forth in Chapter 352, Article III, Enforcement and Penalties.
Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 400
SANITARY CODE
Appendix
Chapter A410
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ 386-10 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § A410-1
1:626
§ A410-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the terms defined above shall have the
meanings there indicated,194 and the following additional terms shall have
the following meanings:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — That statute of the State of New Jersey
relating to cable television, known as the "Cable Television Act," N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — Cablevision's application for renewal of municipal
consent, which application is on file in the Borough Clerk's office and
is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, except as
modified, changed, limited or altered by this ordinance.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey or its
successor agency.
BOROUGH — The governing body of the Borough of Harrington Park in the
County of Bergen and the State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — Cablevision of New Jersey, Inc. ("Cablevision"), the grantee of
rights under this ordinance.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — That federal statute relating to cable communications
commonly known as the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984," 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, or as those
statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to cable
television services, 47 CFR 76.1 et seq. (and, to the extent applicable, any
other federal rules and regulations relating to cable television, including but
not limited to those described in 47 CFR 76.3), or as such regulations may
be amended.
STANDARD INSTALLATION — The installation of drop cable to a customer's
premises where the distance from the point of entry into the building being
served is less than 150 feet from the active cable television system plant.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STATE REGULATIONS — Those regulations of the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television, N.J.A.C. 14:17-1.1 et
seq. and N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq., or as such regulations may be amended.
§ A410-2. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and the
194. Editor's Note: The phrase "terms defined above" refers to "Borough," "company" and
"Cablevision" which were cited in the preamble to this ordinance as meaning the Borough
of Harrington Park ("Borough") and Cablevision of New Jersey, Inc. ("company" or
"Cablevision"), when used in this ordinance. These terms are also defined in this § A410-1.
§ A410-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A410-2
1:627
municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications of
Cablevision to receive this consent, the Borough hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent, and that Cablevision's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A410-3. Grant of authority.
The Borough hereby grants to Cablevision its nonexclusive consent to place
in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under its highways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the municipality poles, wires,
cables, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the
Borough of a cable television system or other communications facility,
and for the provision of any communication service over such facilities as
may be authorized by federal or state regulatory agencies. Operation and
construction, pursuant to said consent, is conditioned upon prior approval
of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ A410-4. Duration of franchise.
This consent granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term of
10 years from the date of issuance of a certificate of approval by the Board.
§ A410-5. Expiration and subsequent renewal.
If Cablevision seeks a renewal of the consent provided herein, it shall,
prior to the expiration of this consent, apply for a municipal consent and
certificate of approval in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-16 and applicable
state and federal rules and regulations. The company shall also petition
the Board for approval authorizing continued operation during the period
following expiration of the consent granted herein and until such a time that
a decision is made by the Borough and the Board relative to the renewal of
said consent.
§ A410-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the Borough and any property hereafter annexed.
§ A410-7. Service area.
Cablevision shall be required to proffer video programming service along
any public right-of-way to any person's residence located in the Borough at
tariffed rates for standard and nonstandard installation.
§ A410-8. Franchise fee.
Cablevision shall pay to the Borough an annual franchise fee in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30.
§ A410-9. Free service.
§ A410-2 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § A410-9
1:628
§ A410-10. Construction/system requirements.
Cablevision shall perform construction and installation of its plant and
facilities in accordance with applicable state and federal law. The company
shall be subject to the following additional construction requirements with
respect to the installation of its plant and facilities in the Borough:
A. Cablevision shall, upon written request, provide, free of charge, one
standard installation and monthly cable television reception service to
all state or locally accredited public elementary and secondary schools
and all municipal public libraries, as well as municipal buildings located
within the Borough.
B. Upon written request from the Borough, the company shall provide to
state and locally accredited elementary and secondary schools and
municipal public libraries in the Borough, without charge, the
following: 1) one standard installation per school or library; 2) one
cable modem per installation; and 3) basic cable modem service for the
term of this ordinance for each installation. This offer shall be subject to
the terms, conditions and use policies of the company, as those policies
may exist from time to time.
C. The company shall continue to provide to the Borough, without charge,
at one designated location, the following: (1) one standard installation;
(2) one cable modem; and (3) basic cable modem service for the term of
this ordinance. This offer shall be subject to the terms, conditions and
use policies of the company as those policies may exist from time to
time.
A. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces, the company
shall at its sole expense restore and replace such disturbances in as
good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work, as
determined by the Borough's Engineer under the Borough's generally
applicable laws, rules and regulations.
B. If at any time during the period of this consent the municipality shall
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the
company, upon reasonable notice by the Borough, shall remove or
relocate its equipment, at its own expense.
C. Upon request of a person holding a building or moving permit issued by
the Borough, the company shall temporarily move or remove
appropriate parts of its facilities so as to permit the moving or erection
of buildings or for the performance of other work. The expense of any
such temporary removal or relocation shall be paid in advance to the
company by the person requesting the same. In such cases, the
company shall be given not less than 14 days' prior written notice in
order to arrange for the changes required.
§ A410-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A410-10
1:629
§ A410-11. Technical and customer service standards.
Cablevision shall comply with the technical and customer service standards
established for the cable industry under applicable federal and state laws,
rules and regulations.
§ A410-12. Local office or agent.
Cablevision shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office shall be open daily
during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, with the exception of holidays.
§ A410-13. Designation of complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Borough pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All
complaints shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.5.
§ A410-14. Liability insurance.
Cablevision agrees to maintain and keep in force and effect at its sole cost at
all times during the term of this consent sufficient liability insurance naming
the Borough as an additional insured and insuring against loss by any such
claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the minimum amounts of
$500,000 for bodily injury or death to one person and $1,000,000 for bodily
injury or death resulting from any one accident or occurrence stemming
from or arising out of the company's exercise of its rights hereunder.
§ A410-15. Performance bond.
Cablevision shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, during
the entire term of this ordinance, a bond in form acceptable to the
municipality in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the
faithful performance of its obligations as provided in this franchise.
§ A410-16. Rates.
The rates of the company for cable television services shall be subject to
regulation to the extent permitted by federal and state law.
D. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this consent, the
company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Borough so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires, cables, conduits and fixtures of the company. Such trimming
shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper clearance for
the company's facilities.
§ A410-10 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § A410-17
1:630
§ A410-17. Emergency uses.
Cablevision shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
messages by the Borough pursuant to state and federal requirements.
The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the Borough or any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason
the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system
as contemplated herein. The Borough shall utilize the state-approved
procedures for such emergency uses.
§ A410-18. Equitable terms.
§ A410-19. Removal of facilities.
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this ordinance, Cablevision, at
its sole cost and expense and upon direction of the Board, shall remove the
A. In the event that the service of another multichannel video program
provider not subject to the Borough's regulatory authority within the
Borough creates a significant competitive disadvantage to Cablevision,
the company shall have the right to request from the Borough lawful
amendments to its franchise that relieve it of the burdens which create
the unfair competitive situation. Should the company seek such
amendments to its franchise, the parties agree to negotiate in goodfaith
appropriate changes to the franchise in order to relieve the
company of such competitive disadvantages. If the parties can reach an
agreement on such terms, the Borough agrees to support the
company's petition to the Board for modification of the consent in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
B. If the parties are unable to reach an agreement on appropriate
amendments to the franchise, the Borough acknowledges that the
company shall have the right to petition the Board directly for such
amendments in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.7; provided, however, that the Borough shall be under no
obligation to support Cablevision's request for such relief from the
Board.
C. In any subsequent municipal consent, the Borough shall require, at a
minimum, the same terms and conditions of any other provider of
multichannel video programming subject to the Borough's regulatory
authority as those contained in the initial consent. In the event such
subsequent consent does not contain the same terms and conditions as
the instant consent, the Borough agrees to support the company's
petition to the Board for modification of the consent in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7 to relieve the company of
competitive disadvantages identified in the company's petition.195
195. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code revisions (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ A410-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A410-19
1:631
cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained in connection
with the services authorized herein, unless Cablevision, its affiliated entities
or assignees should, within six months after such expiration, termination
or revocation, obtain certification from the FCC to operate an open video
system or any other federal or state certification to provide
telecommunications.
§ A410-20. Public, educational and governmental access.
A. Cablevision shall continue to make available noncommercial public,
educational and governmental (PEG) access services available to the
residents of the Borough as described in the application for municipal
consent. All Cablevision support of PEG access shall be for the exclusive
benefit of Cablevision's subscribers.
B. The Borough agrees that Cablevision shall retain the right to use the
PEG access channel, or portion thereof, for non-PEG access
programming, during times when the Borough is not utilizing the
channel for purposes of providing PEG access programming. In the
event that the company uses said PEG access channel for the
presentation of such other programming, the PEG programming shall
remain the priority use and the company's rights with respect to using
the channel for non-PEG programming shall be subordinate to the
Borough's provision of PEG access programming on such channel.
C. Cablevision shall have discretion to determine the format and method
of transmission of the PEG access programming provided for in this
§ A410-20.
D. In consideration for the rights granted in this ordinance, the company
shall provide the Borough with a grant in the amount of $5,000.
Cablevision shall provide an initial grant payment of $500 within 90
days of the issuance of the certificate of approval by the Board of Public
Utilities. The remaining grant of $4,500 shall be provided in annual
installments of $500, upon written request by the Borough (the "annual
grant"). The annual grant may be used by the Borough for any cable
and/or other telecommunications-related purpose as the Borough, in its
discretion, might deem appropriate. Cablevision shall not be obligated
to make any additional payments beyond year 10 of the franchise. The
annual grant shall be payable to the Borough within 60 days from
receipt of the Borough's written request. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, should Cablevision apply for a system-wide certification or
otherwise convert its municipal consent to a system-wide certification
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1, it shall be relieved of any
payments due and owing after the date of such conversion or award of a
system-wide franchise. The Borough agrees that all amounts provided
pursuant to Subsection D shall be used for the exclusive support of PEG
access programming, such as the purchase and/or rental of PEG access
equipment and facilities. On request, the Borough shall provide
Cablevision with a certification of compliance with this Subsection D.
§ A410-19 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § A410-21
1:632
§ A410-21. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted in writing to the Borough by the company except as
modified herein are binding upon Cablevision as terms and conditions of
this consent. The application and any other written amendments thereto
submitted by Cablevision in connection with this consent are incorporated
in this ordinance by reference and made a part hereof, except as specifically
modified, changed, limited, or altered by this ordinance, or to the extent
that they conflict with state or federal law.
§ A410-22. Consistency with applicable laws.
This consent shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
federal, state and local laws.
§ A410-23. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
§ A410-24. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon issuance of a certificate of approval as
issued by the Board of Public Utilities.
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1969 Code to 2011 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1969 Code Location in 2011 Code
Ch. 1, General Provisions
Art. I, Adoption of Code NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
Ch. 4, Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 93, Art. I
Ch. 5, Amusement Devices Ch. 99, Art. II
§ A410-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:633
Chapter/Title From 1969 Code Location in 2011 Code
Ch. 7, Assessors Ch. 53, Art. I
Ch. 8, Board of Health Ch. 6, Art. I
Ch. 9, Cats Ch. 357, Art. II
Ch. 9A, Construction Codes, Uniform Ch. 131
Ch. 11, Claims Approval Ch. 12
Ch. 14, Dogs and Kennels Ch. 105, Art. I
Ch. 15, Environmental Commission Ch. 6, Art. III
Ch. 17, Fire Prevention
Art. I, Fire Department Ch. 33
Art. II, Fire Safety Code Repealed by Ord. No. 646; see Ch.
173.
Ch. 17A, Garbage, Rubbish and
Refuse
Ch. 280, Art. II
Ch. 18, Flood Damage Prevention Ch. 179
Ch. 18A, Historian Ch. 53, Art. II
Ch. 19, Hoofed Animals [Board of
Health]
NLP; see Ch. 352R.
Ch. 20, Housing Developments:
Design and Appearance
REP
Ch. 21, Firearms Ch. 167
Ch. 23, Licensed Entertainment Ch. 99, Art. I
Ch. 24, Licensed Occupations Ch. 237, Art. I
Ch. 24A, Loitering REP
Ch. 25, Municipal Court Ch. 20
Ch. 26, Noise Ch. 219
Ch. 27, Numbering of Buildings Ch. 112
Ch. 29, Parklands and Public Lands Ch. 230, Art. I
Ch. 30A, Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Adjustment
Ch. 202
Ch. 31, Plumbing Code [Board of
Health]
NLP; see Ch. 352R.
Ch. 31A, Police Assistance, Mutual Ch. 66, Art. II
Ch. 32, Police Department Ch. 66, Art. I
Ch. 34, Property Maintenance Superseded by Ord. No. 612; see
Ch. 248.
Ch. 36, Recreation Commission Ch. 6, Art. II
Ch. 36A, Recycling Ch. 280, Art. I
§ DT-1 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § DT-1
1:634
Chapter/Title From 1969 Code Location in 2011 Code
Ch. 37, Retail Food Establishments
[Board of Health]
NLP; see Ch. 352R.
Ch. 38, Salaries and Compensation Deleted; reference page only
Ch. 40, Sewers Superseded by Ord. No. 309; see
Ch. 262.
Ch. 41, Shade Tree Commission REP
Ch. 44, Streets and Sidewalks Ch. 297
Ch. 45A, Subdivision and Site Plan
Review
Ch. 303
Ch. 46, Swimming Pools
Art. I, Board of Health
Regulations
NLP; see Ch. 352R.
Art. II, Council Regulations Ch. 350, § 350-47
Ch. 47, Taxation Ch. 315, Art. I
Ch. 48, Trailers and Trailer Camps Ch. 127
Ch. 50, Vehicles and Traffic Superseded by Ord. No. 620; see
Ch. 331.
Ch. 53, Zoning Ch. 350
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
651 12-20-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 331
652 Salaries NCM
653 2-22-2011 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 66, Arts. I
and II
654 2-22-2011 Affordable housing:
development fees
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 734
655 3-21-2011 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 131
656 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:635
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
657 4-18-2011 Fines and penalties Ch. 164
658 4-18-2011 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
Board of
Health
10-3-2011 Adoption of Health Code
by Board of Health
Ch. 352, Art. I
660 7-18-2011 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 131
661 7-18-2011 Parks, playgrounds and
public facilities: rules
and regulations
amendment
Ch. 230, Art. I
663 9-19-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
664 9-19-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
Board of
Health
3-5-2012 Animals: chickens Ch. 358, Art. III
670 6-19-2012 Certificates of continued
occupancy: residential
property
Ch. 118, Art. II
671 6-19-2012 Sewer use Ch. 262
672 6-19-2012 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing and fees
amendment; animals:
dog licensing and control
amendment; fees:
miscellaneous fees
amendment; land use
procedures amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 93, Art. I; Ch.
105, Art. I; Ch.
153, Art. III; Ch.
202; Ch. 350
673 6-19-2012 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 131
674 7-9-2012 Fees: miscellaneous fees
amendment
Ch. 153, Art. III
676 12-17-2012 Construction fees;
property maintenance
amendment
NCM;
superseded by
Ord. No. 677
677 2-19-2013 Commercial vehicles
amendment; property
maintenance amendment
Ch. 127; Ch. 248
681 7-15-2013 Officers and employees:
Borough Administrator
Ch. 53, Art. V
§ DL-1 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § DL-1
1:636
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
683 10-21-2013 Police Department:
establishment
amendment
Ch. 66, Art. I
686 4-21-2014 Riparian zones Ch. 253
687 4-21-2014 Steep slopes Ch. 284
689 6-16-2014 Parks, playgrounds and
public facilities: rules
and regulations
amendment
Ch. 230, Art. I
690 6-16-2014 Ambulance Corps: length
of service award
program
Ch. 3, Art. I
692 8-18-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
695 12-15-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
701 3-21-2016 False fire alarms Ch. 90, Art. I
705 7-18-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
708 10-5-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
710 7-17-2017 Fee schedule amendment NCM
711 7-17-2017 Master Plan amendment NCM
712 7-17-2017 Stormwater
management: feeding of
wildlife amendment
Ch. 291, Art. IV
713 10-10-2017 Bond NCM
714 10-10-2017 Salaries NCM
715 10-10-2017 Ambulance Corps:
Length of Service Award
Program Amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 719
716 10-10-2017 Excavations Amendment Ch. 150
717 10-10-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 331
718 11-20-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 331
719 11-20-2017 General Provisions:
Adoption of 2017 Code
Revisions
Ch. 1, Art. III
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:637
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Board of
Health
12-11-2017 General
Provisions:
Adoption of 2017
Board of Health
Code Revisions
Ch. 352, Art.
IV
2
720 12-18-2017 Bond NCM 2
721 1-6-2018 Uniform
Construction
Code Fees
NCM 2
722 4-16-2018 Exceed Budget;
Cap Bank
NCM 2
723 7-9-2018 Subdivision and
Site Plan Review
Amendment
Ch. 303 2
724 7-9-2018 Bond NCM 2
725 7-9-2018 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 350 2
726 7-9-2018 Peddling and
Soliciting:
Peddlers,
Solicitors,
Canvassers and
Transient
Merchants
Amendment;
Peddling and
Soliciting: No-
Knock List
Amendment
Ch. 237, Art.
I; Ch. 237,
Art. II
2
727 11-19-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 2
728 Salaries NCM 2
729 12-10-2018 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 350 2
730 4-22-2019 Exceed Budget;
Cap Bank
NCM 2
731 6-10-2019 Bond NCM 2
732 8-19-2019 Flood Damage
Prevention
Ch. 179 2
§ DL-1 HARRINGTON PARK CODE § DL-1
1:638
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
733 6-17-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 331 2
734 6-17-2019 Affordable
Housing
Ch. 85 2
735 6-17-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 350 2
736 Bond NCM 2
737 9-9-2019 Single-Use
Plastics: Plastic
Bags, Straws and
Stirrers and
Polystyrene
Containers
Ch. 245, Art.
I
2
738 9-9-2019 Bond Amendment NCM 2
739 9-9-2019 Salaries NCM 2
740 9-9-2019 Property
Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 248 2
741 9-9-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 331 2
742 11-18-2019 Police
Department
Amendment
Ch. 66 2
743 12-16-2019 Vehicles, Towing
and Storage of
Ch. 336 2
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:639