Adopting Ordinance
Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Chapter LDAO
LAND DEVELOPMENT ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [New]
The book shall be known and may be cited as "The Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Hopewell, 1978" and is herein referred to as
the "revision."
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS. [New]
a. General Definitions. For the purpose of this revision, and in the
interpretation and application of all other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require;
definitions set forth in N.J.S.A. 1:1-1 et seq., or as stated herein shall
apply.
CLERK OR TOWNSHIP CLERK — Shall mean the municipal clerk duly
elected pursuant to law.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the government
established or designated by ordinance or this revision as a
department, together with any agency or instrumentality of the
government assigned to such organizational unit by the township
committee.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this revision.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, and including this revision, so long as it is adopted
by the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long
as it remains in force and effect pursuant to law.
AO:1
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [New]
For the purpose of this revision and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the township are closed, that day
shall be excluded.
"Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any other
mode of communication using paper or similar material which is in general
use, as well as legible handwriting.
Whenever a specific time is used in this revision, it shall mean the prevailing
and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day in
any year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained, in this revision shall
be deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether
or not such designation is included in the citation.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural persons, partnerships,
joint ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, firms,
companies, corporations or unincorporated groups; or any officers,
agents, employees, servants, factors or any kind of personal
representatives of any thereof in any capacity, acting either for himself
or for any other person, under either personal appointment or pursuant
to law. When permitted by context "person" shall also include the
United States, the State and other States, and any foreign country or
government.
STREET — Shall include a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and
every class of road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the
general public.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Hopewell in the County of
Mercer and State of New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE OR COMMITTEE — Shall mean the mayor
and committee of the Township of Hopewell.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically
provided.
§ 1-2 HOPEWELL CODE § 1-3
AO:2
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of the revisions identified
by an Arabic number and divided by subject matter.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY. [New]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this revision shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this revision.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
[The form of government in the Township of Hopewell is the
Township form which comprises Chapters 142 to 156A in Title 40
of the New Jersey Revised Statutes. The Administrative Code has
been drafted in conformity with the township law and, in many
instances, provisions of the township law have been restated in the
code. Other enabling laws, pertaining to the Administrative Chapter
are N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1, et seq., Municipal Court, N.J.S.A. 44:8-1, et seq.,
Local Assistance Board, Welfare; N.J.S.A. 26:3-9, et seq., Board of
Health; N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, et seq., Environmental Commission;
N.J.S.A. 40:55B-1, et seq., Economic Development Commission;
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23, Planning Board; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69, Board of
Adjustment; N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1, et seq., Stony Brook Regional Sewage
Authority; N.J.S.A. 40:146-21(c); cf. N.J.S.A. 40:64-9 Shade Tree
Advisory Committee; N.J.S.A. 40:14B-1, Municipal Utilities
Authority; and N.J.S.A. 40:60-25.53, Historic Site Committee. Other
authority to regulate the internal affairs of the township is contained
in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.]
§ 2-1. TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE.
§ 2-1.1. Organization. [Ord. #416; New; Ord. #7/15/74; Ord.
#14-1591]
The township committee shall hold an annual meeting on January 1 of each
year at 1:00 p.m., or such other time as determined by resolution of the
township committee, during the first seven days of January in any year. At
§ 1-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.1
AO:3
such time it will elect a mayor and a deputy mayor from among its members
and, upon nomination of the mayor it shall, by resolution, make assignment
of its members to designated areas of responsibility.
§ 2-1.2. Powers of the Mayor. [Ord. #7/15/74]
§ 2-1.3. Powers of the Deputy Mayor. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The deputy mayor shall serve in the absence of the mayor and exercise all
the powers and duties prescribed for the mayor and permitted by law.
§ 2-1.4. Powers of the Committee. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #14-1491]
a. The mayor shall be the chairperson of the township committee and
head of the municipal government. The mayor shall preside at meetings
of the committee and shall have the right to debate and vote on all
questions before the committee.
b. The mayor shall have the power to make proclamations concerning
holidays and events of interest to the township. The mayor may appoint
citizens' committees to inquire into matters that are of interest to the
township and the mayor shall have such other appointment powers as
are conferred by law. The mayor shall have and exercise the ceremonial
power of the township and the mayor shall exercise every other power
usually exercised by township mayors or conferred by law.
a. The committee shall be the legislative body of the municipality and shall
have the power to:
1. Pass, adopt, amend and repeal any ordinance or, where permitted,
any resolution for any purpose required for the government of the
township or to accomplish any public purpose for which the
township is authorized to act;
2. Control and regulate the finances of the township and raise money
by borrowing and taxation;
3. Create such offices and positions as they deem necessary. The
officers appointed by the committee shall perform the duties
required by law and the ordinances adopted by the committee.
Other than the township attorney, engineer, building inspector, the
clerk, tax collector and tax assessor who shall serve for the term
provided by law, the officers appointed shall serve at the pleasure
of the committee;
4. Investigate any activity of the township; and
5. Remove any officer of the township for cause, other than those
officers excepted by law.
§ 2-1.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-1.4
AO:4
§ 2-1.5. Areas of Responsibility, Departments. [Ord. #447; New;
Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #650-84 § 1; Ord. #94-973; Ord. #99-1114 § 1;
Ord. #00-1178 § 1; Ord. #14-1491]
§ 2-1.6. Meetings of the Township Committee. [Ord. #442; Ord. #7/
15/74; Ord. #557-81; Ord. #00-1178 § 2; Ord. No. 14-1491; Ord.
#03-1292 § 1; Ord. #14-1491]
b. The committee shall have all the executive responsibilities of the
municipality not placed, by general law or this ordinance, in the office
of the mayor.
c. In the absence or inability of the mayor and the deputy mayor, the
senior committee member shall serve temporarily as mayor. Seniority
shall be determined by length of service of the township committee.
a. At the beginning of each year, the township committee members shall
determine their areas of liaison to township professionals, departments,
boards, committees and commissions, and regional governmental,
nonprofit and corporate agencies and entities. These responsibilities
shall include providing a channel for communications and providing
assistance for collaborative endeavors.
b. The liaison responsibilities shall not include the authorization of any
agreement or expenditures of township controlled funds, as these
require action of the full township committee; or the authority to
exercise supervisory control over the department(s).
c. The mayor is authorized to make such additional or temporary
assignments of committee members as shall be necessary.
a. Regular Meetings. The township committee shall meet regularly in
accordance with the schedule of regular meetings established by
resolution adopted by the township committee at its annual
organizational meeting, except that it may, by resolution, dispense with
or change the date, time or place of any given regular meeting. The
township committee may by resolution, authorize additional regular
meetings and may authorize work sessions and provide that regular
business may be conducted at all such regular meetings and work
sessions. Notice of all meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, C. 231, P.L. 1975. Any
person desirous of having a matter considered by the township
committee in a public meeting shall notify the clerk in writing at least
five days prior to the meeting at which consideration is proposed in
order that it might be placed on the agenda and to facilitate scheduling.
No question or proposal will ordinarily be considered unless such notice
has been given or its consideration is requested by a majority of the
committee in attendance at such meeting. Where a question or proposal
is of an involved or technical nature, anyone requesting its
consideration is urged to submit the same in writing together with his
written request. The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the township
§ 2-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.6
AO:5
§ 2-2. TOWNSHIP OFFICES.
§ 2-2.1. Administrator. [Ord. #442; Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #557-81;
Ord. #00-1178 § 2; Ord. #03-1292 § 1; Ord. #14-1591]
committee but may, where the subject matter so requires, designate
another to preside in his stead for all or part of a meeting.
b. Meetings Rules and Conduct. The rules of procedure to be followed for
the conduct of business of the township committee meetings shall be
provided for in the form of the bylaws of the township committee which
shall be adopted by resolution.
a. Creation of Office. The position of township administrator is hereby
created, and employment of a qualified person for that position is
hereby authorized.
b. Appointment, Term of Office and Compensation. The township
administrator shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and
consent of the township committee and shall hold office for an indefinite
term. He shall receive as salary such sums as may be fixed and adopted
by the township committee in the annual salary ordinance. He shall be
reimbursed for all reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of
his office.
c. Township Administrator as Full-time Position. The township
administrator shall devote full time to the interests of the township and
shall not hold any other employment, unless expressly approved by the
township committee, except that nothing herein shall prevent the
administrator from holding any other position in the township to which
he has been appointed in accordance with the laws of the State of New
Jersey.
d. Disability or Absence. During any approved absence or disability of the
township administrator, an officer or employee of the township may be
appointed by the township committee to temporarily perform the duties
and responsibilities of the position.
e. Removal. The township administrator may be removed at any time by a
two-thirds vote of the township committee. The resolution of removal
shall become effective three months after its adoption. The township
committee may provide that the resolution shall have immediate effect,
provided that the township committee shall cause to be paid to the
administrator forthwith any unpaid balance of his salary and his salary
for the next three calendar months following adoption of the resolution.
f. Qualifications and Residency. The township administrator shall be
appointed on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications
with special regard to education and training in business and
government affairs and experience therein. No elected member of the
§ 2-1.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-2.1
AO:6
township committee may receive such appointment during his term of
office nor within one year after the expiration of said term.
The Township administrator need not be a resident of the township at
the time of his appointment, but after such appointment may reside
outside of the township only with the consent of the township
committee.
g. Duties and Responsibilities. The township administrator shall, under
the supervision, legislative direction and control of the township
committee to the extent not prohibited by law:
1. Perform the general executive and administrative duties as may be
necessary and proper for the comprehensive and efficient exercise
of municipal government.
2. Implement, carry out and enforce the ordinances, resolutions,
motions, policies, and specific procedures and directions adopted
by the township committee pursuant to its legislative power, as
necessary to exercise fully the executive and administrative powers
thereof.
3. Exercise financial and supervisory control over all departments and
offices, be responsible for the proper and efficient operation of all
departments, assign responsibility for all required necessary and
proper executive and administrative action and coordinate
operations.
4. Study, recommend, and, after legislative adoption by the township
committee, implement and enforce personnel organization, and
policy of the township and its departments, branches, offices, and
agencies (hereinafter referred to collectively as "departments").
5. Study, recommend, and after legislative adoption by the township
committee, implement and enforce administrative procedures and
policy of the township and its departments.
6. Study, recommend, and, after legislative adoption by the township
committee, implement and enforce procedures and policy of the
township and its departments for requisition, purchase, inspection,
receipt, storage, distribution, internal transfer and disposal of, and
for standards and specifications and payment for supplies, services,
materials and equipment.
7. Negotiate contracts for the township as authorized by and subject
to approval of the township committee and the township attorney.
8. Implement and enforce all terms and conditions imposed in favor of
the township or its citizens in any statute, public utility franchise,
performance bond, or other contractual undertaking or obligation,
and upon knowledge, call any violation, default or omission to the
attention of the township committee.
§ 2-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.1
AO:7
9. Study, recommend, and, after legislative adoption by the township
committee, implement and enforce procedures and policy of the
township and its departments for internal communications and
public information.
10. Receive and reply in writing to inquiries and complaints concerning
township business and provide information and assistance in
respect thereto.
11. Act as liaison between the township and the various county, State
and Federal agencies, with respect to all applications for funds and/
or services needed or required by the township.
12. Study, recommend, and after legislative adoption by the township
committee, implement and enforce the financial and accounting
policy and procedures of the township and its departments, in
consultation with the township auditors.
13. Supervise the disbursement of all township funds and approve all
vouchers and bills before submitting same to the township
committee for final approval.
14. Study, recommend, and with the approval of the township
committee, implement a program for the prudent investment of
such funds as temporarily may be in excess of the amounts needed
to meet township obligations.
15. Prepare and submit annually a thorough and complete proposed
township budget after requiring and receiving appropriation
requests from heads of the departments and reviewing such
requests with the township committee, transmitting a tentative
budget and consulting with the township committee with respect
thereto, and submitting in a timely manner a final recommendation
in the form required by law for municipal budgets, appending
thereto a detailed analysis of the various items of expenditure and
revenue and such explanatory comment or statement as may be
deemed desirable.
16. Study and recommend the nature, location and extent of public
improvements and coordinate the execution of same when
authorized by the township committee.
17. Develop, implement and administer a comprehensive program of
insurance for the township as authorized by and subject to the
approval of the township committee.
18. Assume responsibility for the overall supervision and maintenance
of real property owned by the township.
19. Attend all regular and special meetings of the township committee,
except when excused, with the right to participate in discussions
but without the right to vote.
§ 2-2.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-2.1
AO:8
§ 2-2.2. Township Clerk. [Ord. #7/15/74]
There shall be a township clerk who shall hold office for a three-year term
and as is provided by law. The township clerk shall:
20. Keep the township committee currently, fully, promptly, and
accurately informed of all matters within the jurisdiction of the
office of township administrator by such reports and in such
manner as deemed advisable, and as may be requested by the
township committee.
21. Perform such other duties, powers, functions, and responsibilities
as may be required or imposed by the township committee.
22. In every instance where the township committee is referred to
herein, the committee may, where permitted by law, designate one
or more of its members as an individual or a committee to act in its
place and stead in which case the township administrator shall deal
in the first instance directly with this individual or committee
rather than with the township committee at large.
23. Recruit and recommend for appointment to positions established
by the township committee, personnel qualified for the respective
positions.
h. Consistence with Law. Nothing herein shall derogate from or authorize
the township administrator to exercise the powers and duties of elected
officials of the township and of the boards and agencies thereof
established pursuant to law.
a. Perform all of the functions required of municipal clerks by the general
election law (N.J.S.A. 19:1-1 et seq.) and any other State law or
township ordinance and receive the fees prescribed therefor for the use
of the township.
b. Until such time as a separate ABC board may be established pursuant
to law, issue such licenses as may be authorized by the township
committee pursuant to the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Law
(N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.) and the ordinances of the township.
c. Keep all records, resolutions, ordinances and minutes of the meetings
of the township committee.
d. Issue all licenses required by law or ordinance and faithfully make all
reports required by law or ordinance to the township committee and
account monthly for all fees received by him.
e. See to it that all ordinances and notices of the township are properly
advertised.
f. Take care of the correspondence of the township committee.
§ 2-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.2
AO:9
§ 2-2.3. Deputy Clerk. [New]
There may be a deputy clerk who shall be appointed for a term expiring
December 31, following the appointment.
§ 2-2.4. Township Attorney. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #415]
§ 2-2.5. Special Counsel. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Whenever he deems the interests of the township so require, the township
attorney may, with the approval of the township committee and within the
g. Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by law or ordinance.
a. Appointment. There shall be a township attorney appointed by the
township committee for a one-year term.
b. Powers and Duties Generally. The township attorney shall be the legal
advisor to the township committee and to all departments except as
may be otherwise provided by ordinance. He shall prosecute and
defend actions and proceedings by and against the township and every
department thereof. In furtherance of these general powers, and
without limitation thereto, he shall:
1. Advise the township committee as to the form and sufficiency of all
ordinances and resolutions prior to their passage.
2. Review and approve all contracts, deeds, documents and
instruments prior to the execution thereof by or on behalf of the
township.
3. Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest of the township, as he may in his discretion determine to be
necessary or desirable, or as directed by the township committee.
4. Subject to the approval of the township committee, have power to
enter into any agreement, compromise or settlement of any
litigation in which the township is involved.
5. Render opinions in writing upon any questions of law submitted to
him by the township committee with respect to their official powers
and duties, or the powers and duties of any officer of the township.
6. Maintain a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters
which relate to the township's interest, and report thereon from
time to time as the township committee may require.
7. Provide such legal, secretarial or other assistance as may be
necessary to the proper performance of his duties.
8. Have such other and different functions, powers and duties as may
be provided by ordinance or resolution.
§ 2-2.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-2.5
AO:10
limits of available appropriations, appoint special counsel to assist him in
the preparation, trial or argument of such legal matters or proceedings
as he may determine. If the township attorney should be disqualified with
respect to any matter, the township committee shall appoint special counsel
to represent the township for and with respect to such matter.
§ 2-2.6. Municipal Court Prosecutor. [Ord. #415]
§ 2-2.6. Municipal Public Advocate. [Ord. #00-1169, § 1; Ord.
#02-1232, § 2]
a. Established. There shall be a municipal court prosecutor appointed by
the township committee for a one-year term. He shall receive such
compensation as is provided by ordinance or by resolution of the
township committee.
b. Powers and Duties Generally. The municipal court prosecutor shall
conduct prosecutions for crimes and offenses cognizable by the
municipal court of the township, except such crimes and offenses as it
may be the duty of the county prosecutor to prosecute, including
violations of ordinances of the township, complaints of any departments
under State law and for violations of rules or regulations duly
promulgated by any department. He shall have such other and different
functions, powers and duties as may be provided by ordinance,
resolution or rules governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey.
a. Established. There is hereby established the position of municipal
public advocate to represent the interests of the public in development
applications before the planning board and zoning board of adjustment.
b. Qualifications; Appointment; Term. The municipal public advocate shall
be a New Jersey attorney-at-law, appointed by the township committee
for a one-year term.
c. Powers and Duties Generally. The municipal public advocate may
appear before the township's planning board and zoning board of
adjustment, and such other Federal, State, County and municipal
agencies and/or courts as the circumstances warrant in order to
represent and advocate the interests of the public, rather than
individual interests, in proceedings of "substantial public importance"
which he/she shall determine, in his/her sole discretion, to warrant such
representation and advocacy.
With regard to appearances before the township's planning board and
zoning board of adjustment, the term "substantial public importance"
shall be defined as or limited to applications where the applicant is
seeking relief in any one of the following areas:
1. Application seeking a use variance;
2. Application seeking a major subdivision;
§ 2-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.6
AO:11
3. Application where three or more variances are being sought;
4. Application where a variance for parking is being sought;
5. Application of any nature involving property which is contiguous or
proximate to lands which have been permanently preserved by any
governmental entity, or designated in the Open Space Plan of the
township for acquisition;
6. Application where the applicant is seeking vacation of streets,
roads, right-of-ways, or similar defined thoroughfares;
7. Application where a variance for height, coverage, or density is
being sought;
8. Application that has been bifurcated and where one part of the
bifurcated application seeks relief under any one or more of
paragraphs 1 through 7 above;
9. Any application which may have a substantial economic impact on
the citizenry and/or the township.
d. Appearances Restricted. The municipal public advocate shall not
appear before the township's planning board or zoning board of
adjustment on any applications other than as enumerated above.
e. Purpose. The municipal public advocate shall be retained by the
township committee but shall not operate in any manner under the
direction or control of the township committee. He/she shall exercise
his/her sole discretion as to the importance and the extent of the public
interest and whether that interest would be adequately represented
and advocated without his/her action.
Upon referral of a matter for possible representation, the Municipal
Public Advocate shall conference with the interested and/or affected
party or parties in order to examine the public interest involved. In
determining whether that interest would be adequately represented
and advocated without his/her action, the municipal public advocate
shall consider one or all of the following:
1. Whether the interest is being fully represented by private parties;
the municipal public advocate may determine to become involved
even if the primary parties to the dispute are represented, if such
parties may not represent the full public interest in the dispute;
2. Whether the citizens affected are members of a group, association
or political subdivision which can practically provide
representation and such group representation will fully represent
the public interest as well; and
3. Whether the citizens affected have sufficient financial ability or
incentive to retain competent counsel.
§ 2-2.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-2.6
AO:12
§ 2-2.7. Department of Finance. [Ord. #519; Ord. #694-85, § 1; Ord.
#94-973]
The municipal public advocate may refrain from representing any public
interest if it appears that the cost of representation to the township
substantially outweighs the public interest involved.
Where several public interests are involved in a single dispute or litigation,
the municipal public advocate may examine each interest and elect to
represent one interest.
Where there are several conflicting public interests involved in a single
dispute or litigation, the municipal public advocate may choose to
represent one interest and arrange for separate representation of the
conflicting interest or interests. Alternatively, the municipal public
advocate may choose to refrain from representing any of the competing
interests.
It is intended that the creation of the position of municipal public advocate
is to insure that a full, fair and balanced record be made in such matters of
substantial public importance, with all of the competent evidence bearing
upon the issues being presented to the township planning board and
the township zoning board of adjustment tested as to its relevancy,
competency, materiality and credibility, so that such boards and such other
Federal, State, County and municipal agencies, the township committee
and courts, whether trial or appellate, will have the benefit of a fully
developed record of the proceedings containing all of the testimony and
evidence for a fair, unbiased, impartial decision in accordance with all
of the applicable rules/laws and to insure that the public interest, not
individual interests, will be adequately represented and better served.
The municipal public advocate shall make a determination as to whether
the public interest should or should not be represented within 45 days
of referral of the matter. The reasons for such determination shall be
stated in writing. Where the municipal public advocate has determined that
the public interest should be represented, he/she is free to participate in
the proceedings, which may include the presentation of evidence, crossexamination
of other witnesses and the presentation of arguments.
f. Compensation. The salary of the position of the municipal public
advocate shall be set by ordinance and in no event shall it be higher
than the combined salary set for the attorneys for the planning board
and/or zoning board of adjustment. Litigation shall be paid as provided
for in the municipal budget and as approved by resolution of the
township committee.
a. Department Established; Head. There shall be a department of finance,
the head of which shall be the chief financial officer.
b. There is hereby created the position of chief financial officer of the
Township of Hopewell to be appointed by the township committee and
§ 2-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.7
AO:13
in accordance with P.L. 1988, Chapter 110. The chief financial officer
may also serve as treasurer.
c. Appointment of Treasurer. There shall be a treasurer of the township
appointed by the township committee upon recommendation of the
administrator. The treasurer shall serve for a one-year term
commencing on January 1 of the year in which he is appointed. The
chief financial officer may also serve as treasurer.
d. Assistants to the Treasurer.
1. The township committee may appoint an assistant treasurer upon
recommendation of the administrator who shall serve for a term
concurrent with that of the treasurer and have all the power,
authority and duty of the treasurer in the absence of the treasurer.
e. Duties of the Treasurer. The treasurer shall:
1. Receive funds entrusted to or under the control of any department
and deposit all funds received by him in depositories authorized by
the township committee by resolution.
2. Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the township
or in the possession of the township in a fiduciary capacity, except
as otherwise provided by law, and keep such funds and all moneys
of the township not required for current operations safely invested
or deposited in interest-bearing accounts.
3. Have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the township and
the receipt and delivery of township bonds and notes for transfer,
registration or exchange.
4. Keep a full account of all cash receipts and disbursements of the
township, and, at least once a month, and more often if the
township committee requires, furnish the township committee with
a statement of all moneys received and expended by him.
5. Make examinations of the records of the municipality to determine
unpaid municipal liens and to certify the result thereof, to issue
official certificates of searches and to collect such fees for the use
of the township as are required by law.
f. Bill of Demand for Claims. Any person claiming payment from the
township shall present a detailed bill of demand, duly certified.
g. Verification of Correctness. It shall be the duty of the treasurer to see
that the signature of the officer or employee who has been duly
designated by the township committee to certify that the materials have
been received by or the services rendered to the township appears on
every claim. It shall also be the duty of the treasurer to determine that
every claim is mathematically correct.
§ 2-2.7 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-2.7
AO:14
§ 2-2.8. Department of Revenue Collection.1 [Ord. #94-973]
h. Approval or Rejection by Township Committee. Claims shall be
considered by the township committee, which shall approve the same,
except that the township committee may reject any claim presented to
it, stating the reason for such rejection.
Any disapproved claim shall be referred back to the township treasurer
with such instructions as the township committee may give at the time
of disapproval.
i. Record of Claims. It shall be the duty of the township clerk to record all
claims in the official minutes, indicating that the township committee
has by formal action approved the same, with appropriate record as to
any claims disapproved or rejected.
j. Approval to Be Noted on Claims. It shall be the duty of the township
treasurer, or such other officer as is designated by resolution of the
township committee, to indicate on said claims that they have been
approved for payment, with the date of approval thereof noted on the
claim.
k. Preparation of Checks; Account Records. After the treasurer has
certified that the claims have been approved, he shall forthwith prepare
the necessary checks for payment thereof, which check shall be signed
by the mayor individually or by signature plate, and thereafter
countersigned by the treasurer, individually or by signature plate. After
preparing checks for payment of claims, he shall record them in proper
books of account and thereafter mail or otherwise distribute the checks
to the claimants.
l. Perform such other tasks as may be assigned by the township
administrator.
a. Department Established; Head. There shall be a tax collector of
revenue collection, the head of which shall be the tax collector.
b. Appointment of Tax Collector; Term. There shall be a tax collector of the
township appointed by the township committee upon recommendation
of the administrator. The tax collector shall serve for a term of four
years from the first day of January next following his appointment.
c. Assistant to the Tax Collector. There may be an assistant tax collector
who shall be appointed by the township committee to serve until
December 31 following his appointment. The assistant collector shall
perform such duties as shall be fixed by resolution of the township
committee and as may be assigned to him by the tax collector.
d. Duties of the Tax Collector. The tax collector shall:
1. Editor's Note: Former subsection 2-2.8 previously codified herein and containing portions
of Ordinance Nos. 803-89 and 92-928 was repealed by Ordinance No. 94-973.
§ 2-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.8
AO:15
§ 2-2.9. Assessor. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #606-82]
§ 2-2.10. Police Department. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #601-81; Ord.
#02-1258; Ord. No. 2016-1634]
1. Perform the functions of a collector of taxes under general law,
including without limitation thereto the preparation and mailing of
tax bills, enforcement of tax bills, enforcement of tax collections by
tax sales and otherwise, and the maintenance of tax accounting
records in such manner as may be prescribed or approved pursuant
to ordinance; and in furtherance therefor, install and administer tax
bill forms which include a bill for the first two quarters of each year
with the bill for the final half of the preceding year.
2. Receive and collect all current and delinquent real and personal
property taxes, charge and receive penalties and interest pursuant
to law.
3. Maintain his office for the transaction of business on such days as
the committee may by resolution require.
4. Make examinations of the records of the municipality to determine
unpaid municipal liens and to certify the result thereof, to issue
official certificates of searches and to collect such fees for the use
of the township as are required by law.
5. Have custody of all municipal tax lien certificates.
a. Established; Term. There shall be an assessor of the township who shall
hold office for a four-year term to commence on July 1 next following his
appointment and as may be provided by law.
b. The assessor shall:
1. Perform such duties as are required by law.
2. Maintain and keep current required records, tax maps, and
property assessments.
3. Supervise all programs of property revaluation.
a. Establishment. A Police Department is hereby established in the
Township, under the name of "Police Department of the Township of
Hopewell, Mercer County, New Jersey."
The following positions and line of authority are hereby created:
1. One Chief of Police.
2. One Captain.
3. Two Lieutenants.
4. Five Sergeants.
§ 2-2.8 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-2.10
AO:16
5. Forty Police Officers.
The creation of these positions shall not require the Township Committee
to fill each position and any position hereunder established may, in the sole
discretion of the Township Committee, remain vacant.
b. Designation of Appropriate Authority. In accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118, the Township Committee is hereby designated as the
"Appropriate Authority." The Appropriate Authority shall be responsible
for the overall performance of the Police Department. The Appropriate
Authority shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the
governance of the Police Department and for the discipline of its
members.
c. Chief of Police; Powers and Duties. The Township shall appoint a Chief
of Police who shall have all of the powers set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118 and who shall be directly responsible to the Appropriate
Authority for the efficiency and routine day-to-day operations of the
Police Department. The Chief of Police shall, pursuant to policies
established by the Township Committee:
1. Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special
emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the force
and its officers and personnel.
2. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the force.
3. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
4. Delegate authority as the Chief may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the force to be exercised under the Chief's
direction and supervision.
5. Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as
shall be prescribed by the Township Committee on the operation of
the force during the preceding month, and make such other reports
as may be requested by the Township Committee.
d. Appointment of Police Officers.
1. All members of the Hopewell Township Police Department shall be
appointed by the Township Committee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118 et seq.
2. Appointments to the Hopewell Township Police Department shall
be made in accordance with the Police Department Rules and
Regulations which have been approved by the Township Committee
in accordance with subsection 2-2.10e.
e. Rules and Regulations. The Township Committee shall, by resolution, as
in its judgment may seem necessary, adopt and amend the rules and
§ 2-2.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.10
AO:17
regulations for the government and discipline of the Police Department
and employees thereof. The rules and regulations may fix and provide
for the enforcement of such rules and regulations and the enforcement
of penalties for the violation of such rules and regulations, and all
members of the Police Department shall be subject to such rules and
regulations and penalties.
f. Disciplinary Action.
1. Disciplinary action shall be taken against employees of the Police
Department in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted
by resolution pursuant to subsection 2-2.10e above.
2. Disciplinary action against an employee may include oral
reprimand, written reprimand, fine, suspension, demotion and/or
removal from the police force.
3. No sworn officer shall be suspended, removed, fined or reduced in
rank from or in office, employment, or position therein, except for
just cause and then only upon a written complaint setting forth the
charge or charges against such officer in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-147 et seq. and this paragraph:
(a) The complainant shall file the complaint with the Chief of
Police and simultaneously serve a copy upon the respondent.
(b) The complaint shall specify the disciplinary charge(s) and shall
notify the respondent of the date, time and place of the hearing
which shall be not less than 10 nor more than 30 days from the
date of service of the complaint. Failure to comply with the
provisions of this subsection as to the service of the complaint
shall require dismissal of the complaint.
(c) A complaint charging a violation of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant to subsection 2-2.10e above shall be filed no
later than the forty-fifth-day after the date on which the person
filing the complaint obtains sufficient information to prepare
the complaint. The forty-five-day time limit shall not apply if an
investigation of a respondent for a violation of the rules or
regulations is included directly or indirectly within a
concurrent investigation of that officer for violation of the
criminal laws of this State, in which case the forty-five-day limit
shall begin on the day after the disposition of the criminal
investigation. A failure to file a complaint within the forty-fiveday
limit of this paragraph shall require dismissal of the
complaint, except that the forty-five-day limit shall not apply to
complaints filed against respondents by private individuals.
Upon the filing of a complaint by a private individual, the Chief
of Police shall cause the Department to conduct an internal
investigation. If the internal investigation finds probable cause
to believe that there has been a violation of Department rules
and regulations, the officer in charge of the investigation shall
§ 2-2.10 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-2.10
AO:18
§ 2-2.11. Department of Public Works. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord.
#94-973; Ord. #94-989]
file departmental charges and the matter shall proceed as
otherwise provided in this subsection. If the internal
investigation does not find probable cause, departmental
charges shall not be filed.
(d) The Chief of Police shall be the hearing officer relative to all
disciplinary proceedings involving a permanent sworn member
of the Police Department when the penalty is a suspension of
five days or less. The Chief of Police shall review each and
every disciplinary matter involving a sworn officer and shall
determine whether on the face of the complaint, the penalty for
the alleged charges would exceed the above limit. If the
penalty will involve a suspension of more than five days, a
demotion or dismissal from the Department, an independent
hearing officer appointed by the Township Committee shall
conduct the hearing and make recommended findings and
conclusions to the Township Committee which shall retain full
authority to accept, reject or modify the hearing officer's
recommendation and to make a final determination.
(e) All disciplinary hearings shall be held in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-148.
(f) Any sworn police officer who has been tried and convicted
under this subsection may obtain a review thereof by the
Superior Court of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-150.
All such appeals from decisions of the hearing officer, whether
it was the Chief of Police or the Township Committee, shall be
taken directly to the Superior Court.
g. Civilian Dispatchers and School Crossing Guards. In addition to the
regular members of the police force provided for in subsection 2-2.10d,
the Township Committee may also employ persons 18 years of age or
older as civilian dispatchers and school crossing guards for the Police
Department. Persons shall be appointed to the office of civilian
dispatcher and school crossing guards for the Police Department on an
annual basis and shall be citizens of the United States; shall be able to
read, write and speak the English language; and shall be of good moral
character and never have been convicted of a crime. Such person shall
be hired in accordance with the hiring procedures set forth in the Police
Department Selection policy.
a. There shall be a department of public works of the township, the head
of which shall be the director of public works.
b. The department of public works shall:
§ 2-2.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.11
AO:19
§ 2-2.12. Municipal Construction Office. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord.
#94-973]
§ 2-2.13. Department of Community Development. [Ord. #94-973;
Ord. #14-1597; Ord. No. 2017-1654]
§ 2-2.14. Township Engineer. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #94-973]
1. Maintain and repair all township streets, bridges, culverts and
drains within the township.
2. Construct and reconstruct streets, roads, bridges, culverts and
drains; treat road surfaces and resurface streets and roads
according to such standards and schedules as directed or approved
by the township engineer.
3. Maintain all township streets in a clean and safe condition, free of
obstructions and hazards and remove snow and ice therefrom as
required.
4. Receive applications for and issue street opening permits.
5. Provide, operate and maintain such other services and facilities as
the township committee shall direct.
a. There shall be a municipal construction office which shall consist of the
municipal construction officer and such other subcode officials as are
appointed by the township committee.
b. Functions of the municipal construction official.
1. The municipal construction official shall enforce and administer the
Uniform Construction Code.
a. There shall be a Department of Community Development which shall
consist of a Community Development Director as is appointed by the
Township Committee.
b. The Community Development Director shall be the Zoning Officer and
shall also perform the duties of Planning Board Secretary and Zoning
Board Secretary.
c. The Zoning Officer shall enforce and administer the zoning ordinances.
d. The Planning Board Secretary and Zoning Board Secretary shall
perform all duties as set forth by N.J.S.A. 40:55D.
e. The Township Committee may appoint an Assistant Community
Development Director upon recommendation of the Administrator who
shall serve for a term concurrent with that of the Community
Development Director and have all the power, authority and
responsibilities of the Community Development Director in his or her
absence.
§ 2-2.11 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-2.14
AO:20
§ 2-3. PERSONNEL GENERALLY.
§ 2-3.1. Personnel Policy and Procedures Manual. [Ord. #04-1311]
a. Established. There shall be a township engineer appointed by the
township committee for a three-year term which term shall commence
January 1 of the year of his appointment.
b. Powers and Duties Generally. The township engineer shall be the
engineering consultant to the township committee and to all
departments except as may be otherwise provided by ordinance. In
furtherance of his general powers, and without limitation thereto, he
shall:
1. Be responsible for all matters relating to the design, construction
and maintenance of the physical properties of the township.
2. Direct and supervise the preparation of plans and specifications
and the writing and performance of contracts for all township
improvements.
3. Provide all engineering and mechanical services required by the
township committee and any department of the township except as
may otherwise be provided.
4. Have such other and different functions, powers and duties as may
be provided by ordinance or resolution.
c. Assistant Township Engineer. There may be an assistant township
engineer appointed by the township committee for a three-year term.
He shall receive such compensation as provided by ordinance and, in
the case of special services, by resolution. He shall assist the township
engineer in the performance of his duties and shall be responsible to
the township engineer for the proper completion thereof.
a. The personnel policies of the township shall be set forth in a document
entitled Personnel Policy and Procedures Manual.
b. The Personnel Policy and Procedures Manual, and any amendments
thereto, shall be adopted by resolution of the township committee and
shall have the same force and effect as if they were set forth at length in
this subsection.
c. A copy of the Personnel Policy and Procedures Manual shall be provided
to each employee; copies of all amendments thereto shall be provided to
each employee immediately after adoption of any such amendment.
Implementation, enforcement and interpretation of the Personnel Policy
and Procedures Manual shall be the responsibility of the township
administrator.
§ 2-2.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-3.2
AO:21
§ 2-3.2. Powers and Duties of Department Heads. [Ord. #7/15/74;
Ord. #04-1311]
The head of each department, under the supervision of the township
administrator, and subject to this revision and all other ordinances, shall:
§ 2-3.3. Hours of Work. [Ord. #452; Ord. #04-1311]
§ 2-4. MUNICIPAL COURT OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HOPEWELL.
§ 2-4.1. Powers; Title. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #14-1592]
There shall be a municipal court in the township which shall possess and
exercise all powers conferred by N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq. or by any other law.
It shall be known as "The Municipal Court of the Township of Hopewell."
§ 2-4.2. Municipal Judge. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #14-1592]
There shall be a municipal judge who shall be appointed by the township
committee and who shall serve for a term of three years from the date of his
appointment and until his successor is appointed and qualified.
a. Prescribe the internal organization of the department and the duties of
subordinate officers and employees within the department.
b. Assign functions, powers and duties to subordinate officers and
employees within the department, and modify such assignments as
need appears.
c. Supervise the work of the department and such other organization units
as may be assigned to such departments by the township committee.
d. Delegate to subordinate officers such of his powers as he may deem
necessary for efficient administration.
a. The official work week of the township shall be a five-day, forty-hour
week, totaling 2,080 hours for a work year. The township committee,
however, by resolution, may reduce the hours of work required of
employees in specific departments to not less than 35 hours per week.
b. The administrator shall set forth the hours of work for each
department, including the amount of time that shall be allowed for
lunch. In specialized functions, such as the police department, or public
works department, and any other appropriate functions, employees
may be scheduled for work according to a schedule other than the
typical five-day, forty-hour work week, provided, however, that the
effect of such schedule over a full year cycle substantially results in an
equivalent amount of work hours as if such employees were working a
five-day, forty-hour work week.
§ 2-3.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-4.3
AO:22
§ 2-4.3. Duties of the Municipal Judge. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord.
#14-1592]
The municipal judge will sit every Tuesday from 8:30 a.m. until the calendar
is completed and at such other times as the business of the court may
require. The municipal judge will exercise the functions, powers, duties and
jurisdiction of the municipal court.
§ 2-4.4. Municipal Court Clerk. [Ord. #7/15/74]
§ 2-4.5. Deputy Court Clerk. [Ord. #7/15/74]
There shall be a deputy court clerk who shall be appointed by the township
committee for a term of one year from January 1 of the year of appointment.
During the absence or disability of the court clerk, the deputy court clerk
shall have all the powers of the court clerk and shall perform the duties and
functions of such office.
§ 2-4.6. Acting Clerks. [Ord. #7/15/74]
In the absence of the clerk or deputy clerk, the judge of the municipal
court may designate in writing an acting clerk or acting deputy clerk who
temporarily shall have the authority to perform the duties of the clerk or
deputy clerk to serve at such compensation and in the manner set forth in
N.J.S.A. 2A:8-13.2.
a. Term. There shall be a municipal court clerk who shall be appointed by
the township committee for a term of one year from January 1 of the
year of appointment.
b. Duties. The municipal court clerk shall:
1. Carry out the rules, regulations, policies and procedures relating to
the operation of the court.
2. Interview and speak to prospective complainants; receive
complaints and dispense information relating to court matters.
3. Maintain the financial records of the court.
4. Attend court, take minutes of the trials and enter them in the
docket, arrange trial calendars; sign court documents; prepare and
issue warrants and commitments.
5. Take and prepare bail bonds, making inquiry as to their sufficiency
and equity; receive and account for fines and costs.
6. Interview persons on informal policy court matters to determine if
there is a basis for formal action, and, if necessary issue
summonses requiring court appearances in this regard; maintain
and classify records and files.
7. Act as violations clerk when designated by the municipal court.
§ 2-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-4.7
AO:23
§ 2-4.7. Violations Bureau. [Ord. #7/15/74]
There shall be a Violations Bureau in the Township of Hopewell which
shall exercise all functions as may be provided by rules of court. The
municipal judge shall designate as the violations clerk such person as he
shall determine in the manner provided by the rules governing the courts of
the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-5. BODIES, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND
AUTHORITIES.
§ 2-5.1. Bodies Established. [Ord. #7/15/74; New; Ord. #624-83, § 1;
Ord. #11-1504, § 1; Ord. #11-1514 § 1; Ord. #13-1566, § 1; Ord.
#2018-1688]
There shall be the following municipal and intermunicipal bodies:
§ 2-5.2. Appointment and Term. [Ord. #7/15/74]
All members or township representatives and the chairman of any municipal
or intermunicipal body shall be appointed as provided by law. In the absence
of any statutory direction, they shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to
the approval of the township committee, and for such term as is provided
by ordinance or resolution. In the absence of any provision as to term,
they shall serve until January 1 next following their appointment. Unless
otherwise provided by law, all members and the chairman of any municipal
a. Local Assistance Board, Welfare;
b. Environmental Commission;
c. Board of Health;
d. Finance Advisory Committee;
e. Economic Development Commission;
f. Planning Board;
g. Board of Adjustment;
h. Stony Brook Regional Sewerage Authority;
i. Shade Tree Advisory Committee;
j. Municipal Utilities Authority;
k. (Reserved)
l. Historic Sites Committee;
m. Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee;
n. Deer Management Advisory Committee.
§ 2-4.7 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-5.2
AO:24
body and the township representatives to any intermunicipal body shall be
residents of the Township of Hopewell.
§ 2-5.3. Removal. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Unless otherwise provided by law, any member, township representative
or chairman of any municipal or intermunicipal body may be removed or
suspended by the township committee for good cause. Good cause shall
include incapacity, misconduct, inefficiency, material conflict of interest,
pending indictment or habitual nonattendance to duties. Any such person
shall be entitled to five days' written notice served upon him of the charge
or charges made. He shall have the right to a hearing before the township
committee and be heard in person or by counsel.
§ 2-5.4. Vacancy. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Unless otherwise provided by law, any vacancy shall be filled in the same
manner as the initial election or appointment and shall be only for the
unexpired term remaining. Temporary appointments shall be made in the
same manner as the initial election or appointment but shall be only for the
period of suspension.
§ 2-5.5. Assistance and Cooperation. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Unless otherwise provided, any municipal body may request the
professional or other assistance of any appointive township officer or
department head. Such request shall be made to the administrator and shall
be liberally authorized by him.
§ 2-5.6. Records. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Each municipal body and, where not otherwise maintained, the township
representative to an intermunicipal body, shall keep records of its meetings
and activities. Where not otherwise provided, the same shall be filed with
the township clerk and are public records.
§ 2-5.7. Annual Reports and Budgets. [Ord. #7/15/74; New]
Each municipal body or township representative shall submit a report to
the township committee annually or at such lesser intervals as the township
committee shall direct. Such report shall set forth the activities of the
particular body and such recommendations as may deem appropriate.
The chairman or township representative of each municipal or
intermunicipal body or their designee shall prepare and submit to the
township administrator in the month of October of each year detailed
budgetary proposals for consideration by the township committee and shall
consult with the township upon request of the administrator or committee.
§ 2-5.8. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #7/15/74; New]
§ 2-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5.8
AO:25
§ 2-5.9. Appropriations. [Ord. #7/15/74; New]
The township committee may appropriate funds for the expense incurred
by any municipal or intermunicipal body and shall appoint such clerks
and other employees as any such body may require. Where the power of
appointment is in the municipal or intermunicipal body, it shall nevertheless
be empowered to make expenditures only within the limits of the funds
appropriated to it. All such bodies are nonetheless requested to consult with
the township committee and/or administrator on all such appointments to
the end that existing township personnel and facilities might be shared.
§ 2-6. LOCAL ASSISTANCE BOARD: WELFARE.
§ 2-6.1. Established. [Ord. #7/15/74]
There shall be a local assistance board.
§ 2-6.2. Appointment and Term. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #548-80; Ord.
#96-1037]
The local assistance board shall be composed of three persons, at least
one of whom shall be a woman, appointed by the mayor upon approval of
the township committee. The term of one member shall be for one year
and such member only may be appointed from among the membership
of the governing body. The terms of the other members shall be for four
years each, one term expiring in each year. The local assistance board shall
organize and select a chairman and a secretary. It shall appoint a director of
welfare who shall hold office for a term of five years and be paid such salary
as is fixed by the board and approved by the township committee.
§ 2-6.3. Powers and Duties of the Local Assistance Board, Director
of Welfare. [Ord. #7/15/74]
a. Unless otherwise provided by law, all municipal bodies shall prepare
and submit proposed rules and regulations to the township committee.
No rule or regulation shall be effective unless adopted by the township
committee and filed with the township clerk.
b. The chairman of any municipal body empowered by law to enact its own
rules and regulations and the township representative to any
intermunicipal body shall also file the rules and regulations of this
municipal or intermunicipal body with the township clerk.
c. All rules and regulations shall be kept on file by the township clerk.
a. The local assistance board shall provide public assistance to persons
eligible thereto residing in the township in accordance with law and
such regulations as the board shall from time to time promulgate and
shall supervise the work of the director of welfare.
b. The director of welfare shall:
§ 2-5.8 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-6.3
AO:26
§ 2-7. ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
§ 2-7.1. Established. [Ord. #7/15/74]
There shall be an environmental commission to be known as "The Hopewell
Township Environmental Commission."
§ 2-7.2. Membership. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #06-1365]
§ 2-7.3. Terms; Dates of Appointment. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord.
#06-1365]
The term of office of the first commissioners shall be for one, two and three
years, to be designated by the mayor, at the time of appointment, so that the
terms of approximately one-third of the members will expire each year and
their successors shall, thereafter, be appointed for terms of three years and
until the appointment and qualification of their successors. The terms of the
alternate members shall be for two years except the terms of the alternate
members first appointed shall be for two years for Alternate No. 1 and one
year for Alternate No. 2.
§ 2-7.4. Powers of Commission. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The environmental commission shall have the power to conduct research
into the use and possible use of open land areas of the township and may
coordinate the activities of official bodies organized for similar purposes,
and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans,
pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems necessary for its purposes, all
within the limits of funds appropriated to it by the township committee
or gifts which may have been made available for such purposes. It shall
keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned, including open
marsh lands, swamps and other wetlands, in order to obtain information on
the proper use of such areas and may recommend to the planning board of
1. Supervise, through monthly visits, welfare recipients.
2. Re-evaluate such person's needs on a monthly basis.
3. Maintain required and appropriate records.
4. Bring about actions for commitment where appropriate.
a. Membership and Appointment. The commission shall consist of seven
members appointed by the mayor, one of whom shall be a member of
the planning board. The members shall serve without compensation,
except as hereafter provided. The mayor shall designate one of the
members to serve as chairman and presiding officer of the commission.
b. Alternate Members. There shall be two alternate members, appointed
by the mayor, designated at the time of appointment as "Alternate No.
1" and "Alternate No. 2."
§ 2-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-7.4
AO:27
the township, plans and programs for inclusion in a municipal master plan
and the development and use of such areas.
§ 2-7.5. Acquisitions by Commission. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The environmental commission may, subject to the approval of the
governing body, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of
the Township of Hopewell, by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease
for any of its purposes and shall administer the same for such purposes
subject to the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may
be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement
(including conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right
(including a conveyance on conditions or with limitations or reversions), as
may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future
use of, or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other
land and water areas in the municipality.
§ 2-7.6. Personnel. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The commission may appoint such clerks and other employees as it may
require and shall be within the limits of funds appropriated to it.
§ 2-8. BOARD OF HEALTH. [Ord. #7/15/74; New]
Pursuant to the provisions of Title 26 of the Revised Statutes of the State of
New Jersey, there is hereby created a board of health which shall have and
exercise all the powers and perform all the duties provided for by law and
any other statute heretofore or hereinafter enacted and applicable thereto.
The board of health shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be
members of the township committee. Their terms shall be coextensive with
their terms as members of the township committee.
The board of health shall appoint, on the day of its organization, a place,
day and hour for the regular meeting of the board for the hearing of
complaints, reports, and general business, and shall cause to be published
in the township newspaper notice of the same. At least one regular meeting
shall be held in each year.
§ 2-9. BOARD OF HEALTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
§ 2-9.1. Established. [Ord. #01-1212, § 1]
There is hereby established within the Township of Hopewell a board of
health advisory committee.
§ 2-9.2. Purpose. [Ord. #01-1212, § 1]
The committee shall make recommendations to the township board of
health as to those measures essential to meeting the health needs of the
community.
§ 2-7.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-9.3
AO:28
§ 2-9.3. Membership; Terms; Vacancies; Removal. [Ord. #01-1212,
§ 1; Ord. #02-1227, § 1; Ord. #07-1388, § 1]
§ 2-9.4. Meetings; Quorum; Rules. [Ord. #01-1212, § 1; Ord.
#07-1388, § 1]
a. Membership and Appointment. The board of health advisory committee
shall consist of five regular voting members from Hopewell Township
and two alternate voting members who may be residents from
Pennington or Hopewell Borough, and shall be appointed by the
township committee. Alternate members shall be designated at the time
of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." All members
of the committee, including alternate members, shall have expertise in
health related fields. In addition, there shall be two nonvoting members
appointed by the township committee, who shall serve as ex officio
members of the committee. One of the ex officio members shall be a
member of the township committee and at least one other shall be an
employee of the township department of health.
b. Terms; Vacancies. The terms of office of the five regular voting
members of the committee shall be as follows, with said designation to
be made by the Township Committee at the time of appointment: two
members shall serve for a three-year term; two members shall serve for
a two-year term; and one member shall serve for a one-year term.
Thereafter, all future members of the committee shall be appointed for
three year terms. The terms of office of the two alternate voting
members of the committee shall be as follows, with said designation to
be made by the township committee at the time of appointment: the
term of the "Alternate No. 1" member shall be for a period of two years,
and the term of the "Alternate No. 2" member shall be for a period of
one year. Thereafter, all future alternate members shall be appointed
for two year terms. In no instance shall the terms of both alternate
members expire in any one year. The advisory committee shall elect, at
its first meeting of the year, one of its voting members to serve as
chairperson and one member as vice-chairperson of the committee for a
one-year term. A recording secretary shall also be appointed by the
committee. In the event of a vacancy occurring on the committee other
than by the expiration of a term, such vacancy shall be filled for the
unexpired term in the same manner as referenced above.
c. Removal and Absenteeism. The township committee may remove any
member of the committee for cause by a majority vote after written
charges have been served upon the member and after a hearing on such
charges at which time the member shall be entitled to be heard in
person or by counsel. Absence from three consecutive meetings or from
50% of the committee's regularly scheduled meetings in a year may
constitute cause for removal. The chairperson shall report to the
township committee every six months as to such absenteeism.
a. Meetings. The board of health advisory committee shall meet at least
four times annually, on such dates and at such times as established by
§ 2-9.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-9.4
AO:29
§ 2-9.5. Powers and Duties. [Ord. #01-1212, § 1]
The board of health advisory committee, in accordance with current State
performance guidelines, shall:
§ 2-9.6. Records and Annual Report. [Ord. #01-1212, § 1]
The board of health advisory committee shall keep records of its meetings
and activities and shall make an annual written report to the township
committee and the township board of health.
§ 2-10. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.
§ 2-10.1. Established. [Ord. #7/15/74]
There shall be an industrial and economic commission to be known as
"Hopewell Township Economic Development Commission."
the committee at its first meeting of the year, which meetings shall
be held in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act. Additional
meeting may be held at the request of the chairperson or by agreement
of a majority of members, provided timely public notice of the meeting
is given in accordance with any applicable law.
b. Quorum. The presence of a majority of the authorized voting members
of the board of health advisory committee shall constitute a quorum.
c. Rules. The board of health advisory committee shall have the power to
establish rules for the conduct of its meetings.
a. Develop community health and environmental programs and projects,
taking as its top priorities those items referred to it by the township
board of health and the township committee.
b. Work in cooperation with the township department of health and the
township health officer in order to establish priorities for health
programs within the township and to form guidelines for the
implementation of any such programs by the township department of
health.
c. Issue reports and make recommendations to the township committee
and/or the township board of health for local legislative action related
to the health and environmental health needs of the community.
d. Review all proposed health and environmental health related
ordinances prior to enactment by the township committee and/or the
township board of health.
e. Establish fact-finding subcommittees with respect to health and
environmental health related issues, if deemed necessary.
f. Exercise such additional powers, functions and duties as requested by
the township committee and/or the township board of health.
§ 2-9.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-10.2
AO:30
§ 2-10.2. Appointment. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The commission shall consist of seven members, each of whom shall have
been, for the last five years preceding his appointment, a citizen of the
United States and a qualified voter of the State of New Jersey. Each shall
be chosen with special view to his qualifications and shall be subject to the
limitations imposed by statute, i.e. N.J.S.A. 40:55B-5. The members of the
commission shall annually choose from among its members a chairman and
such other officers as it may deem necessary.
The mayor shall be an ex officio member of the Economic Development
Commission.
§ 2-10.3. Term. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #611-82]
The term of each member shall be for five years. The term of the
commissioners shall expire on December 31 of the first, second, third,
fourth and fifth years next ensuing after the date of their appointment. One
member shall be appointed for one year, one member for two years, one
member for three years, two members for four years and two members for
five years. At the expiration of each of the above terms, new members and
members reappointed shall serve for a term of five years and until their
successors are appointed and qualify.
§ 2-10.4. General Powers. [Ord. #7/15/74]
To effectuate its purposes, the commission shall have the power:
§ 2-10.5. Purposes, Functions, and Additional Powers. [Ord. #7/15/
74]
This commission constitutes the corporate instrumentality of the township
for the following purposes:
a. To sue and be sued.
b. To adopt and use an official seal.
c. To adopt suitable by-laws for the management of its affairs.
d. To determine the qualifications and duties of its employees, and to fix,
subject to the foregoing provisions hereof, their compensation.
e. To enter into contracts.
a. To inquire into, survey and publicize the extent, advantages and utility
of the vacant lands of such municipality, whether municipally owned or
otherwise.
b. To classify such vacant lands according to their adaptability for the
settlement thereon of various types of industrial, professional,
commercial and other business enterprises.
§ 2-10.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-10.5
AO:31
§ 2-10.6. Limitations on Powers. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The commission shall not:
c. To study and analyze the various industries, professional organizations
and commercial and business enterprises of the nation and, to the
extent it deems necessary for its purposes, the enterprises of other
nations, with a view to ascertaining the opportunities for the economic
expansion of the township. In this connection, the reports, records,
statistics, compendia and similar documents of existing Federal, State,
county, municipal and other governmental and public agencies, as well
as of responsible private institutions, boards, agencies and similar
bodies interested in the compilation of the information relating to
economic development, shall be resorted to wherever possible in order
to avoid unnecessary original research and gathering of source
material.
d. To advertise the economic advantages and opportunities of the
municipality and the availability of real estate within the municipality
for economic development and to encourage and accomplish the
settlement within the municipality of beneficial industries, professional
organizations and commercial and business enterprises.
e. To solicit the several industries, professional organizations and other
commercial and business enterprises to purchase or lease the vacant
lands and property of or in the township.
f. To accomplish the sale or lease of the township's vacant lands to
industries, professional organizations and other commercial and
business enterprises whose settlement thereon is best calculated in the
judgment of the commission to advance the interests of the township
and of its citizens and inhabitants.
g. To acquire title to vacant land owned by the township for the purpose of
resale or lease to industries, professional organizations and other
commercial and business enterprises whose presence within the
township will benefit in the judgment of the commission, its citizens and
inhabitants.
h. To make a study of the tax structure with a view to reducing the tax
burden of the municipality.
a. Have any power of condemnation or eminent domain.
b. Have any power to pledge the credit of the township or to create any
debt or in any manner act as the agent of the township or of the State of
New Jersey.
The commission shall be additionally limited in its powers and functions as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55 B-10.
§ 2-10.5 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-11
AO:32
§ 2-11. through § 2-12. (Reserved)2 [Reserved by Ordinance
#572-80]
§ 2-13. STONY BROOK REGIONAL SEWERAGE AUTHORITY.
§ 2-13.1. Sewerage Authority Created. [Ord. #813-89]
a. Name. The Stony Brook Regional Sewerage Authority.
b. Intent.
1. To form a permanent organization jointly with the other
participating municipalities, which is legally, administratively and
fiscally competent to supervise the preparation of detailed plans
and specifications by the consulting engineer, and to carry out a
program of construction, operation and financing of a regional
sewerage system.
2. To enable the prevention and abatement of pollution of the streams
and other surface and ground waters of the Stony Brook Watershed
and related land resources, and the correction and prevention of
unsanitary and unhealthful conditions which exist or will develop
for lack of proper public sanitary sewerage facilities, which
prevention and abatement is vital to the public health and safety
and to the economic development of the region comprised of the
Boroughs of Hopewell, Pennington and Princeton and of the
Townships of Hopewell, Princeton and West Windsor, and an area
known as Princeton Farms and a contiguous parcel, all in the
County of Mercer.
c. Authority Created. The Stony Brook Regional Sewerage Authority is
hereby created upon the enactment of parallel ordinances by the other
municipalities named in this section.
d. Powers and Duties. The sewerage authority hereby created shall have
such functions, powers and duties as are provided by the Sewerage
Authorities Law, as amended and supplemented and shall be governed,
administered and financed to that law and any other provision of law
applicable to such authorities.
e. Membership. The authority shall consist of six members, one to be
appointed by each of the governing bodies in accordance with the
provisions of the Sewerage Authorities Law, as amended and
supplemented.
f. Filing. The township clerk is authorized and directed to file forthwith a
duly certified copy of this section with the Secretary of State of New
Jersey and with the municipal clerk of each of the municipalities named
above.
2. Editor's Note: See Chapter 17, Land Use and Development.
§ 2-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-14
AO:33
§ 2-14. MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AUTHORITY.
§ 2-14.1. Established. [Ord. #7/15/74]
There shall be established "The Hopewell Township Municipal Utilities
Authority."
§ 2-14.2. Intent. [Ord. #7/15/74]
To create a municipal utility authority so as to enable:
§ 2-14.3. Appointment. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The municipal utilities authority shall consist of five members. The members
shall annually elect from among its members a chairman and a vicechairman
on or after February 1 of each year.
§ 2-14.4. Term. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Members' initial terms shall expire on the first days of the first, second,
third, fourth and fifth Februaries next ensuing after the date of their
appointment. On or after January 1 in each year thereafter, one person shall
be appointed to serve for a term commencing February 1 in such year and
expiring on February 1 in the fifth year after such year. Appointments to
vacancies shall be for the unexpired term.
§ 2-14.5. Compensation. [Ord. #413]
Members of the township municipal utilities authority shall receive no
compensation for their services as members.
§ 2-14.6. General Powers and Limitations. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The municipal utilities authority shall have all the limitations set forth at
length in N.J.S.A. 40:14B-1 et seq.
§ 2-14.7. Personnel. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The municipal utilities authority may appoint and employ a secretary, an
executive director and a chief engineer, and it shall determine their
qualifications, terms of office, duties and compensation. It may also appoint
and employ such other agents as it may require and determine their duties
and compensation.
§ 2-15. HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.3
a. The provision and distribution of an adequate supply of water for the
public and private uses of the township.
b. Relief from the pollution of streams and waters through sewage,
industrial and other wastes arising from causes within the township.
§ 2-14 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-15.1
AO:34
§ 2-15.1. Establishment. [Ord. #7/15/74, Ord. #00-1142, § 2]
There is hereby established within the Township of Hopewell an historic
preservation commission. All applicable regulations governing the historic
preservation commission, as well as all regulations concerning the
designation, establishment, preservation and regulation of historic
landmarks and historic districts within the Township of Hopewell are set
forth in more detail in Chapter 17, Land Use and Development.
§ 2-16. CATV ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
§ 2-16.1. Members. [Ord. #99-1113]
The CATV advisory committee shall be composed of five members who shall
meet the following criteria:
§ 2-16.2. Terms of Office. [Ord. #99-1113]
§ 2-16.3. Removal and Vacancies. [Ord. #99-1113]
§ 2-16.4. Purpose. [Ord. #99-1113]
The CATV advisory committee shall:
a. Each member of the committee shall be a township resident appointed
by the township committee.
b. One member of the committee may be a member of the board of
education or its designee.
c. One member of the committee shall be a member of the township
committee.
d. All members of the committee shall serve without compensation.
a. The committee shall designate one of its members to serve as
chairperson and presiding officer of the committee for a one-year term.
b. All members of the committee shall serve two year appointments.
a. The township committee may remove any member of the committee for
cause after written charges have been served upon the member and
after a hearing on such charges at which time the member shall be
entitled to be heard in person or by counsel.
b. In the event of a vacancy occurring on the committee other than by
expiration of a term, such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
c. Any member of the committee who misses three consecutive regular
monthly meetings shall be considered to have vacated his appointment.
3. Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 718-86, 93-945
and 97-1058.
§ 2-15.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-16.4
AO:35
§ 2-16.5. Records and Annual Report. [Ord. #99-1113]
The committee shall keep records of its meetings and activities and shall
make an annual report to the township committee.
§ 2-17. OPEN SPACE ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
§ 2-17.1. Established. [Ord. #99-1135, § 1]
There is hereby established an open space advisory committee within the
Township of Hopewell, which shall be a joint committee composed of
representatives of the Township of Hopewell, the Borough of Hopewell and
the Borough of Pennington.
§ 2-17.2. Purpose. [Ord. #99-1135, § 1]
It is the intent of the township and its partner municipalities to embark upon
a long range program in order to acquire and preserve natural resources
in order to manage the pace of growth, enhance property values and
otherwise benefit the health, safety and welfare of the residents of Hopewell
Township, Hopewell Borough and Pennington Borough.
§ 2-17.3. Membership; Quorum; Removal. [Ord. #99-1135, § 1; Ord.
#09-1458, § I]
a. Develop a plan for education and municipal uses of cable, including
such uses as:
1. Coordinating the use of access channels.
2. Sharing production facilities and equipment.
3. Using or leasing additional channels.
4. Involvement of volunteer and citizen groups within the service
area.
5. Monitor the progress of the township's CATV franchisee in meeting
its obligations under the Municipal Consent Ordinance.
6. Review all proposed changes to the stipulations of the Municipal
Consent Ordinance as recommended by the township's CATV
franchise.
7. Recommend the Township's application for any grants appropriate
for its purposes.
8. Investigate the possibility of broadcasting meetings of the
Hopewell Township Committee and the municipal bodies.
a. Membership and Appointment. The open space advisory committee
shall be composed of nine regular members, consisting of five regular
members appointed from Hopewell Township, two regular members
§ 2-16.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-17.3
AO:36
§ 2-17.4. Operating Procedures. [Ord. #99-1135, § 1]
appointed from Hopewell Borough and two regular members appointed
from Pennington Borough. The five Hopewell Township regular
members shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent
of the township committee. The appointment of the two Hopewell
Borough regular members and the two Pennington Borough regular
members shall be as set forth by their respective governing bodies.
b. Alternate Members. Each municipality shall appoint two alternate
members who shall be appointed in the same manner as the regular
members. The alternate members may participate in all committee
discussions but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of
a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member.
c. Terms; Vacancies. The terms of the five Hopewell Township regular
members first appointed under this section shall be as follows: two
regular members shall serve for a three-year term; two regular
members shall serve for a two-year term; and one regular member shall
serve for a one-year term. Thereafter, all future Hopewell Township
regular members shall be appointed to a three-year term. The alternate
members shall serve for a term not exceeding three years duration.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as
the initial appointment. The terms of the non-Hopewell Township
regular and alternate members shall be as set forth by the governing
bodies of Hopewell Borough and Pennington Borough, respectively.
d. Quorum. The presence of five members, which may include alternate
members filling the vacancies of regular members, shall constitute a
quorum.
e. Removal. A member of Hopewell Township's delegation to the
Committee may, after a public hearing if requested, be removed for
cause by a majority vote of the Hopewell Township Committee.
a. Officers. The open space advisory committee shall select from its
members a chairperson and vice-chairperson to serve as the presiding
officer in the absence of the chairperson. The committee shall also
select a secretary whose function shall be to manage minutes of the
committee's meetings and records of the proceedings of the committee.
b. Initial Organization Meeting. The committee shall hold its initial
organization meeting within 60 days after the final adoption of this
section.
c. Meetings. The committee shall hold public meetings, which public
meetings shall be held in accordance with the Open Public Meetings
Act.
§ 2-17.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-17.5
AO:37
§ 2-17.5. Powers and Duties. [Ord. #99-1135, § 1]
The open space advisory committee shall:
§ 2-17A. OPEN SPACE TRUST FUND.
§ 2-17A.1. Establishment of Open Space Trust Fund. [Ord.
#99-1134, § 2; Ord. #03-1275]
There is hereby established a reserve in the township's general capital fund
which shall be known and designated as the open space trust fund (the
fund). A separate bank account shall be opened and maintained for this
purpose.
§ 2-17A.2. Funding. [Ord. #99-1134, § 2; Ord. #03-1275]
The open space trust fund shall be funded through the dedication to the
fund of an amount as determined from time to time by the registered voters
of the township pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.7 donations and testamentary
requests made for the purposes enumerated in N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.7 shall be
deposited in this fund. The monies accumulated within the fund may be
utilized for the acquisition of land, easements and/or development rights,
acquisition of historic properties and structures or as a down payment for
the issuance of bonds for the same purpose at the discretion of the township
committee. Any and all interest accruing shall remain in the fund and may
be utilized for the above- described purpose.
a. Study and determine the existence of farmland and open space
properties within the area.
b. Make recommendations to the governing bodies of the three
participating municipalities as to those properties which it has
determined meet the criteria for possible acquisition, whether in fee, by
easement or by means of development rights.
c. Prepare a farmland and open space plan which shall be submitted to the
governing bodies of the three participating municipalities on an annual
basis. The plan shall contain an updated inventory of farmland and open
space properties within the area, and include recommendations for the
acquisition or preservation of certain land, whether in fee, by easement
or by means of development rights.
d. Establish a farmland and open space tracking program to catalog the
status of privately owned farmland and open space in the area and
record the progress of the participating municipalities with respect to
farmland and open space preservation.
e. Provide guidance and support to their governing bodies and planning
boards on issues and matters of farmland and open space.
f. Perform such other advisory duties as are requested by the governing
bodies and planning boards of the participating municipalities.
§ 2-17.5 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-17A.3
AO:38
§ 2-17A.3. Use of Funds. [Ord. #99-1134, § 2; Ord. #03-1275]
Funds from the account may be used, as directed by the township
committee, to acquire, develop and maintain vacant land, easements and
development rights for open space public recreation, conservation and/or
farmland and historic properties and structures for preservation purposes.
Funds from the account may also be used to acquire land that has
improvements upon it at the time of acquisition, provided that the principal
purpose of the acquisition is to preserve open space. In the event that
the township committee shall find it appropriate to apportion the cost
of acquisition between open space and improvements, it may do so and
charge the open space trust fund for the approximate value that it deems
appropriate relative to open space and the township's capital account for
the value that it determines attributable to improvements. Money from
the fund may also be used to cover expenses related to the authorized
acquisition, including but not limited to appraisals, surveys, title searches
and legal fees.
§ 2-17B. FINANCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
§ 2-17B.1. Established. [Ord. #13-1566, § 2]
There is hereby established a finance advisory committee within the
Township of Hopewell.
§ 2-17B.2. Purpose. [Ord. #13-1566, § 2]
The committee shall make recommendations to the township regarding the
township finances and budget.
§ 2-17B.3. Membership and Removal. [Ord. #13-1566, § 2]
a. Membership and Appointment. The finance advisory committee shall be
composed of seven members; five regular members and two alternate
members who shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and
consent of the township committee. The alternate members may
participate in all committee discussions but may not vote except in the
absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member.
b. Terms; Vacancies. The terms of the initial five regular members first
shall be as follows: two regular members shall serve for a three-year
term; two regular members shall serve for a two-year term; and one
regular member shall serve for a one-year term. Thereafter, all future
regular members shall be appointed to a three-year term. The alternate
members shall be appointed for a one-year term. Vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial
appointment.
§ 2-17A.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-17B.3
AO:39
§ 2-17B.4. Meetings; Quorum; Rules. [Ord. #13-1566, § 2]
§ 2-17B.5. Powers and Duties. [Ord. #13-1566, § 2]
The finance advisory committee shall:
§ 2-18. FINANCE AND BUDGET.
§ 2-18.1. Rate of Interest for Nonpayment of Taxes. [Ord. #7/15/74;
Ord. #556-80; Ord. #91-893]
The rate of interest to be charged for nonpayment of taxes or assessments
on or after the date when they would become delinquent is hereby fixed at
8% per annum on the first $1,500 of the delinquency, and 18% per annum
on any amount in excess of $1,500 except that no interest shall be charged
if payment of any installment is made within 10 days after the date upon
which the same became payable.
c. Removal and Absenteeism. The township committee may remove any
member of the committee for a cause by a majority vote after written
charges have been served upon the member and after a hearing on such
charges at which time the member shall be entitled to be heard in
person or by counsel. Absence from three consecutive meetings or from
50% of the committee's regularly scheduled meetings in a year may
constitute cause for removal.
a. Meetings. The finance advisory committee shall meet at least monthly,
on such dates and at such times as established by the committee at its
first meeting of the year, which meetings shall be held in accordance
with the Open Public Meetings Act. Additional meetings may be held at
the request of the chairperson or by agreement of a majority of
members, provided timely public notice of the meeting is given in
accordance with any applicable law. The committee shall hold its initial
organization meeting within 60 days after the final adoption of this
section.
b. Officers. The finance advisory committee shall select from its members
a chairperson and vice-chairperson to serve as the presiding officer in
the absence of the chairperson. The committee shall also select a
secretary whose function shall be to manage minutes of the
committee's meetings and records of the proceedings of the committee.
c. Quorum. The presence of a majority of the committee shall constitute a
quorum.
d. Rules. The committee shall have the power to establish rules for the
conduct of its meetings.
a. Provide guidance and support to the governing body on issues and
matters related to the township finances and budget.
b. Perform such other advisory duties as requested by the governing body.
§ 2-17B.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-18.2
AO:40
§ 2-18.2. Penalty Rate for Nonpayment of Taxes. [Ord. #403; Ord.
#91-893]
A penalty rate of 6% is hereby fixed on any delinquency in excess of $10,000
which was not paid in the calendar year due. "Delinquency" is defined as
the sum of all taxes and municipal charges due on a given parcel of property
covering any number of quarters or years which were not paid when due.
§ 2-19. COOPERATIVE PRICING AGREEMENT.4 [Ord. #93-929]
§ 2-20. POLICE PROTECTION SERVICES.
§ 2-20.1. Preamble. [Ord. #622-82; Ord. #727-87; Ord. #758-88;
Ord. #794-89; Ord. #90-826; Ord. #91-874, § 1; Ord. #92-905; Ord.
#93-936; Ord. #94-972; Ord. #94-999; Ord. #95-1030]
Whereas, it is the desire of the governing body of the Township of Hopewell
to provide police protection services for residents of the Borough of
Hopewell during 1996; and the Interlocal Services Act permits a local unit
to enter into a contract with another local unit for the provision of a service
which any party to the agreement is empowered to render. (N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1
et seq.).
§ 2-20.2. Contract. [Ord. #622-82, § 1; Ord. #727-87; Ord. #758-88;
Ord. #759-89, § 1; Ord. #90-826, § 1; Ord. #91-874, § 2; Ord.
#92-905, § 1; Ord. #93-936, § 1; Ord. #94-972, § 1; Ord. #94-999,
§ 1; Ord. #95-1030, § 1]
The Township of Hopewell is hereby authorized to enter into a contract with
the Borough of Hopewell for police protection services for 1996 for a fee
of $225,000 for the Borough of Hopewell. Said services shall be furnished
and rendered by the Township of Hopewell pursuant to a contract,5 a copy
of which is annexed hereto.
a. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the mayor of the
Township of Hopewell is hereby authorized to enter into a cooperative
pricing agreement with the lead agency.
b. The lead agency entering into contracts on behalf of the Township of
Hopewell shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the
Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and all other
provisions of the revised statutes of the State of New Jersey.
c. This section shall be known and may be cited as the Cooperative Pricing
Ordinance of the Township of Hopewell.
4. Editor's Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of Ordinance Nos. 532,
569-80 and 725-87.
5. Editor's Note: A complete copy of the contract can be found on file in the office of the
township clerk.
§ 2-18.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.3
AO:41
§ 2-20.3. Effective Date. [Ord. #622-82, § 2; Ord. #727-87; Ord.
#794-89, § 2; Ord. #90-826, § 2; Ord. #91-874, § 3; Ord. #92-905,
§ 2; Ord. #93-936, § 2; Ord. #94-972, § 2; Ord. #94-999, § 2; Ord.
#95-1030, § 2]
This section shall take effect upon the adoption of a substantially similar
ordinance by the governing body of the Borough of Hopewell and if said
municipality has already adopted such an ordinance, upon passage and
publication as provided by law.
§ 2-20.4. Contract Duration. [Ord. #95-1030, § 3]
The Township of Hopewell authorizes contract duration as specified in the
contract, a copy of which is filed in the office of the township clerk.
§ 2-21. MERCER COUNTY PLANNING COUNCIL.
§ 2-21.1. Name. [Ord. #666-84, § 1]
There shall be formed a regional planning group which shall be known as
Mercer County Planning Council.
§ 2-21.2. Composition. [Ord. #666-84, § 2]
The Mercer County Planning Council representatives from Hopewell
Township shall be the mayor or his/her designee. The term of office of each
such representative shall be two years. In addition, the county executive of
Mercer County or his designee, shall be a member of the Mercer County
Planning Council.
§ 2-21.3. Salary. [Ord. #666-84, § 3]
Members of the Mercer County Planning Council shall serve without salary
but may be paid expenses in the performance of duties.
§ 2-21.4. Powers. [Ord. #666-84, § 4]
The Mercer County Planning Council shall prepare, adopt and/or administer
a regional housing development plan and strategy, with respect to the
provision of low and moderate housing throughout Mercer County, such
plan and strategy to be advisory only; and the formulation of such plan
and strategy shall constitute the performance of an advisory duty assigned
by ordinance or resolution pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D25b(3) and shall not
be construed to limit in any manner any of the powers of any municipal
planning board.
§ 2-21.5. Officers. [Ord. #666-84, § 5]
The Mercer County Planning Council shall elect a chairman and vice
chairman from among its members. Their terms of office shall each be one
year, and they shall be eligible for reelection. The Council shall also select
§ 2-20.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-21.5
AO:42
a secretary, who may but not need be a member of the council and it may
create and fill such other offices as it shall determine.
§ 2-21.6. Funding. [Ord. #666-84, § 6]
The County of Mercer shall provide staff support to the Mercer County
Planning Council, as the need arises.
§ 2-21.7. Termination. [Ord. #666-84, § 7]
The Mercer County Planning Council shall continue until terminated by a
majority of the constituent municipalities.
§ 2-22. INDEMNIFICATION AND DEFENSE OF PUBLIC
EMPLOYEES.
§ 2-22.1. Intent and Purpose. [Ord. #711-86, § 1]
It is the intent and purpose of this section to provide for the defense of
actions against and the indemnification of public employees as permitted by
N.J.S.A. 59:10-1, et seq.
§ 2-22.2. Definitions. [Ord. #711-86, § 1]
As used in this section:
EMPLOYEE — Shall mean and include any officer, employee, or servant,
whether or not compensated or part-time individual members of appointed
boards and committees and elected officials, who are authorized to perform
any act or service; provided, however, that the term does not include an
independent contractor.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — Shall mean any employee or former employee of the
township.
§ 2-22.3. Defense of Action. [Ord. #711-86, § 1]
The township shall provide for the defense of any action brought against
a public employee on account of any act or omission in the scope of his
employment, and this obligation shall extend to any cross-actions,
counterclaims or cross-complaint against such employee.
§ 2-22.4. Exceptions. [Ord. #711-86, § 1]
The provisions of subsection 2-22.3 shall not be applicable when the
township committee determines that:
a. The act or omission was not within the scope of employment.
b. The act or failure to act was because of actual fraud, willful misconduct
or actual malice.
§ 2-21.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-22.4
AO:43
§ 2-22.5. Methods of Providing Defense. [Ord. #711-86, § 1]
The township may provide any defense required of it under this section
through an attorney from its own staff or by employing other counsel.
§ 2-22.6. Township Control Over Litigation. [Ord. #711-86, § 1]
Whenever the township provides any defense required of it under this
section, the township, through counsel, may assume exclusive control over
the representation of the public employee, and such employee shall
cooperate fully with the defense.
§ 2-22.7. Indemnification. [Ord. #711-86, § 1]
In any case where the township is required to provide a defense under this
section, the township shall pay or shall reimburse the public employee for:
§ 2-23. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COUNCIL.
§ 2-23.1. Purpose. [Ord. #747-87]
c. The defense of the action or proceeding would create a conflict of
interest between the township and the public employee.
d. The defense of the action or proceeding is provided for by an insurance
policy or policies, whether obtained by the township or by any other
person.
e. The public employee failed to deliver to the township administrator,
within 10 calendar days after the time he is served with any summons,
complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading, the original or a copy
of the same.
f. The public employee has failed to cooperate fully with the defense.
a. Any bona fide settlement agreements entered into by the employee.
b. Any judgments entered against the employee.
c. If the township has failed to provide such required defense, all costs of
defending the action, including reasonable counsel fees and expenses,
together with costs of any appeal.
In addition, in any case where the township would be required to provide a
defense under this section except for the fact that such defense is provided for
by insurance, the township shall provide indemnification as aforesaid, but only
to the extent not covered by insurance.
Nothing in this section shall authorize the township to pay for punitive or
exemplary damages or damages resulting from the commission of a crime.
a. The council shall be responsible for the preparation and maintenance of
an emergency operations plan.
§ 2-22.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-23.1
AO:44
§ 2-23.2. Membership. [Ord. #747-87]
The emergency management council shall be composed as follows: mayor,
who shall serve as chairperson; township administrator; health officer; chief
of police; superintendent of public works; superintendent of the school
district; and the fire chief(s).
§ 2-24. PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICES.
§ 2-24.1. Preamble. [Ord. #795-89; Ord. #90-827; Ord. #91-875;
Ord. #92-906; Ord. #93-937; Ord. #94-976; Ord. #94-1000; Ord.
#95-1004; Ord. #95-1029; Ord. #95-1031]
Whereas, it is the desire of the governing body of the Township of Hopewell
to renew the agreements with the Borough of Pennington and the Borough
of Hopewell for the provision of Public Health Services during 1996; and
the Interlocal Services Act permits a local unit to enter into a contract with
another local unit for the provision of a service which any party to the
agreement is empowered to render (N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1, et seq.).
§ 2-24.2. Contract. [Ord. #795-89, § 1; Ord. #90-827, § 1; Ord.
#91-875, § 1; Ord. #92-906, § 1; Ord. #93-937, § 1; Ord. #94-976,
§ 1; Ord. #94-1000, § 1; Ord. #95-1004, § 1; Ord. #95-1029, § 1; Ord.
#95-1031, § 1]
The Township of Hopewell is hereby authorized to renew and enter into
contracts with the Boroughs of Pennington and Hopewell for the provision
of Public Health Services in 1996 at a fee for the Borough of Pennington of
$18,960 and a fee for the Borough of Hopewell of $14,710. Said services
shall be furnished and rendered pursuant to a contract6, a copy of which is
annexed hereto.
§ 2-24.3. Effective Date. [Ord. #795-89, § 2; Ord. #91-875, § 2; Ord.
#91-906, § 2; Ord. #93-937, § 2; Ord. #94-976, § 2; Ord. #94-1000,
§ 2; Ord. #95-1004, § 2; Ord. #95-1029, § 2; Ord. #95-1031, § 2]
This section shall take effect upon the adoption of a substantially similar
ordinance by the governing body of the Borough of Pennington and the
governing body of the Borough of Hopewell, and if said municipalities have
already adopted such ordinances, upon passage and publication as provided
by law.
b. The council shall be responsible for disseminating public information
regarding the operations plan.
c. The council shall serve as the operations group implementing the plan
and coordinating activities during a disaster emergency.
6. Editor's Note: A complete copy of the contract can be found on file in the office of the
township clerk.
§ 2-23.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-24.4
AO:45
§ 2-24.4. Contract Duration. [Ord. #795-89, § 3; Ord. #90-827, § 3;
Ord. #91-875, § 3; Ord. #92-906, § 3; Ord. #93-937, § 3; Ord.
#94-976, § 3; Ord. #94-1000, § 3; Ord. #95-1004, § 3; Ord. #1029,
§ 3; Ord. #95-1031, § 3]
The Township of Hopewell authorizes contract duration as specified in the
contract, a copy of which is filed in the office of the township clerk.
§ 2-25. PROFESSIONAL HEALTH SERVICES.7
§ 2-25.1. Preamble. [Ord. #96-1040]
The Township of Hopewell desires to contract with the Township of
Hamilton for provision of certain professional health services for sexually
transmitted diseases for the period January 1, 1996 through December
31, 1996; and the Township of Hamilton has agreed to provide certain
health services to the Township of Hopewell for a fee; such agreements are
authorized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:8A:1-et seq. The contract is in the best
interest of the Township of Hopewell.
§ 2-25.2. Contract. [Ord. #96-1040]
The interlocal services contract between the Township of Hopewell and
the Township of Hamilton for the provision of professional health clinic
services for sexually transmitted diseases is authorized and accepted and
the proper officials of the Township of Hopewell are authorized to execute
said contract.8
§ 2-25.3. Effective Date. [Ord. #96-1040]
The contract should take effect upon the adoption of this section in
accordance with law, the Township of Hamilton having adopted a similar
ordinance on January 16, 1996.
§ 2-26. UNIFORM FIRE SAFETY CODE ADMINISTRATIVE
SERVICES.
§ 2-26.1. Preamble. [Ord. #90-839; Ord. #95-1008]
Whereas, it is the desire of the governing body of the Borough of Pennington
to contract with the Township of Hopewell for administrative services
related to the Uniform Fire Safety Code for the period January 1, 1995
through December 31, 1999, and the Interlocal Services Act permits a local
unit to enter into a contract with another local unit for the provision of a
service which any party to the agreement is empowered to render. (R.S.
40:8A-1, et seq.)
7. Editor's Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of Ordinance No. 90-829.
8. Editor's Note: A complete copy of the contract can be found on file in the office of the
township clerk.
§ 2-24.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-26.2
AO:46
§ 2-26.2. Contract. [Ord. #90-839, § 1; Ord. #95-1008, § 1]
The Township of Hopewell is hereby authorized to enter into contract with
the Borough of Pennington for Uniform Fire Safety Code Administrative
Services for the period January 1, 1995 through December 31, 1999. Said
services shall be furnished and rendered by the Township of Hopewell
pursuant to contract, copy of which is annexed hereto.
§ 2-26.3. Effective Date. [Ord. #90-839, § 2; Ord. #95-1008, § 2]
This section shall take effect upon the adoption of a substantially similar
ordinance by the governing body of the Borough of Pennington and if
said municipality has already adopted such ordinance, upon passage and
publication as provided by law.
§ 2-27. BASIC LIFE SUPPORT SERVICE.
§ 2-27.1. Preamble. [Ord. #90-840; Ord. #93-938; Ord. #94-980]
Whereas, it is the desire of the governing body of the Township of Hopewell
to provide Basic Life Support Service for residents of the Borough of
Pennington during 1994; and the Interlocal Services Act permits a local unit
to enter into a contract with another local unit for the provision of a service
which any party to the agreement is empowered to render. (R.S. 40:8A-1, et
seq.)
§ 2-27.2. Contract. [Ord. #90-840, § 1; Ord. #93-938, § 1; Ord.
#94-980, § 1]
The Township of Hopewell is hereby authorized to enter into contract with
the Borough of Pennington to provide Basic Life Support Services for 1994
for residents of the Borough of Pennington. Said Services shall be furnished
and rendered by the Township of Hopewell pursuant to contract, copy of
which is annexed hereto.9
§ 2-27.3. Effective Date. [Ord. #90-840, § 2; Ord. #93-938, § 2; Ord.
#94-980, § 2]
This section shall take effect upon the adoption of a substantially similar
ordinance by the governing body of the Borough of Pennington and if
said municipality has already adopted such ordinance, upon passage and
publication as provided by law.
§ 2-28. PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
9. Editor's Note: A complete copy of the contract can be found on file in the office of the
township clerk.
§ 2-26.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-28.1
AO:47
§ 2-28.1. Submission to Ordering Department. [Ord. #241; Ord.
#90-854]
Any person claiming payment from the municipality shall present a detailed
bill of demand (R.S. 40A:5-16) to the ordering department, duly certified (or
in the alternative, supported by an affidavit of the claimant).
§ 2-28.2. Consideration by Departmental Clerk. [Ord. #241; Ord.
#90-854]
It shall be the duty of the departmental clerk to see that the signature of
the officer, or employee, who has been duly designated by the local unit to
certify that the materials have been received by or the services rendered to
the local unit, appears on every claim. (R.S.40A:5-16)
§ 2-28.3. Consideration by Chairman of Department. [Ord. #241;
Ord. #90-854]
Claims shall then be presented to the chairman of the department
responsible for the placing of the order, who, if satisfied the claims are
proper shall approve same. After such approval is given, the chairman shall
file the claims with the administrator and the chief financial officer who
shall then present these claims to the governing body for formal approval at
a regular meeting.
§ 2-28.4. Consideration by Governing Body. [Ord. #241; Ord.
#90-854]
Claims shall be considered by the governing body which shall approve the
same, except that said governing body may reject any claim presented to
it stating the reason for such rejection. Any disapproved claim shall be
referred back to the administrator and the chief financial officer with such
instructions as the governing body may give at the time of disapproval.
§ 2-28.5. Recording of Claims. [Ord. #241; Ord. #90-854]
It shall be the duty of the municipal clerk to record all claims in the official
minutes indicating that the governing body has by formal action approved
the same with appropriate record as to any claims disapproved or rejected.
§ 2-28.6. Notation of Approval. [Ord. #241; Ord. #90-854]
It shall be the duty of the municipal clerk or such other officer designated by
resolution of the governing body, to indicate on said claims that they have
been approved for payment, with the date of approval noted thereon.
§ 2-29. AGRICULTURAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE.10
10.Editor's Note: Former Section 2-29, Code of Ethics, established by Ordinance No. 91-891,
was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 92-913.
§ 2-28.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-29.1
AO:48
§ 2-29.1. Established. [Ord. #01-1194, § 1]
There is hereby established within the Township of Hopewell an
"Agricultural Advisory Committee."
§ 2-29.2. Purpose. [Ord. #01-1194, § 1]
The committee is established in order for the township to meet the eligibility
requirements for grants provided under the "Farmland Preservation
Planning Incentive Grant Program," N.J.S.A. 4:1C-43.1, for purposes of
farmland preservation within the township.
§ 2-29.3. Membership; Vacancies; Removal. [Ord. #01-1194, § 1;
Ord. #03-1271; Ord. #03-1271]
a. Membership and Appointment. The agricultural advisory committee
shall consist of five regular members, who shall be appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of the township committee. All
members of the committee shall be residents of the township, with a
majority of the members actively engaged in farming and owning a
portion of the land which they farm. On an annual basis, a member of
the governing body may be appointed to serve as an ex officio member
of the committee, with said appointment to be made by the mayor with
the advice and consent of the township committee.
b. Alternate Members. There shall be two alternate members who shall be
appointed in the same manner as the regular members. The alternate
members may participate in all committee discussions but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of
an alternate member.
c. Terms; Vacancies. The terms of office of the first five regular members
of the committee shall be as follows, with said designation to be made
by the mayor at the time of appointment: two members shall serve for a
three-year term; two members shall serve for a two-year term; and one
member shall serve for a one-year term. Thereafter, all future members
of the committee shall be appointed for three-year terms. The alternate
members shall serve for a term not exceeding three years duration. The
committee shall designate one of its members to serve as chairperson
and presiding officer of the committee for a one-year term. In the event
of a vacancy occurring on the committee other than by the expiration of
a term, such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as referenced above.
d. Removal. The township committee may remove any member of the
committee for cause by a majority vote after written charges have been
served upon the member and after a hearing on such charges at which
time the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel.
§ 2-29.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-29.4
AO:49
§ 2-29.4. Powers and Duties. [Ord. #01-1194, § 1]
The agricultural advisory committee shall:
§ 2-30. YOUTH ADVISORY BOARD.11
§ 2-30.1. Establishment. [Ord. #03-1276, § I; Ord. #07-1408, § I]
A youth advisory board to the Hopewell Township Committee is hereby
established to be composed of no fewer than five and no more than 12
student members appointed by the township committee.
§ 2-30.2. Committee Member Appointment. [Ord. #03-1276, § II;
Ord. #07-1408, § II]
To be eligible to serve on the youth advisory board, a student must have
been a resident of Hopewell Township, Hopewell Borough or Pennington
Borough for at least one year prior to submitting the application for
membership and be in grades seven through 11 when filing the application.
Interested students may obtain an application packet from the township
clerk. A committee appointed by the township committee shall review all
complete applications received and make recommendations to the township
committee concerning recommendations as to the individuals to be
appointed. The township committee shall thereafter make said
appointments.
§ 2-30.3. Term of Office. [Ord. #03-1276, § III]
Youth advisory board members shall be appointed for one-year terms. Terms
shall be from July 1 through June 30. No member may serve more than three
consecutive terms.
a. Report to the township planning board.
b. Assist with the preparation of a farmland preservation plan element of
the master plan of the township.
c. Make recommendations and provide guidance to the governing body
and the planning board with respect to the completion and submission
of grant applications.
d. Identify project areas of multiple farms that are reasonably contiguous
and located in an agriculture development area, and provide such other
information as may be required by the grant applications.
e. Perform such other advisory duties as are requested by the governing
body and the planning board with respect to issues and matters of
farmland preservation and development of the agricultural industry in
the township.
11.Editor's Note: Former Section 2-30, Community Activities and Recreation Advisory
Committee, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 94-965
was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1057.
§ 2-29.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-30.4
AO:50
§ 2-30.4. Ex-Officio Members. [Ord. #03-1276, § IV]
A representative of the township committee and the township administrator
(or designee) shall serve as ex-officio members. The committee member
shall be appointed by the mayor. Ex-officio members may participate in
youth advisory board meetings.
§ 2-30.5. Meetings. [Ord. #03-1276, § V]
The youth advisory board shall meet at least monthly, on a specific schedule
adopted for the year by the board members.
§ 2-30.6. Officers. [Ord. #03-1276, § VI]
At the first meeting of the board in September of each year, the youth
advisory board shall elect from among its members a chairperson, a vice
chairperson and a secretary to serve for a one-year term. The chairperson
or vice chairperson, in the event of the absence of the chairperson, shall
conduct the meeting. The secretary shall be responsible for taking minutes
of the meetings.
§ 2-30.7. Advisory Capacity. [Ord. #03-1276, § VII]
The youth advisory board shall be an advisory body to the township
committee and shall make recommendations and reports to the township
committee regarding issues of concern to youth in the community. Final
determination for all matters pertaining to recommendations from the youth
advisory board shall remain the responsibility of the township committee.
§ 2-30.8. Duties and Responsibilities. [Ord. #03-1276, § VIII]
The youth advisory board shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
a. Advise the township committee regarding issues of concern to youth in
the community;
b. Work with the township committee, township department heads,
schools, civic clubs and service organizations to provide service and
leadership opportunities for the youth of the township;
c. Inform and educate other youth of issues facing the township and
opportunities for youth involvement in municipal and community
affairs;
d. Promote community pride;
e. Assist in developing and implementing ways to increase asset-building
influences;
f. Be encouraged to attend meetings of the township committee.
§ 2-30.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-30.9
AO:51
§ 2-30.9. Quorum; Rules and Regulations for Meetings. [Ord.
#03-1276, § IX]
A majority of the youth advisory board members shall constitute a quorum.
The board shall adopt rules and regulations which shall be consistent with
the Open Public Meetings Act of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-31. EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION SERVICES.
§ 2-31.1. Preamble. [Ord. #94-981; Ord. #95-1005; Ord. #95-1032,
Preamble]
It is the desire of the governing body of the Township of Hopewell to
provide Emergency Communication Services for residents of the Borough
of Pennington during 1996. The Interlocal Services Act permits a local unit
to enter into a contract with another local unit for the provision of a service
which any party to the agreement is empowered to render. (R.S. 40:8A-1, et
seq.)
§ 2-31.2. Contract. [Ord. #94-981, § 1; Ord. #95-1005, § 1; Ord.
#95-1032, § 1]
The Township of Hopewell is hereby authorized to enter into a contract with
the Borough of Pennington to provide Emergency Communication Services
for 1996 for residents of the Borough of Pennington at a fee of $43,230.
Said services shall be furnished and rendered by the Township of Hopewell
pursuant to a contract, a copy of which is annexed hereto.12
§ 2-31.3. Effective Date. [Ord. #94-981, § 2; Ord. #95-1005, § 2;
Ord. #95-1032, § 2]
This section shall take effect upon the adoption of a substantially similar
ordinance by the governing body of the Borough of Pennington and if said
municipality has already adopted such an ordinance, upon passage and
publication as provided by law.
§ 2-32. AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE NEW JERSEY HOUSING AND
MORTGAGE FINANCE AGENCY AND THE TOWNSHIP OF
HOPEWELL.
§ 2-32.1. Preamble. [Ord. #95-1017, Preamble]
Hopewell Township has provided for the development of low and moderate
income housing (affordable housing units) pursuant to the State of New
Jersey Fair Housing Act and the rules and regulations adopted thereunder.
Hopewell Township has adopted ordinances which set forth the procedures
and controls for administering the sale, resale and leasing of such low
and moderate income housing units to eligible persons. Hopewell Township
12.Editor's Note: A complete copy of the contract may be found on file in the office of the
township clerk attached to Ordinance No. 94-981.
§ 2-30.9 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-32.1
AO:52
does not have an appropriate administrative agency to administer such
procedures and controls; and the New Jersey Fair Housing Act authorizes
the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency to establish
procedures for entering into, and to enter into, contractual agreements
with willing municipalities and developers of inclusionary developments,
whereby it will administer resale controls and rent controls in municipalities
where no appropriate administrative agency exists.
§ 2-32.2. Agreement. [Ord. #95-1017, §§ 1, 2]
§ 2-33. PARKS, PUBLIC LANDS AND OPEN SPACES.
§ 2-33.1. Established; Title. [Ord. #02-1254]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Hopewell Township
Ordinance Regulating Conduct in Parks, Public Lands and Open Spaces."
§ 2-33.2. Definitions. [Ord. #02-1254]
As used in this section, the following terms and their derivations shall have
the meanings indicated. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include
the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
DIRECTOR OF RECREATION — Shall mean the person in charge of parks,
public lands and open spaces, and to whom all parks and recreational
employees are responsible.
LITTER — Shall mean any used or unconsumed substance or waste material
which has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic,
rubber, paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof, including but not limited to any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted
cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material, or any garbage,
trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings, or other lawn or garden
waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or
other packaging or construction material.
NONRESIDENT — Shall mean any individual who is not a resident or
taxpayer of the Township of Hopewell. Any group or organization with less
than 80% residents.
PARK — Shall mean a park, play area, natural area, meadow, field, brook,
or other water access, recreation building, or any other area the township
a. The Township of Hopewell shall enter into an agreement with the New
Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency for the administration of
affordability controls for all low and moderate income housing
developed with the township.
b. The mayor and township clerk be and are hereby authorized and
instructed to execute such agreement on behalf of the township.
§ 2-32.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.2
AO:53
owns, or is used by the township, and devoted to or intended for active or
passive recreation or open space and conservation purposes.
PERSON — Shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC LAND — Shall mean any land which the township owns or controls
by lease, easement, agreement, or other conveyance.
RESIDENT — Includes all families or individuals who have either paid
property tax in the Township of Hopewell or are actual residents in the
township.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Hopewell.
VEHICLE — Shall mean any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered,
animal-drawn or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of
any size, kind or description.
§ 2-33.3. Statement of Nondiscrimination. [Ord. #02-1254]
§ 2-33.4. Permits, Reservations and Fees. [Ord. #02-1254]
a. No person shall, on the grounds of race, color, national origin, religion,
age, sex, handicap, affectional or sexual orientation be excluded from
participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to
discrimination in, any park facility, program, or activity.
b. Discrimination on the basis of residence, including preferential
reservation, membership, or annual permit systems is prohibited except
to the extent that reasonable differences in admission and other fees
may be maintained on the basis of residence in any park.
a. Permit Procedure; Application. No person or entity should be given any
special or exclusive privilege to use any public property without first
obtaining a permit. The permit procedure is not intended to inhibit the
spontaneous use of park property by individuals or small groups
whereas larger, organized groups (e.g., teams) must possess a valid
permit. Spontaneous use will not be allowed in areas already committed
by permit, or areas closed for maintenance/preservation purposes. In
all instances a permit holder takes precedence.
A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application with the director. The application shall state:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity.
3. The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
4. The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
5. An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
§ 2-33.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-33.4
AO:54
6. Any other information which the director shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be
issued hereunder.
b. Standards for Issuance of Permit. The director shall issue a permit
hereunder when he finds:
1. That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the
park.
2. That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety
and recreation.
3. The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite
violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
4. That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the township.
5. That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the day and hour required in the application.
6. That the proposed activity shall not harm natural areas or
endanger characteristics of an environment that is being preserved
and protected.
c. Appeal. Within five days after receipt of an application, the director
shall apprise an applicant in writing of his reasons for refusing a permit,
and any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal in writing
within five days to the township committee to sustain or overrule the
decision of the director at the next regularly scheduled township
committee meeting. The decision of the township committee shall be
final.
d. Effect of Permit. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and
regulations and all applicable ordinances fully as though the same were
inserted in said permits.
e. Liability of Permittee. The person or persons to whom a permit is issued
shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person
whatever by reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom
such permit shall have been issued.
f. Insurance Coverage.
1. Owners or tenants of residences located within the township may
be required to provide proof of current liability coverage under a
homeowner's or renter's policy. The applicant shall also execute a
hold harmless agreement in favor of the township for all events.
§ 2-33.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.4
AO:55
§ 2-33.5. Regulations Pertaining to the Use of Park Property. [Ord.
#02-1254; Ord. #12-1549]
No person shall engage in any of the following activities in a park:
2. Non-township homeowners and tenants, as well as businesses,
located within or outside the township and charitable, social,
volunteer or other organizations located outside the township, shall
provide a certificate of insurance in a single limit amount of not less
than $1,000,000 for all permit applications. The certificate shall
cover personal injury and property damage and name the Township
of Hopewell as an additional insured.
3. Township-based nonprofit, charitable, volunteer, and social
organizations shall meet the criteria stated in paragraph f1 above.
Where there is no homeowner's liability coverage, a general
liability insurance policy with $1,000,000 coverage will be
required.
g. Revocation of Permit. The director shall have the authority to revoke a
permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good
cause shown.
h. Protection of Fields and Participants. In the event of inclement weather
or other conditions which subject fields and facilities to unusual wear or
imperil participant safety, the director will have the authority to place a
scheduled event in abeyance for however long such conditions exist. At
such times the fields and facilities may not be used.
i. Reservations.
1. Requests for permits shall be presented on the required form no
more than 365 days prior to the scheduled event. Persons holding a
valid permit in the current calendar year for a specific location,
date and time will be granted right of first refusal in scheduling the
same event in the next calendar year. Such person shall present a
completed permit application upon being notified that another
application has been submitted for that location, date and time.
This new application must be presented to the director within the
five days stated above.
2. In the scheduling of new events for a specific location, date and
time, the needs of governmental groups (specifically including the
Hopewell Valley Recreation Department and the Hopewell Valley
Regional School District) will take precedence over all other
groups. Governmentally sponsored events which reoccur but which
may occur on different dates (e.g., a high school sports team's
game schedule) will take precedence over all other groups. In the
event that a person is displaced by this provision, an attempt will
be made to provide a suitable alternative location, date or time.
a. Buildings and Other Property.
§ 2-33.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-33.5
AO:56
1. Disfiguration and Removal. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure,
tamper with or displace or remove any building, bridges,
playground equipment, port-a-johns, tables, benches, bleachers,
goal posts, backstops, fireplaces, grills, trash and recycling
receptacles, railings, athletic field mix, play sand, playground
cushioning material, wood chips, paving or paving material,
irrigation equipment, water lines or other public utilities or parts or
appurtenances [apparatus or accessories] thereof, signs, notices or
placards, whether temporary or permanent; monuments, stakes,
posts or other boundary markers; or other structures or equipment,
facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real
or personal.
2. Restrooms, Washrooms and Portable Toilets. Fail to cooperate in
maintaining restrooms, washrooms and portable toilets in a neat
and sanitary condition. No person over the age of 12 years shall use
the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.
3. Removal of Natural Resources. Dig or remove any sand or gravel,
whether submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, gravel or
plants; or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or
other means or agency.
4. Erection of Structures. Construct or erect any building or structure
of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or
run or string any public service utility into, upon or across such
lands, except on special written permit issued hereunder.
b. Trees, Shrubbery, Lawns.
1. Injury and Removal. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any
tree or plant or injure the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any
tree or plant; nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other
contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or
otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure or impair
the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
2. Climbing Trees, etc. Climb any tree or wall, stand or sit upon
monuments, vases, fountains, railing, fences or structures or upon
any other property not designated or customarily used for such
purposes.
3. Hitching of Animals. Tie a dog, cat or other animal to any tree or
plant.
c. Wild Animals, Birds, Etc.
1. Nonpermitted Hunting. Nonpermitted hunting, molest, harm,
frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any
animal; nor shall be remove or have in his possession the young of
any wild animal or the eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird.
§ 2-33.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.5
AO:57
§ 2-33.6. Solid Waste and Recycling. [Ord. #02-1254]
No person in a park shall:
2. Feeding. Give or offer or attempt to give to any animal, reptile or
bird any tobacco, alcohol or other known noxious substances.
d. Endangered and Protected Species. Hunt, trap, kill, harm, collect,
remove, have in his possession, give away, sell or offer to sell, buy or
offer to buy or accept as a gift any specimen or part of a specimen alive
or dead, of any of the species of animals, insects, and plants designated
as endangered or protected by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
e. Glass Beverage Containers. No person shall bring into any park nor
have in his/her possession any glass beverage container for any
purpose whatsoever.
a. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, brook, bay or other body of water in
or adjacent to any parks, or any tributary, stream, detention pond,
retention pond, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any
substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in
the pollution of the waters.
b. Dump, deposit, leave or cause to be dumped, deposited or left any
bottles, cans, cardboard, broken glass, ashes, paper, cans, dirt, rubbish,
waste, garbage, or refuse or other trash. No such rubbish, refuse, trash
or solid waste shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park
or left anywhere on the grounds thereof but shall be placed in the
proper receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles are
not provided, all such rubbish, refuse, trash or solid waste shall be
carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence
and properly disposed of elsewhere.
c. Recycling.
1. Dispose of commingled recyclable items in receptacles other than
those intended for such purpose. Such commingled items include
glass, plastic bottles and aluminum cans commonly used for milk,
soda, water, iced tea and other beverages. Where commingled
receptacles are not provided, all such recyclable items shall be
carried away from the park by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
2. Dispose of recyclable corrugated cardboard in park trash
receptacles, other than that which is substantially soiled with food.
Organizations who generate significant amounts of corrugated
cardboard as part of their park use (i.e., concession stand supplies,
trophies, etc.) are required to make prior arrangements with the
Hopewell Valley Recreation Department for storage and collection.
Users are required to collapse and stack the material neatly in an
§ 2-33.5 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-33.6
AO:58
§ 2-33.7. Regulation of Traffic. [Ord. #02-1254]
No person shall engage in any of the following activities in a park:
area protected from inclement weather. Where prior arrangements
have not been made, all such recyclable cardboard items shall
be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
a. State Motor Vehicle Laws Apply. Fail to comply with all applicable
provisions of the State motor vehicles traffic laws in regard to
equipment and operation of vehicles, together with such regulations as
are contained in this section and other ordinances.
b. Enforcement of Traffic Regulations. Fail to obey all police officers and
designated park employees, such persons being hereby authorized and
instructed to direct roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance
with the provisions of these regulations and such supplementary
regulations as may be issued subsequently by the director of recreation.
c. Obey Traffic Signs. Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating
speed, fire zones, direction, caution, stopping or parking and all others
posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property.
d. Speed of Vehicles. Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding
15 miles an hour, except upon such roads as the director of recreation
may designate, by posted signs, for speedier travel.
e. Operation Confined to Roads. Drive any vehicle on any area except the
paved park roads or parking areas or such other areas as may on
occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the
director of recreation.
f. Racing. Being in a racing vehicle, race with another vehicle.
g. Parking.
1. Designated Areas. Park a vehicle in other than an established or
designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with
the posted directions there, at and with the instruction of any
designated park employee or such persons being hereby authorized
and instructed to direct traffic by the director.
2. Emergency Procedures. Fail to immediately notify a park employee
or the Hopewell Police Department of an emergency in the nature
of a breakdown requiring the assistance of a tow truck, mechanic
or other person.
3. Double-Parking. Double-park any vehicle on any road or parkway
unless directed by a designated park employee or such persons
being hereby authorized and instructed to direct traffic by the
director.
§ 2-33.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.7
AO:59
§ 2-33.8. Regulation of Recreational Activities. [Ord. #02-1254]
No person shall engage in any of the following activities in a park:
4. Overnight Parking. Leave a vehicle within the confines of a park
after the hour of closing or before the hour of opening without
permission, except in cases when activity is officially prolonged by
the use of lights designated to extend play beyond darkness.
h. Bicycles.
1. Confined to Roads. Ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular
road or path designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be
permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area
or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use.
2. Operation. Ride a bicycle other than on the right hand side of the
road paving as close as conditions permit, and bicycles shall be
kept in a single file when two or more are operating as a group.
Bicyclists shall at all times operate their machines with reasonable
regard to the safety of others, signal all turns, pass to the right of
any vehicle they are overtaking and pass to the right of any vehicles
they may be meeting.
3. Rider Prohibited. Ride any other person on a bicycle.
4. Designated Racks. Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle
rack when such is provided and there is a space available.
5. Immobile. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or set
against trees or in any place or position where other persons may
trip over or be injured by it.
6. Night Operation. Ride a bicycle on any road or path between halfhour
past sunset and sunrise without an attached headlight plainly
visible at least 200 feet in front of, and without a red taillight or red
reflector plainly visible from at least 100 feet from the rear of such
bicycle.
i. Horses. Ride, drive or bring a horse within the limits of any park in the
Township of Hopewell unless specifically permitted on paths or trails
designated or clearly established for that purpose. Exceptions may be
made at permitted events at the discretion of the director (e.g., pony
rides, carriage rides and petting zoos).
a. Bathing and Swimming.
1. Designated Areas. Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or
waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at
such places as are provided therefor and in compliance with such
regulations as are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted.
b. Boating.
§ 2-33.7 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-33.8
AO:60
1. Designated Areas. Bring into or operate any boat, raft or other
water craft, whether motor-powered or not, upon any waters,
except at places designated for boating by the director. Such
activity shall be in accordance with applicable regulations as are
now or may hereafter be adopted.
2. Public Docks. Use of public docks for dockage or other purpose
without first making arrangements for such accommodation with
the director of recreation, who shall assign space and collect
reasonable rental charges in conformity with established
regulations and rates.
3. Operation of Boats. Navigate, direct or handle any boat in such a
manner as to unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or
endanger the occupants of any other boat.
4. Prohibition During Closing Hours. Launch, dock or operate any
boat of any kind on any waters between the closing hour of the park
at night and opening hour the following morning; nor shall any
person be on or remain on, or in, any boat during the closed hours
of the park.
c. Fishing.
1. Commerce Prohibited. Engage in commercial fishing or the buying
or selling of fish caught in any waters.
2. General Prohibition. Fish in any waters, whether by the use of hook
and line, net, trap or other device, except in waters specifically
designated for that purpose.
d. Hunting and Firearms. Except in wildlife management areas or when in
compliance with standards as may be established by the governing
body, no person shall hunt, trap or pursue wildlife at any time; use,
carry or possess firearms of any description, or air rifles, spring guns,
paint ball guns, bows and arrows, slings or any other forms of weapons
potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety, or any
instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or any
kind of trapping device. Shooting into park areas from beyond park
boundaries is forbidden.
e. Picnic Areas and Use.
1. Regulated. Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated
for that purpose. Designated park employees shall have the
authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to
prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort
and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions
given to achieve this end.
§ 2-33.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.8
AO:61
§ 2-33.9. Regulation of Activities. [Ord. #02-1254]
No person shall engage in any of the following activities in a park:
2. Violate the regulation that use of the individual fireplaces, together
with tables and benches, follows generally the rule of "first come,
first served", unless a permit has been issued for such purpose.
3. Nonexclusive. Use any portion of the picnic areas or any of the
buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics,
to the exclusion of other persons; nor shall any person use such
area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are
crowded, when a permit has not been issued.
4. Duty of Picnicker. Leave a picnic area before all trash in the nature
of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed
in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash
receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried
away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of
elsewhere.
f. Camping. Camp in other than designated camp sites for organized
camping, provided by the director of recreation and used by groups of
persons under adequate supervision. No person shall set up tents,
shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight
camping; nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any
movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could be used for
such purpose, such as house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon or the
like, without a permit.
g. Games. Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown
or otherwise propelled objects, such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or
model airplanes, except in that area set apart for such forms of
recreation. Take part in the playing of games such as soccer, football,
baseball, softball, quoits, tennis and horseshoes except on the fields and
courts or areas provided therefor. Roller skating, rollerblading and
skate boarding shall be confined to those areas specifically designated
by the director. There are no provisions for golfing in township parks
and all related golf activities are prohibited. Exceptions to restrictions
may be made for Hopewell Valley Regional School District physical
education activities.
h. Meetings, Exhibitions and Parades. No person, without permission of
the director, shall erect any structure, hold any meeting, perform any
ceremony, conduct any performances, engage in any parade, drill
maneuvers or civic or other processions.
a. Intoxicating Beverages.
1. Prohibition. Possess or sell alcoholic beverages at any time in the
park.
§ 2-33.8 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-33.9
AO:62
2. Drunkenness. Have entered under or be under the influence of
intoxicating liquor.
b. Fireworks and Explosives. Brought or have in his possession or set off
or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn any firecrackers,
torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or explosives of inflammable
material, or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land
or highway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance,
compound, mixture or article that in conjunction with any other
substance or compound would be dangerous from any of the foregoing
standpoints. Exception, when the director approves and a permit is
issued by the township fire official.
c. Domestic Animals. No person in a park shall engage in any of the
following activities:
1. Fail to clean up and properly dispose of feces left by a dog or other
domesticated animal under the control or ownership of such
person.
2. All dogs and other domestic animals shall be restrained at all times
on adequate leashes not greater than 10 feet in length except in
areas specifically designated for such purpose.
d. Fires. Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under
such regulations as may be designated by the director of recreation. No
person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning
cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material
within any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or
contiguous thereto.
e. Closed Area. Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public"; nor shall
any person use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
f. Smoking. Smoking of tobacco shall be prohibited at all times in the
parks.
g. Games of Chance. Gamble, or participate in, or abet, any game of
chance, with the exception of activities that are authorized by the
director and possess an enabling permit from the township clerk.
h. Going on Ice. Go onto the ice on any of the waters except such areas as
are designated by the director as skating fields and provided that a
safety signal is displayed.
i. Sledding. Coast with hand sleds, wagons or other vehicles on wheels or
runners except at places as may be designated for such purpose.
j. Loitering and Boisterousness. Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats
or benches or other areas, or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening,
abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in any disorderly
conduct or behavior tending to be a breach of the public peace,
including the playing of recorded or live music at an excessive volume,
§ 2-33.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.9
AO:63
§ 2-33.10. Regulation of Commercial Activities and Signs. [Ord.
#02-1254]
No person in a park shall engage in any of the following activities:
or engage in any indecent conduct or behavior tending to be a breach
of public morals.
k. Exhibit Permits. Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the
director he claims to have, upon request of any authorized person who
shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance
with any ordinance or rule.
l. Interference with Permittees. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with
any person or party occupying any area or participating in any activity
under the authority of a permit.
m. Use of Drugs and Other Controlled Dangerous Substances. No person
in a park shall possess, use, sell or distribute marijuana or any drug or
pill or other item which is a controlled dangerous substance, as defined
by Title 2C of New Jersey Statutes.
a. Vending and Peddling. Expose or offer for sale any article or thing; nor
shall be/she station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the
transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing; peddle, sell
or vend food and merchandise without proper permits. Organizations or
individuals may apply for permission to operate park concession stands
to sell refreshment items as well as program related items such as tee
shirts, caps, event souvenirs and the like. Such permission shall be
requested as part of the initial reservation as provided for in subsection
2-33.4, Permits, Reservations and Fees. Mobile vendors are not
permitted in public park areas except with an approved permit for
special park area(s), limited time use and/or special program needs.
Such mobile vendors permit shall be issued by the township clerk and
approved by the health inspector. Review and approval for operation of
such permitted use in a park shall be made by the director. Such
permits will not be valid at times when park concession stands are
being operated by permitted township organizations as provided for in
subsection 2-33.4, Permits, Reservations and Fees.
b. Advertising. Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way
to any article or service for sale or hire. An organization or individual
may request at the time of application for a permit, permission to post
signs, banners, posters and the like to advertise events or components
of events that have been approved and permitted as provided for in
subsection 2-33.4, Permits, Reservations and Fees.
c. Signs. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, banner, placard,
advertisement or inscription whatever; nor shall any person erect or
cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways
or roads adjacent to a park. An organization or individual may request
§ 2-33.9 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-33.10
AO:64
§ 2-33.11. Regulations of Park Operation. [Ord. #02-1254]
§ 2-33.12. Enforcement. [Ord. #02-1254]
permission to post signs, banners, placards and the like as components
of events that have been approved and permitted as provided for in
subsection 2-33.4, Permits, Reservations and Fees.
d. Solicitation. No person shall solicit alms or contributions for any
purpose without permission from the director, including but not limited
to 50-50's and cash raffles. Such permission shall not preclude the need
for usual and required permits for such purpose from the township
clerk.
a. Hours. The parks are formally open to the public daily from one-halfhour
before sunrise to one-half-hour after sunset, except that use of
illuminated tennis courts, illuminated ice skating facilities and
illuminated ball fields may extend to the conclusion of the permitted
activity at which point the illumination shall be turned off no later than
30 minutes after the conclusion of the activity; or the offering of special
events, programs, fairs, festivals and other activities provided and
authorized by the Hopewell Valley Recreation Department.
b. Activities which produce noise which may be carried off the premises
shall not be permitted prior to 8:00 a.m.
c. Closed Areas. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to
the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time, either
temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and
either entirely or merely to certain users, as the director shall find
reasonably necessary.
d. Lost and Found Articles. The finding of lost articles shall be reported to
the director who shall make every reasonable effort to locate the
owner(s). The director shall make every reasonable effort to find
articles reported as lost.
a. Officials. Police officers, the director of recreation, and designated
employees shall, in conjunction with their duties, enforce the provisions
of this section.
b. Posting of Rules and Regulations. The rules and regulations of the
"Ordinance Regulating Conduct in the Parks, Public Lands and Open
Spaces" shall be referenced prominently on signs at the main ingress
and egress to the sites covered therein.
c. Ejection. Police officers, the director of recreation, and designated
employees shall have the authority to remind people of the rules and
regulations contained within this section to provide warnings and/or to
eject from the park any person acting in violation of this section.
§ 2-33.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.12
AO:65
§ 2-33.13. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #02-1254]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by fine of not more
than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the judge. The continuation
on each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person
or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may be
punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 2-33.14. Naming and Memorializing Parks. [Ord. #02-1254; Ord.
No. 2016-1633]
d. Seizure of Property. Police officers, the director of recreation, and
designated employees shall have the authority to seize and confiscate
any property, thing or device in the park in violation of this policy.
e. Issuances of Summons. Police officers shall have the authority to issue
summonses before the municipal court to any persons acting in
violation of this section.
a. The naming of public parks, buildings and places within parks and
public lands to establish recognition for officials involved in acquisition,
construction and dedication of these facilities is permitted.
b. No parks, public building or portion thereof, lands or place shall be
named after any living individual.
c. The name of any park or public lands may include words which denote a
general geographic area, where possible, in which it is located within
the township. The name shall be established by ordinance passed by the
township committee.
d. Proposals to name or rename a park, portion thereof, or building within
the park shall be submitted to the director of recreation for comment
prior to being submitted to the township committee. The period of
review shall not exceed 60 days, and thereafter both the proposal and
comments will be submitted to the township committee for
consideration.
e. Such proposals for naming or renaming will include the name of the
individual(s) nominated, a justification for the nomination which will be,
at least in part, biographical, and a listing of, at least 10 residents who
are prepared to act as sponsors for the nomination and who personally
signed the proposal.
f. Any plaques commemorating the park, public lands, or public facility
within a park, if it includes names of mayors or members of the
township committee, shall include, at a minimum, the names of all
mayors and committee members who were involved in the project from
initial formal action by the township committee through the completion
of the acquisition or development at the time of dedication.
§ 2-33.12 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-33.14
AO:66
§ 2-33.15. Criminal History Background Checks of Employees and
Volunteers Involved in Recreation Programs. [Ord. #06-1381, § 1;
Ord. #12-1546]
g. Block 92, Lot 9 shall be named Woolsey Park.
a. Background Checks Required.
1. Any nonprofit, youth-serving organization, as defined by State law,
N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1, including the Hopewell Township Parks and
Recreation Department, which operates a youth sports program
that receives funding from Hopewell Township, or utilizes facilities
owned or maintained by Hopewell Township, shall require all
employees and volunteers of that organization who have regular,
unsupervised contact with minors to obtain a criminal history
background check.
2. All such employees or volunteers shall file completed applications
for the background check including fingerprints, prior to their first
day of service. No such employee or volunteer shall be permitted to
serve the organization unless that person consents in writing to the
background check. Until a background check is complete,
employees and volunteers shall not have regular, unsupervised
contact with any minor.
3. The employee, volunteer, or nonprofit youth-serving organization
shall bear the costs associated with conducting the background
check, in accordance with fees established by the State Bureau of
Identification and the Division of State Police and in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-2(d).
4. Any person who has undergone a Federal and State criminal
history record background check similar in nature to the
requirements contained herein, and who can provide proof of the
results of such background check, is exempt from the requirements
hereunder until five years have elapsed since the most current
background check.
5. Any person who is employed as a full-time staff member with the
Hopewell Valley Regional School District shall be exempt from the
requirements hereunder.
b. Conditions Under Which a Person Shall Be Disqualified from Service.
1. A person shall be disqualified from serving as an employee or
volunteer of a nonprofit youth serving organization if that person's
criminal history background check reveals a record of conviction of
any of the following crimes and offenses:
(a) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
§ 2-33.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.15
AO:67
(1) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1
et seq., such as criminal homicide; N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq.,
such as assault, reckless endangerment, threats, stalking;
N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq., such as kidnapping; N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq., such as sexual assault; or, N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1
et seq., such as robbery;
(2) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning
those crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in
N.J.S.A. 2C:24-1 et seq., such as endangering the welfare
of a child;
(3) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes;
(4) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or
controlled substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of
Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes except paragraph (4) of
subsection (a) of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
2. In any other State or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons offenses described in this section.
c. Submission, Exchange of Background Information.
1. Each employee or volunteer shall submit his or her application for a
criminal history background check, through the New Jersey State
Police, in accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et
seq. Complete instructions for this procedure are available through
the Hopewell Township Parks and Recreation Department.
2. If the background check disqualifies the individual from
employment or volunteering, he or she shall be so notified by the
Hopewell Township Chief of Police, or the chief's designee, and
such information shall be kept confidential by the police
department.
3. Successful background checks shall be reported to the director of
parks and recreation, who shall maintain a list of all individuals
who are qualified to serve as employees or volunteers with
nonprofit youth serving organizations by virtue of their having
successfully completed the background check. Youth serving
organizations will provide a current list of volunteer coaches to the
director of parks and recreation for each season of play on an
annual basis. The director of parks and recreation will review the
list of coaches and notify the youth organization of any coach that is
not on the approved list. That coach will then have 30 days to
comply with the criminal background check requirement.
4. A successful background check remains valid for five years.
§ 2-33.15 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-33.15
AO:68
5. Access to criminal history record information shall be limited in
accordance with law, including N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq. and
N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq.
d. Appeal Procedure.
1. Any person whose criminal history background check disqualifies
that person from employment or from volunteering, may appeal his
or her disqualification.
(a) A person may challenge the accuracy of the criminal history
record;
(b) A person may claim to be rehabilitated;
(c) No person may appeal a disqualification on the grounds of
rehabilitation, if the person has been rejected because that
person has been convicted, adjudicated delinquent or
acquitted by reason of insanity of aggravated sexual assault;
sexual assault; aggravated criminal sexual contact; kidnapping
pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection c of N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1;
endangering the welfare of a child by engaging in sexual
conduct which would impair or debauch the morals of the child
pursuant to subsection a of N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4; endangering the
welfare of a child pursuant to paragraph (4) of subsection b of
N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4; luring or enticing pursuant to section 1 of P.L.
1993, c.291 (N.J.S.A. 2C:13-6); criminal sexual contact
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:14-3b if the victim is a minor;
kidnapping pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:13-2, or false imprisonment
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:13-3 if the victim is a minor and the
offender is not the parent of the victim; knowingly promoting
prostitution of a child pursuant to paragraph (3) or paragraph
(4) of subsection b of N.J.S.A. 2C:34-1; or an attempt to commit
any of these enumerated offenses.
2. A challenge to the accuracy of the report shall be filed with the
Hopewell Township Chief of Police, who shall coordinate the
challenge with the New Jersey State Police.
3. An appeal based on rehabilitation shall be made to an appeals
committee, which shall consist of the director of parks and
recreation, the Hopewell Township Chief of Police, and the
Hopewell Township Administrator. Any such appeal must be made
within 30 days of receipt of the notice of disqualification.
4. In determining whether a person has affirmatively demonstrated
rehabilitation, the appeals committee shall consider the following
factors:
(a) The nature and responsibility of the position which the
convicted person would hold or has held, as the case may be;
§ 2-33.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.15
AO:69
§ 2-33.16. Deer Management. [Ord. #12-1549; Ord. No. 2016-1643]
Hunting, shooting, killing and removal of white-tailed deer on municipallyowned
property shall be allowed solely for the purpose of reducing and
managing the township's deer population and only in accordance with the
following provisions, and only on designated lands, and shall otherwise be
prohibited in any township park or open space.
(b) The nature and seriousness of the offense;
(c) The circumstances under which the offense occurred;
(d) The date of the offense;
(e) The age of the person when the offense was committed;
(f) Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated incident;
(g) Any social conditions which may have contributed to the
offense; and
(h) Any other evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in
prison or the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment
received, acquisition of additional academic or vocational
schooling, successful participation in correctional work-release
programs, or the recommendation of those who have had the
person under their supervision.
5. If the appeals committee determines that the disqualified person
has been successfully rehabilitated, it shall enter that person's
name on the list of qualified employees and volunteers maintained
by the director of parks and recreation.
e. Penalty.
1. Failure to comply with this subsection may result in the township
withholding funding for the nonprofit youth-serving organization,
prohibiting the use of facilities, or withholding funding for facility
maintenance.
a. Permit Required. No person shall hunt, shoot, kill or remove deer from
any municipally-owned park or open space, or enter on those lands
carrying or possessing firearms of any description in which loaded or
blank cartridges may be used, as well as air guns, spring guns, bows,
slings or any other form of weapon potentially dangerous to wildlife and
human safety, unless that person has first obtained a municipal deer
management permit for such activity.
b. Eligibility for Permit. Municipal deer management permits shall be
available to any holder of a valid State of New Jersey hunting license,
except Hopewell Township employees who are involved in the
administration and/or enforcement of this section. Applicants must be
§ 2-33.15 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-33.16
AO:70
14 years of age or older to be eligible for a municipal deer management
permit. All permits shall be issued subject to the following limitations:
1. For the first hunting season, hunters will be selected by lottery
drawing.
2. In subsequent years, there shall be two drawings for permits. The
first drawing shall be open only to those past hunters who meet the
following eligibility requirements and who are applying to hunt the
same property for which they were previously issued a permit;
(a) Hunters who have harvested (throughout the fall/winter
seasons) two or more antlerless deer if hunting with a bow or
three or more antlerless deer if hunting with a firearm, and
who otherwise meet all eligibility requirements set forth in this
section. Note that the deer management advisory committee
and the program director may modify these harvest
requirements.
3. A second and subsequent drawing will be held for any remaining
permits for available hunting sports. This drawing shall be open to
anyone holding a valid State of New Jersey hunting license who
meets the eligibility requirements set forth in this section.
c. Application Process. All applications must be submitted in writing to
the Hopewell Township Chief of Police in person, by the applicant, on a
form promulgated by the police chief. Those not submitted in person
will not be processed. The applicant shall provide the following
information:
1. Name, address, phone number, date of birth and social security
number.
2. Automobile license plate number, year, make, model and color.
3. A New Jersey Conservation Identification Number (CID) or proof of
participation in a State hunter education course.
4. Copies of the applicant's current and valid New Jersey hunting
license(s) attached to the application in addition to copies of any
applicable State-issued deer hunting permit(s) (permit bow, permit
shotgun, permit muzzleloader rifle and antlered buck permits
which are available for sale beginning in early September) that are
required of the applicant, once these State permits are issued
which may be just prior to the start of the corresponding hunting
season.
5. A signed certification that the applicant is not prohibited by law
from possessing a firearm and has not been convicted of any felony.
Any applicant who is prohibited by law from possessing a firearm or
who has been convicted of a felony shall not be eligible for a
municipal deer management permit.
§ 2-33.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.16
AO:71
6. A release authorizing the township to conduct a background check
for violations of the New Jersey Fish and Game Code, N.J.A.C.
7:25-5 et seq., plus N.J.S.A. Title 23 and for violations of any local
regulations pertaining to parks or to hunting. Any applicant who
has violated any significant provision of the Fish and Game Code,
Title 23 or has violated any local regulation pertaining to parks or
to hunting within 10 years of the date of the application shall not be
eligible for a permit.
7. A copy of a current certificate of insurance confirming general
liability insurance with combined single limits coverage for bodily
injury and property damage of at least $1,000,000 per single
occurrence and $1,000,000 annual aggregate.
Applications shall be reviewed by the Hopewell Township Police
Department for accuracy and for compliance with the requirements set
forth herein. After review, the Hopewell Township Police Department shall
either grant or deny the permit application.
d. Permit Fees. To defray increased maintenance, materials, labor and
administrative costs incurred by the township in connection with its
deer management program, a permit fee of $105 is herewith
established. Any permit fees collected that are not needed to defray the
costs of administering the program including venison donation, shall be
deposited into the township's Open Space Fund and dedicated to the
acquisition or maintenance of open space. The applicant shall submit
the required fee to the township with the completed application. Any
application submitted without the required fee shall not be processed.
e. Duration of Permit. Permits shall be valid only during the applicable
State-approved deer hunting seasons, as said dates may be amended
from time to time by the New Jersey Division of Fish and Wildlife and
the Fish and Game Council.
f. Hunter Orientation Course. As a prerequisite to receiving a permit,
each applicant shall be required to complete the township's site-specific
hunter orientation course. Following successful completion of the
hunter orientation course, the municipal clerk shall issue the permit.
g. Rules and Regulations. The following rules and regulations shall apply
to all permittees:
1. Prior to any hunting activities taking place, permittees shall post
hunting notice signs along the boundaries of the properties for
which they have received a permit (boundary hunting notice signs
will be provided by the township) and the township shall post
hunting notice signs at the entrances to all properties for which
permits which have been issued.
2. Hunting will be allowed only in elevated stands. Only portable
stands that do not harm the trees shall be permitted. All stands
shall be removed no later than 15 days following the end of the
§ 2-33.16 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-33.16
AO:72
New Jersey deer hunting seasons, or as required by the program
director.
3. All deer must be checked in using the New Jersey Division of Fish
and Wildlife's Automated Deer Check System.
4. All permits shall be site-specific and nontransferable. Permittees
shall be authorized to hunt only the property for which they have
been issued a permit and shall be responsible for knowing where
they are at all times. Each permittee is required to display his or
her municipal deer management permit prominently on their
person when engaging in hunting activities on properties within
this program. Vehicle permits must be displayed on the front left
side of the dashboard of the authorized vehicle registered with the
deer management program.
5. Deer drives shall be allowed, subject to the following limitations:
(a) Only permittees may drive deer.
(b) No person shall carry a sporting arm of any kind while driving
deer.
6. Motorized vehicles shall be restricted to public roads and
designated parking areas.
7. Target practice is strictly prohibited. Discharge of a crossbow prior
to transporting is not considered target practice. A field target such
as the Rinehart RFT is recommended to discharge crossbows.
8. All season dates and bag limits designated by the State of New
Jersey Division of Fish and Wildlife and the Fish and Game Council
for deer management zones 12, 14 and 41 shall apply.
9. Only white-tailed deer may be hunted; the hunting, shooting,
killing, pursuit or removal of any other wildlife is strictly
prohibited.
10. Compliance with any additional conditions as may be deemed
necessary to ensure the safety of residents by the Hopewell
Township Police Chief or Deer Management Advisory Committee
after reasonable notification. Such conditions may include but are
not limited to limiting the days and times during which the
permittees may hunt and restricting the areas within the parks or
open spaces where hunting is permitted.
h. Dates and Locations for Hunting. The number of permits issued each
year, the properties for which the permits are issued and the dates on
which those properties may be hunted, shall be determined annually by
resolution of the township committee as recommended by the deer
management advisory committee. A press release and/or notice
informing the public of said designated dates and locations shall be
published as follows: the township's website, the township's television
§ 2-33.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-33.16
AO:73
§ 2-33.17. Sight Triangle Area. [Ord. #13-1570]
Pursuant to that certain Management and Use Agreement (the
"Agreement") between the Township of Hopewell and the State of New
Jersey regarding the township's management of a sight triangle area
located on Block 135, Lot 71 in the township, the sight triangle area shall be
governed by the provisions of the Agreement, the provisions of this chapter
and the rules and regulations governing the use of State parks, recreation
areas and open space reservations as adopted by the State of New Jersey
and codified at N.J.A.C. 7:2-1 et seq. as amended and supplemented from
time to time, to the extent said regulations are applicable to the sight
triangle area.
§ 2-34. PROFESSIONAL SERVICE CONTRACTS.
channels, and a press release shall be provided to the official
newspaper(s) of Hopewell Township. Residents within 200 feet of these
designated properties also will be notified by mail.
i. Program Director. The deer management program director shall be
determined by the Township Administrator with the recommendation of
the deer management advisory committee.
j. Revocation of Permit. The Township Administrator, upon the advice and
recommendation of the deer management program director and/or the
Hopewell Township Police Chief, shall be authorized to revoke any
permit issued at any time if the safety of any persons or personal
property, including that of the Township of Hopewell, is threatened by a
permittee. Violations by any permittee of any applicable State or local
rules and regulations pertaining to hunting or to the use of parkland
shall be cause for permit revocation. When a permit has been revoked
or where persons or personal property are endangered as set forth
above, the deer management program director and/or the Hopewell
Township Police Chief or his designee is authorized to require that such
person or persons leave the park immediately and take all steps
necessary to eliminate the condition which endangers persons or
personal property.
k. Violations and Penalties. All State and local regulations pertaining to
parks and to hunting shall remain in full force and effect and nothing
herein shall be construed to abrogate the same. Violation of this
section, any special condition or any applicable State or local regulation
will result in the immediate loss of hunting privileges on the property
through the following permit year and will subject the hunter to any
applicable penalties, including but not limited to the general penalties
set forth in section 3-1 of the Hopewell Township Code.
l. Enforcement. The provisions of this section and provisions of any rules
and regulations adopted by the township committee shall be enforced
by the Hopewell Township Police Department.
§ 2-33.16 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-34.1
AO:74
§ 2-34.1. Prohibition on Awarding Public Contracts to Certain
Contributors. [Ord. #02-1255]
§ 2-34.2. Contributions Made Prior to Effective Date. [Ord.
#02-1255]
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a professional business entity to any Hopewell
Township candidate for mayor or township committee, or Hopewell
Township or Mercer County party committee shall be deemed a violation of
this section, nor shall an agreement for property, goods or services of any
a. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
township or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or those of its
independent authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter into an
agreement or otherwise contract to procure services from any
professional business entity if that entity has solicited or made any
contribution of money, or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind
contributions, to a campaign committee of any Hopewell Township
candidate or holder of the public office within the township having
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract, or to any Hopewell
Township or Mercer County party committee within one calendar year
immediately preceding the date of the contract or agreement.
b. No professional business entity which enters into negotiations for, or
agrees to, any contract or agreement with the township or any
department or agency thereof or of its independent authorities for the
rendition of professional services shall knowingly solicit or make any
contribution of money, or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind
contributions, to any Hopewell Township candidate or holder of the
public office within the township having ultimate responsibility for the
award of the contract, or to any Hopewell Township or Mercer County
party committee, between the time of first communications between
that business entity and the township regarding a specific professional
services agreement and the later of the termination of negotiations or
the completion of the contract or agreement.
c. For purposes of this section, a "professional business entity" seeking a
public contract means an individual, including the individual's spouse,
if any, and any child living at home; person, firm, corporation,
professional corporation, partnership, organization or association. The
definition of a business entity includes all principals who own 10% or
more of the equity in the corporation or business trust, partners, and
officers in the aggregate employed by the entity as well as any
subsidiaries directly controlled by the business entity.
d. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be: The
Hopewell Township Committee, if the contract requires approval or
appropriation from the committee.
§ 2-34.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-34.2
AO:75
kind whatsoever, be disqualified thereby, if that contribution was made by
the professional business entity prior to the effective date of this section.
§ 2-34.3. Contribution Statement by Professional Business Entity.
[Ord. #02-1255]
§ 2-34.4. Return of Excess Contributions. [Ord. #02-1255]
A professional business entity, or Hopewell Township candidate or
officeholder, or Hopewell Township or Mercer County party committee may
cure a violation of subsection 2-34.1, if, within 30 days after the general
election, the professional business entity notifies the township committee in
writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution from the
township candidate or Hopewell Township or Mercer County political party.
§ 2-34.5. Penalty. [Ord. #02-1255]
§ 2-35. MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT FOR EMERGENCY POLICE
SERVICES.
a. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure services with
any professional business entity, the township or any of its purchasing
agents or agencies, as the case may be, shall receive a sworn statement
from the professional business entity made under penalty of perjury
that the bidder or offeror has not made a contribution in violation of
subsection 2-34.1 hereof.
b. The professional business entity shall have a continuing duty to report
any violations of this section that may occur during the negotiation or
duration of a contract. The certification required under this subsection
shall be made prior to entry into the contract or agreement with the
township and shall be in addition to any other certifications that may be
required by any other provision of law.
a. All Township of Hopewell professional service agreements shall provide
that it shall be a breach of the terms of the government contract for a
professional business entity, as defined in subsection 2-34.1 to violate
subsection 2-34.1b or to knowingly conceal or misrepresent
contributions given or received, or to make or solicit contributions
through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the source of the contribution.
b. Any professional business entity, as defined in subsection 2-34.1c, who
knowingly fails to reveal a contribution made in violation of this section,
or who knowingly makes or solicits contributions through
intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the
source of the contribution, shall be disqualified from eligibility for
future township contracts for a period of four calendar years from the
date of the violation.
§ 2-34.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-35.1
AO:76
§ 2-35.1. Preamble. [Ord. #2015-1609 Preamble]
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156, 40A:14-156.1, 40A:156.2, and 40A:156.3 authorize
municipalities to enter into mutual aid and assistance agreements for police
services in cases of emergencies.
The County of Mercer consists of 12 municipalities, 11 of which have
municipal police or fire departments operating for or within the Township
of East Windsor, the Township of Ewing, the Township of Hamilton, the
Borough of Hightstown, the Township of Hopewell, the Township of
Lawrence, the Borough of Pennington, the Municipality of Princeton
(comprised of the former Township of Princeton and the former Borough
of Princeton), the City of Trenton, the Township of Washington, and the
Township of West Windsor, which regularly interact and provide assistance
to each other in police related emergencies.
Each of the aforementioned municipalities in the County of Mercer wish
to formalize and refine existing practice by entering into mutual aid
agreements.
§ 2-35.2. Mutual Aid Agreements - Established. [Ord. #2015-1609
§ 1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156, N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1, et seq., there are
hereby established mutual aid agreements among and between this
municipality and each of the aforementioned municipalities in the County
of Mercer, New Jersey, which shall become effective upon the adoption by
one or more of the aforementioned municipalities (hereinafter referred to
as "participating municipalities") of reciprocal ordinances to provide mutual
aid in police services in case of emergency. This agreement shall apply
whenever this municipality may have an emergency within its boundaries
requiring additional police assistance to protect life and property, and
whenever any of the aforementioned municipalities may experience a
similar emergency.
§ 2-35.3. Emergency - Defined, S.O.P. [Ord. #2015-1609 § 2]
For purposes of this section, the term "emergency" shall be defined to
include situations in which the number of available police officers in a
participating municipality is insufficient to meet the public need in a
particular situation and situations where police aid involving special
expertise, training or equipment is required in order to protect public
safety, life, and property or to assist in suppressing a riot or disorder. No
formal declaration of emergency is required to implement the provisions of
the Mutual Aid Agreement.
§ 2-35.4. Requests for Assistance. [Ord. #2015-1609 § 3]
The chief, police director, or acting head of the police department or mayor,
or chief executive officer of a participating municipality, is hereby
authorized to request assistance from the chief or other head of the police
§ 2-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-35.4
AO:77
department of any other participating municipality to provide aid in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156, et seq.
§ 2-35.5. Provision of Assistance. [Ord. #2015-1609 § 4]
A participating municipality shall provide police assistance when a valid
request in accordance with this agreement to supply personnel is made
to the extent possible without endangering persons or property within the
confines of the providing municipality.
§ 2-35.6. Powers, Rights, Immunities. [Ord. #2015-1609 § 5]
The members of the providing municipality's police department supplying
aid shall have the same powers, authorities, rights, and immunities as the
members of the police force of the requesting municipality when aid is being
rendered therein. Said members shall also have, while so acting, such rights
and immunities as they may otherwise enjoy in the performance of their
normal duties in the municipality rendering such assistance.
§ 2-35.7. County Critical Incident Management Plan. [Ord.
#2015-1609 § 6]
These mutual aid agreements established herein by and between the
aforementioned municipalities in the County of Mercer shall further
authorize mutual police aid and assistance under the County Critical
Incident Management Plan as established by the Mercer County Prosecutor
as the Chief Law Enforcement Official in the county. The plan provides
for a response by specially trained regional Emergency Response/Special
Weapons and Tactics Team in the event of certain hostage, barricade,
sniper, high risk armed apprehensions, terrorist, or similar situations
occurring within a municipality within the County of Mercer.
§ 2-35.8. Benefits, Injury, Death. [Ord. #2015-1609 § 7]
Members of the police force of the providing municipality suffering injury, or
their legal representatives, if death results while rendering assistance in the
requesting municipality, shall be entitled to all such salary, pension rights,
Worker's Compensation, or other benefits, as they would have accrued if
such injury or death had occurred in the performance of duties in their own
municipality, with such benefits to be the responsibility of the providing
municipality.
§ 2-35.9. Reimbursement. [Ord. #2015-1609 § 8]
A municipality receiving police assistance hereunder pursuant to the terms
of the County Critical Incident Management Plan shall not be required to
directly reimburse the regional team for services so provided. The member
municipalities shall, however, otherwise support the function of the
respective regional response teams by providing the necessary manpower,
equipment, and supplies on an ongoing annual basis pursuant to the terms
of the County Critical Incident Management Plan.
§ 2-35.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-35.9
AO:78
Where emergency police aid is otherwise provided under circumstances
outside of the County Critical Incident Management Plan, reimbursement
shall be pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156, or such other terms and conditions
for reimbursement specifically agreed to between specific municipalities.
§ 2-35.10. Federal Emergency Management Agency ("FEMA")
Reimbursement. [Ord. #2015-1609 § 9]
The municipality receiving emergency police aid (hereinafter referred to
as "receiving entity") may seek reimbursement from FEMA for the cost of
the services rendered by the municipality providing the emergency police
aid (hereinafter referred to as "providing entity"). Reimbursement paid by
FEMA shall not be contingent on the declaration of an emergency, major
disaster, or fire by the Federal government. Reimbursement provided by
FEMA is subject to the following conditions:
a. The receiving entity must request reimbursement from FEMA in
accordance with the provisions set forth in the FEMA Recovery Policy
RP9523.6, dated November 10, 2012, as may be amended from time to
time.
b. Reimbursement for "emergency work," as that phrase is referenced in
FEMA Recovery Policy RP9523.6, shall include, but is not limited to,
work necessary to meet immediate threats to life, public safety, and
situations described in subsection 2-35.3, Emergency - Defined, S.O.P.,
herein.
c. Only a receiving entity is eligible for FEMA reimbursement as
described herein. The providing entity may seek reimbursement from
the receiving entity.
d. The receiving entity shall provide FEMA with an executive summary of
the emergency police aid services requested and received, and the
associated costs (e.g., labor, equipment, materials, etc.). Both the
receiving entity and the providing entity shall keep and maintain
detailed records of the services requested and received. Such records
shall be maintained for at least three years after the emergency police
aid has been rendered.
e. A receiving entity shall submit a copy of this agreement to FEMA with
its reimbursement request.
f. A receiving entity shall submit a written and signed certification to
FEMA with its reimbursement request, which shall include:
1. The type and extent of emergency police aid assistance requested
and received;
2. The labor and equipment rates used to determine the cost of the
emergency police aid; and
§ 2-35.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-35.10
AO:79
§ 2-35.11. Effective Date. [Ord. #2015-1609 § 10]
This section shall take effect upon final passage and publication according
to law. It shall become effective with respect to this municipality's activities
with another participating municipality, when such other participating
municipality has adopted an ordinance reciprocal to this one and such
ordinance has become effective in that municipality.
§ 2-36. PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
§ 2-36.1. Creation; Maximum Number of Members; Quorum. [Ord.
#11-1504, § 2]
There is hereby established a parks and recreation advisory committee,
which shall consist of up to 11 members. Four members shall comprise a
quorum to do business.
§ 2-36.2. Transitional Membership. [Ord. #11-1504, § 2]
All members currently serving on the parks and recreation advisory
committee that was established pursuant to Resolutions 07-367, 10-225
and 10-267 shall be reappointed to terms determined by resolution of the
township committee.
§ 2-36.3. Membership. [Ord. #11-1504, § 2]
There shall be up to seven regular members, each of whom shall serve for
a three-year term. There shall be up to two senior members, defined as
persons over the age of 65, who shall serve for two-year terms. There shall
be up to one youth member, defined as a person between the ages of 16
and 25, who shall serve for a two-year term. There shall be one township
committee member, appointed by the mayor, who shall serve for a one-year
term, act as a liaison between the advisory committee and the township
committee, and who shall be authorized to vote at meetings of the advisory
committee.
§ 2-36.4. Residency. [Ord. #11-1504, § 2]
All members shall be residents of Hopewell Township. This provision may
be waived for good cause by resolution of the township committee.
§ 2-36.5. Duties. [Ord. #11-1504, § 2]
The advisory committee shall provide advice and assistance to the township
administrator and the parks and recreation director in the planning,
coordination and implementation of parks and recreation development and
3. A statement that all of the emergency police aid rendered by the
Providing Entity was eligible under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster
Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 5121 — 5206)
and applicable FEMA regulations and policies.
§ 2-35.10 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-36.5
AO:80
management programs for the township. The advisory committee shall
communicate with township residents and community organizations and
attempt to involve them in the planning process and in established
programs. On a periodic basis, the advisory committee shall evaluate the
Township Master Plan Open Space and Recreation Element, and make
appropriate recommendations within its area of expertise to the township
committee.
§ 2-36.6. Election of Chair. [Ord. #11-1504, § 2]
The advisory committee shall select a chair from among its members and
may select such other officers from among its members as it deems
appropriate.
§ 2-36.7. Adoption of Bylaws. [Ord. #11-1504, § 2]
The advisory committee may adopt its own bylaws, which shall not be
inconsistent with this section or the laws of the State of New Jersey and
which shall be submitted to the township committee pursuant to subsection
2-5.8.
§ 2-36.8. Meetings. [Ord. #11-1504, § 2]
Meetings of the advisory committee shall be held in accordance with the
Open Public Meetings Act.
§ 2-37. DEER MANAGEMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
§ 2-37.1. Creation; Number of Members; Quorum. [Ord. #11-1514,
§ 2]
There is hereby established a deer management advisory committee, which
shall consist of seven regular members and two alternates. Four members
shall comprise a quorum to do business.
§ 2-37.2. Powers and Duties; Purpose. [Ord. #11-1514, § 2]
The advisory committee will render advice to the township committee on
matters related to deer management. It will issue an annual report and
undertake such other duties as may be requested from time-to-time by the
township committee. The advisory committee's purpose is to help mitigate
the adverse impact of the white-tailed deer on the health, economics and
ecology of Hopewell Township.
§ 2-37.3. Membership; Appointment. [Ord. #11-1514, § 2]
The membership shall include at least one farmer, one hunter and one
master gardener. All members shall be appointed by the mayor.
§ 2-36.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-37.4
AO:81
§ 2-37.4. Terms of Office. [Ord. #11-1514, § 2]
Initially, two members shall be appointed to serve three year terms, three
members shall be appointed to serve two year terms and two members shall
be appointed to serve one year terms. Thereafter, all regular members shall
serve three year terms. Alternate members shall serve one year terms.
§ 2-37.5. Election of Chair. [Ord. #11-1514, § 2]
The advisory committee shall select a chair from among its members and
may select such other officers from among its members as it deems
appropriate.
§ 2-37.6. Adoption of Bylaws. [Ord. #11-1514, § 2]
The advisory committee may adopt its own bylaws, which shall not be
inconsistent with this section or the laws of the state of New Jersey and
which shall be submitted to the township committee pursuant to subsection
2-5.8.
§ 2-37.7. Meetings. [Ord. #11-1514, § 2]
The advisory committee shall meet at least monthly. Meetings shall be held
in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act.
§ 2-37.8. Sunset Provision. [Ord. #11-1514, § 2; extended March 26,
2018 by Ord. #2018-1688]
Authorization for the advisory committee shall terminate five years from the
effective date of this section unless the township committee, by ordinance,
extends that authorization.
§ 2-37.9. Goals. [Ord. #2018-1688]
a. Improvement of hunting access and efficacy.
1. Planning and continued implementation of the Township Deer
Management Program.
2. Encouraging improved access and efficacy on both public and
private lands.
3. Development of cooperative and coordinated approaches for deer
management with the Township Agricultural Advisory Committee
and broader agricultural community as well as non-profit
conservation groups and County land managers.
4. Encouraging the establishment of a local butcher to become
certified as an approved venison donation service with Hunters
Helping the Hungry.
§ 2-37.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 2-37.9
AO:82
§ 2-38. TOWNSHIP HISTORIAN.
§ 2-38.1. Position Created and Qualifications. [Ord. #2018-1689]
There is hereby created within the Township of Hopewell the position of
Township Historian. The Historian shall serve without compensation and at
the pleasure of the Township Committee.
§ 2-38.2. Powers and Duties. [Ord. #2018-1689]
The Historian shall have the following powers and duties while serving in
the position:
5. Explore potential application for Community Based Deer
Management Permit.
b. Avoidance of Deer Impacts.
1. Provide outreach and warning signage to minimize deer vehicle
collisions.
2. Perform outreach on Lyme disease prevention and use of deer
resistant landscaping.
a. The Historian shall have demonstrated a substantial knowledge of
Hopewell Township History and possess sufficient ability for writing
and public speaking to present historical knowledge to the public.
b. The Historian will not be required to live within the Township but must
be readily available for meetings and activities.
a. The Historian shall be empowered to solicit and collect on behalf of
Hopewell Township such objects, photographs, archives, and
publications as deemed fit to demonstrate the history and culture of the
Township; catalogue and store the same according to reasonably
professional standards in a secure facility. All items thus collected will
be turned over to Hopewell Township with a catalogue at the end of the
Historian's tenure.
b. The Historian shall endeavor to keep the history of the Township before
the public eye, by means of no fewer than two public talks, and two
newspaper publications per year.
c. The historian will cooperate with the Township Committee in
conducting any commemorative event, or placement of monuments,
markers or signs as the Committee shall deem fit.
d. The Historian shall be an appointed member of the Township
Preservation Commission, and fully participate in all duties under the
Preservation Commission Ordinance.
§ 2-37.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-38.2
AO:83
§ 2-38.3. Expenses. [Ord. #2018-1689]
The Historian may employ such clerical assistants as may be necessary in
order to carry out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this section,
within the limits of such funds as may be made available in the budget of the
Township of Hopewell for such purposes. Additionally, said Historian may
be reimbursed for expenses incurred and vouchered in the performance of
his or her duties and responsibilities. Said reimbursement shall be limited
to the amount set forth in the annual budget and shall be paid only after
necessary vouchers have been submitted and approved by the governing
body.
Chapter 3
LAW ENFORCEMENT REGULATIONS
[Editor's Note: For rules and regulations for parks, public lands and
open spaces see Chapter 2, Section 2-33.]
§ 3-1. PENALTY.
§ 3-1.1. Maximum Penalty. [New; Ord. #664-84, § I; Ord. #04-1318;
Ord. #06-1371; Ord. No. 2016-1627]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code or other ordinance
of the township, where no specific penalty is provided regarding the section
violated, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by one or more of
the following: a fine not exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 90 days or to a period of community service not exceeding 90
days at the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
§ 3-1.2. Separate Violations. [New; Ord. #06-1371; Ord. No.
2016-1627]
Except as otherwise provided every day in which a violation of any provision
of this chapter or any other ordinance of the township exists shall constitute
a separate violation.
§ 3-1.3. Repeat Offender. [Ord. No. 2016-1627]
Any person, firm or corporation who is convicted of violating an ordinance
within one year of the date of a previous violation of the same ordinance and
e. The Historian shall make an annual report to the Mayor and Committee
and cooperate with the Preservation Commission in reporting to
agencies of the State as required.
f. The Historian may research and write and caused to have published for
his/her own account, a municipal history. The Historian may
recommend to the Township appropriate historical material for
publication by the Township.
§ 2-38.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 3-1.3
AO:84
who was convicted for the previous violation, may be sentenced by a court
to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the
court for a repeat offense shall not exceed the maximum fine as specified
in subsection 3-1.1 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Hopewell, but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the
violation of the ordinance.
§ 3-1.4. Application. [New; Ord. #06-1371; Ord. No. 2016-1627]
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for every violation. Any lesser penalty, including a
nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular
case or violation.
§ 3-1.5. Minimum Penalty. [New; Ord. #06-1371; Ord. No.
2016-1627]
The township committee may prescribe that, for the violation of any
particular Code provision or ordinance, at least a minimum penalty shall be
imposed which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed at an amount not
exceeding $100. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
§ 3-1.6. Housing and Zoning Code Violations. [Ord. #06-1371; Ord.
No. 2016-1627]
Whenever the municipality seeks to impose a fine greater than $1,250
upon an owner for violations of housing or zoning codes, the municipality
shall provide a thirty-day period within which the owner may cure or
abate the condition as well as an opportunity for a hearing before a court
of competent jurisdiction for an independent determination concerning
the violation. After the end of the thirty-day period, a fine greater than
$1,250 may be imposed if a court has not determined otherwise or, upon
reinspection of the property, it is determined that the abatement has not
been substantially completed.
§ 3-2. PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES.
§ 3-2.1. Actions Prohibited. [Ord. #7/15/74]
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to commit any of
the following prohibited acts or activities or to engage or counsel or assist
others in engaging in the same acts.
§ 3-3. FIREARMS AND FIREWORKS.
§ 3-3.1. Discharging Prohibited. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No person shall discharge any cannon, artillery, small arm, gun, pistol,
rocket, squib or powder cracker unless licensed by the township or other
lawful authority to do so.
§ 3-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-3.2
AO:85
§ 3-3.2. Sale or Delivery Prohibited; Exception by Permission of
Township Committee. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No person shall sell, expose for sale, deliver or offer to any other person a
torpedo, blank cartridge firecracker, squib, rocket, roman candle, red fire,
or firework of any kind except upon the production of a written permit
produced by the purchaser and issued by the township committee.
§ 3-3.3. Additional Prohibitions. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No person shall discharge or ignite any toy cannon, pistol, shotgun, or other
explosive device or any torpedo, firecracker, squib, rocket, roman candle,
red fire, sparkler or firework of any kind unless licensed by the township
committee or otherwise permitted by law.
§ 3-4. LOITERING.
§ 3-4.1. Definitions. [Ord. #7/15/74]
As used in this section:
§ 3-4.2. Certain Types of Loitering Prohibited. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No persons shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
§ 3-4.3. Discretion of Police Officer. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment,
decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in subsection 3-4.2, he may
if he deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety,
order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave
after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation
of this section.
a. LOITERING – Shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and
shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking
about aimlessly, and shall also include the colloquial expression
"hanging around."
a. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
b. Create or cause to create any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort
and repose of any person.
c. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
d. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place. This paragraph shall include the making of unsolicited remarks
of any offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated
to annoy or disturb the person to, or in whose hearing, they are made.
§ 3-3.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 3-5
AO:86
§ 3-5. TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS.
§ 3-5.1. Definitions. [Ord. #7/15/74]
As used in this section:
TRAILER OR CAMP CAR — Shall mean any vehicle used or intended to be
used as a conveyance upon public streets or highways, whether the same
is actually licensed or not; and shall include self-propelled and non-selfpropelled
vehicles so designed and constructed and reconstructed or added
to by means of accessories in such manner as to permit the occupancy
thereof as a temporary dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons
and having no foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirtings so arranged
as to be part of or portable by said trailer or camp car.
§ 3-5.2. Use as Living or Sleeping Quarters Prohibited. [Ord. #7/15/
74]
No trailer or camp car shall be parked and used as living or sleeping
quarters on the streets in the township.
§ 3-6. DEFACEMENT OR INJURY TO PROPERTY. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No person shall maliciously destroy, damage, injure, remove, mark or
deface or so attempt to destroy, damage, injure, remove, mark or deface any
property.
§ 3-7. OBSCENE GRAFFITI AND PERSONAL EXPOSURE. [Ord. #7/
15/74]
No person shall write, print, paint, make, cut, or exhibit any obscene words
or offensive figures upon any house, wall, fence or other place, or make any
indecent or improper exposure of his person to public view.
§ 3-8. OBSCENE COMMUNICATIONS. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No person shall import, print, publish, exhibit, sell or distribute or have in
his possession or give away any book or pamphlet, ballad, printed paper,
moving picture or film or record or other things containing obscene
language, prints, pictures, figures, descriptions or sounds tending to the
corruption of morals. No person shall introduce into any other family or
school; or buy, procure, receive or have in his possession any such thing
for the purpose of loan, sale, exhibition, circulation or playing by any such
device; or giving it away; or with the intent to introduce the thing into any
family or school to promote a prurient interest.
§ 3-9. JUNK AUTOMOBILES.
§ 3-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-9.1
AO:87
§ 3-9.1. Outdoor Storage Prohibited. [Ord. #7/15/74]
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, keep, store, or maintain any
junk automobile or junk automobile body, or separately the parts thereof,
which are exposed outside of an enclosed building, on any tract of land
within the township which is owned, leased or rented or under the control
of such person.
§ 3-9.2. Definition. [Ord. #7/15/74]
As used in this section.
A JUNK AUTOMOBILE OR JUNK AUTOMOBILE BODY — Shall mean any
automobile which is no longer in actual use as a motor vehicle, or which is
wholly unfit without rebuilding or reconditioning for use for public highway
transportation, or which has been discarded for use as a motor vehicle.
§ 3-9.3. Violation and Nuisance. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The lands and premises where any such junk automobile, junk automobile
body, or junk automobile parts are kept, stored, or maintained in violation of
this section shall be deemed to be a nuisance and detrimental to the health
and general welfare of the residents of the township and shall be subject to
regulations and ordinances of the township, including those enacted by the
township board of health.
§ 3-10. EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
§ 3-10.1. Determination of Emergency. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Whenever, in the judgement of a majority of the township committee or, in
the event of its inability to meet, the mayor or, in the event of his inability
to act, the deputy mayor, it is determined that an emergency exists or is
imminent as the result of:
§ 3-10.2. Regulations. [Ord. #7/15/74]
a. Mob action, riot, disorderly assemblage or other widespread or perilous
disturbances which may cause death or injury to persons or destruction
of property, or
b. Natural disaster or man-made calamity such as flood, conflagration,
earthquake, explosion or the uncontained presence of corrosive,
radioactive or poisonous substances or gases.
The majority of the township committee, the mayor or the deputy mayor, as the
case may be, shall have the power and authority to impose by proclamation any
or all of the following regulations necessary to protect and preserve the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens and inhabitants of the Township of Hopewell.
a. To impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the township by requiring
all persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove
§ 3-9.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 3-10.2
AO:88
§ 3-10.3. Authority. [Ord. #7/15/74]
This section is duly promulgated under the authority granted by N.J.S.A.
40:48-1,2.
§ 3-10.4. Proclamation of Emergency. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Any proclamation of emergency provided herein shall become effective
upon its issuance and dissemination to the public. Any emergency and the
rules and regulations proclaimed thereunder shall remain in full force and
effect until amended or terminated by proclamation.
§ 3-10.5. Additional Power. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Any powers granted by this section shall be in addition to and supplemental
with any existing authority invested in the township committee and in the
township police department.
§ 3-11. DUMPING AND LITTERING.
§ 3-11.1. Definitions. [Ord. #493; Ord. #91-880]
themselves from the public streets, alleys, parks and other public
places or lands abutting the same; provided that physicians, nurses and
ambulance operators performing medical services, utility personnel
maintaining essential public service, firemen and township authorized
or requested law enforcement officers and personnel shall be exempted
from such curfew.
b. To order the closing of any business establishment anywhere within the
township for a period of the emergency or impose such other limitations
on business activities or sales as may be necessary.
c. To designate any public streets, thoroughfare or vehicle parking area
closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic.
d. To call upon regular and auxiliary law-enforcement agencies and
organizations within or without the township to assist in preserving and
keeping the peace within the township.
e. To impose such other rules and regulations as may be deemed
necessary to implement and carry out emergency control operations
and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens and
residents of the township.
a. LITTER – Shall mean garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein,
and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein
prohibited tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
b. GARBAGE – Shall mean putrescible animal and vegetable waste
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of
food.
§ 3-10.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-11.1
AO:89
§ 3-11.2. Acts of Litter Prohibited. [Ord. #493; Ord. #91-880; Ord.
#92-907, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon, deliver, deposit, throw
upon, leave or abandon, within or upon any private property or public ways
adjacent to private property in the Township of Hopewell any litter, garbage,
refuse or rubbish as defined herein, or any handbills, advertisements,
brochures, fliers, shoppers or other unsolicited commercial matter, printed
or otherwise, of every kind or nature whatsoever. This section shall not
apply to placement of leaves when duly authorized.
§ 3-11.3. Exceptions. [Ord. #493]
The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to the delivery of:
c. REFUSE – Shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste
(except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and all waste
materials resulting from any business, trade or industry.
d. RUBBISH – Shall mean nonputrescible wastes, consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
e. PRIVATE PROPERTY – Shall mean any dwelling or structure whether or
not occupied, as well as any yard, grounds, sidewalk, wall, fence,
driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging to or
appurtenant to such dwelling or structure.
f. PUBLIC WAYS ADJACENT TO PRIVATE PROPERTY – Shall mean the
areas from the side edge of a highway, street or road, whether or not
curbed, to and including the sidewalk, if any, and if no sidewalk, to the
front property line of adjacent private property, and all areas used for
any public park, playground, municipal building or other installation,
including driveways, parking areas, walks, paths and other public ways
thereupon.
a. Open or Overflowing Waste Disposal Bins. It is unlawful for any
residential or commercial property owner to permit open or
overflowing waste disposal bins on his or her property.
b. Construction Sites. It is unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in
charge of a construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation
of litter before, during, or immediately following completion of any
construction or demolition project. It is the duty of the owner, agent or
contractor in charge of a construction site to furnish containers
adequate to accommodate flyable or nonflyable debris or trash at areas
convenient to construction areas, and to maintain and empty the
receptacles in such a manner and with such a frequency as to prevent
spillage of refuse.
§ 3-11.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 3-11.3
AO:90
§ 3-11.4. Unsolicited and Unsubscribed Commercial Publications.
[Ord. #496; Ord. #612-82]
The delivery of unsolicited and unsubscribed newspapers, publications and
other periodicals of a commercial nature, in whole or in part, shall qualify
for the exception provided for in subsection 3-11.3g hereof, subject to
and contingent upon initial and continuing compliance with the following
requirements:
a. Mail, parcels or packages by and in accordance with the rules of the
United States Postal Service.
b. Parcels, packages and materials by and in accordance with the rules of
the Railway Express Agency or other utility licensed or regulated for
such purposes, and those delivered by vendors where ordered by the
owner or occupant of the recipient premises.
c. Newspapers and other publications and periodicals only if subscribed
to by the owner or occupant or the recipient premises, provided either
(1) placed firmly in a receptacle designed for such purpose or (2) if
none, then tightly wrapped to prevent blowing or scattering upon the
recipient premises or adjacent areas.
d. Laundry, dry cleaning, dairy, bakery and similar food products, and
commercial product sampling, by agreement with or invitation of the
owner or occupant of the recipient premises.
e. Solicitation cards, brochures and flyers by duly authorized bona fide
nonprofit charitable organizations, including, but not limited to, United
Fund, American Red Cross, religious, educational, medical and
volunteer police, fire and ambulance organizations, provided packaged
and placed in such manner as not to blow or scatter upon the recipient
premises or adjacent areas.
f. Noncommercial handbills of a political or other nature whose
distribution is or may be protected by constitutional rights of free
speech, provided packaged and placed in such manner as not to blow
and scatter upon the recipient premises or adjacent areas.
g. Unsolicited and unsubscribed newspapers, publications and other
periodicals of a commercial nature, in whole or in part, provided
distribution of same is in compliance with this ordinance, and further
provided packaged and placed in such manner as not to blow or scatter
upon the recipient premises or adjacent areas.
a. License. The publisher or distributor shall, prior to any such delivery,
apply to the township clerk for an annual license, to be effective from
January 1 to the following December 31 (or any portion thereof), on
forms to be prescribed by the township administrator requiring, in part,
complete information about the publisher, distributor, the publication
concerned, frequency of distribution and designating specific persons
§ 3-11.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-11.4
AO:91
§ 3-11.5. Suspension and Revocation of License. [Ord. #612-82]
The township clerk may, in addition to the penalties provided herein for
violations, either suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any such license where
three or more violations of this section by the licensee shall have occurred
within any annual license period, provided the licensee is first given 10 days
advance written notice of any such action and a hearing.
§ 3-11.6. Fees. [Ord. #612-82]
See Chapter 10.
§ 3-12. PROHIBITING THE OPERATION OF CERTAIN MOTOR
DRIVEN VEHICLES.
§ 3-12.1. Definitions. [Ord. #502]
The term "motor-driven vehicle", as used in this section, shall include
but not be expressly limited to minibikes, trail bikes, motorcycles, motor
scooters, go-carts, swamp buggies and any other motor-driven vehicle not
capable of being registered under Title 39 ("Motor Vehicles") of the New
Jersey Statutes, as amended.
§ 3-12.2. Violation and Nuisance. [Ord. #502]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or permit and suffer to be
operated, a motor-driven vehicle, as defined herein, within the township
under the following circumstances:
(with addresses and telephone numbers) responsible for compliance
with this ordinance.
b. Objection to Delivery. The owner or occupant of any property within the
township shall have the right, in writing, at any time, to transmit to the
township clerk notice of objection to the continued delivery of any such
unsolicited and unsubscribed publication by any licensee. The township
clerk shall prepare and maintain, at all times on a current basis, a list of
the names and addresses of such objectors which shall be sent to the
police department and made available to licensees hereunder at all
times during the business hours prescribed by law for the township
clerk's office. The township clerk shall also notify the designated
specific person referred to in subsection 3-11.4a hereby, by certified
mail, return receipt requested of the name and address of all persons
making such objection. Such notice of objection shall continue in effect
until revoked, and it shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance for
any licensee to deliver, or continue to deliver, any such unsolicited and
unsubscribed publication to any such objecting owner or occupant
whose name has been delivered by certified mail to person referred to
in subsection 3-11.4a.
§ 3-11.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 3-12.2
AO:92
§ 3-13. FIRE AND BURGLAR ALARMS.
§ 3-13.1. Definitions. [Ord. #680-85; Ord. No. 2016-1636]
a. On private property of another without the express written consent of
the owner and the occupant of said property. Where such express prior
written consent has been obtained, the operator shall keep same on his
person, available for immediate display, during the period of such
operation;
b. On any public grounds or property;
c. In such manner as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to
disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons;
d. No person shall operate a motor-driven vehicle before the hour of 8:00
a.m. prevailing time and after 9:00 p.m.;
e. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger the safety or property of any person;
f. Each motor-driven vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler,
in good working order and no person shall use a muffler cut-out, bypass
or similar device.
a. ALARM BUSINESS – Shall mean any business operated by a person,
partnership, or corporation, for profit, which engages in the activity of
altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling,
servicing or responding to a fire or burglar alarm system, or which
causes any of these activities to take place.
b. ALARM DEVICE – Shall mean any type of alarm-activating equipment
which provides warning of burglary, intrusion, fire, flood, or like peril.
c. ALARM SYSTEM – Shall mean the installation in one or more buildings
of one or more alarm devices for the express purpose of giving visual
and/or audible warning of an emergency such as burglary, intrusion,
fire, flood or like peril.
d. ALARM USER – Shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind in possession or
control of any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm device or
system is maintained.
e. FALSE ALARM – Shall mean an alarm signal eliciting a response by
police or firefighters or any other public officials when a situation
requiring a response by police or firefighters or any other public
officials does not in fact exist, but excluding an alarm signal caused by
violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not
reasonably subject to control by the alarm business or alarm user.
f. INDEPENDENT SMOKE DETECTOR – Shall mean a device giving an
audible alarm indicating smoke and/or fire within a structure and not
§ 3-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-13.1
AO:93
§ 3-13.2. Registration of Alarm System. [Ord. #680-85; Ord. No.
2016-1636]
No person shall install, operate or maintain any alarm system unless the
alarm system has been registered with the police department. An alarm
system shall be deemed registered at such time as a registration form
supplied by the police department is completed as to all information
requested therein. Among the information to be provided on the registration
form is the following:
§ 3-13.3. General Provisions, Regarding the Operation of Alarm
Systems and the Installation and Activation of New Alarm Systems.
[Ord. #680-85]
connected to an alarm system or to any external sounding device
outside of the structure.
g. A one-time alarm registration fee in the amount of $20.
a. The name, address, telephone number of the owner, occupant, or user
of the property upon which the alarm system is installed.
b. The name, address, and telephone number of the installer of the
system.
c. The name, address, and telephone number of the maintainer of the
system.
d. The type of system.
e. A list of the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of person(s) to
be contacted in the event of an alarm or in an emergency situation
determined by the police department.
f. A detailed description and location of the alarmed premises.
g. A one-time alarm registration fee in the amount of $20.
No further renewal registration shall be required unless and until there has
occurred any material change in the information previously submitted with
respect to any alarm system in which event it shall be the duty of the user of the
alarm system, within 10 days of such material change, to file a supplemental or
revised registration containing accurate, current information.
All pre-existing alarm systems shall comply with the registration requirements
of this subsection within 60 days of the date of the final adoption of this
section.13
a. Each alarm system shall be installed utilizing discrete circuitry for
multi-purpose and single alarm systems to insure appropriate
emergency response.
13.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 680-85 was adopted April 15, 1985.
§ 3-13.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 3-13.3
AO:94
§ 3-13.4. Confidentiality. [Ord. #680-85]
All information submitted in compliance with this section shall be held in
confidence and shall be deemed a record exempt from public disclosure
pursuant to State statute(s). Any violation of confidentiality shall be deemed
a violation of this section.
b. Any alarm system which requires for its operation electricity supplied
by a public utility may be equipped with a battery rendering it operable
in the event of a power outage if so desired by the property owners.
Such battery back-up system shall only be required for any alarm
system which will trigger itself automatically in the event of a power
outage.
c. Every burglar alarm system must be provided with a device which will
shut off the alarm after 15 minutes of activation.
d. Every burglar alarm system not fitted with an external key switch shall
be equipped with a time delay of at least 15 seconds which may include
an audible signal of the same length of time, said time delay to be
designed to prevent accidental activation of the system. The fifteensecond
signal, if utilized, shall be audible only within the structure and
not externally.
e. No alarm system may be connected directly to the alarm system panel
located in the police department without the approval of the owner of
the alarm system panel and chief of police or his designee.
f. No person shall install, cause to be installed, or permit to be installed,
any alarm device, by whatever name known, which automatically
selects a telephone line dedicated to the police department or fire
department for the purpose of playing a recorded message to report
any emergency.
g. In the event an alarm system, other than a fire or holdup alarm system,
is tied into and/or serviced by a central station or answering service,
upon activation of said alarm system, the central station or answering
service shall verify the validity of the alarm prior to notifying the police
department of same.
h. No police, fire, or other public department or official shall be
responsible in any way for the re-setting or maintenance of any alarm
system.
i. No alarm business or person owning, using or possessing an alarm
system shall cause or permit the giving of repeated false alarms,
whether intentional, accidental or otherwise.
j. A new homeowner, occupant or user possessing or using an alarm
system shall be responsible for notifying and re-registering the system
with the police department within 30 days of his purchase and/or
transfer of title of the property.
§ 3-13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-13.5
AO:95
§ 3-13.5. Exceptions. [Ord. #680-85]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any alarm system installed
on property occupied by any township, county or State or Federal
government agency or office, nor to an independent smoke detector as
defined in subsection 3-13.1f.
§ 3-13.6. Penalties for Owners and Users of Alarm Systems or
Devices. [Ord. #680-85; Ord. No. 2016-1636]
§ 3-13.7. Penalty for Intentional False Alarm. [Ord. #680-85]
Any person who intentionally causes the giving of a false alarm shall be in
violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:33-3.
a. Any person who fails to register said alarm system as required by the
provisions of this section is subject to a minimum fine of $50.
b. Any owner or user of an alarm system which experiences more than two
false alarms within any one-year period shall be required to modify or
improve said system with a retrofit which will incorporate into said
system a mandatory audible fifteen-second signal which shall be
designed to prevent accidental activation of the system.
c. Owners and users of alarm systems shall be subject to the following
minimum fine schedule for false alarms:
Minimum Fine/Penalty
Number of False Alarms Fire Police/Burglar
3 $50 $50
4 $75 $75
5 $90 $90
6 or more $100 $100 each
Any owner or user of an alarm system who accidentally activates his/
her burglar alarm and promptly notifies the police department within
two minutes after activation will not be charged a false alarm call. This
grace period shall not apply to fire alarms.
d. Any owner or user of an alarm system who installs such a system not in
compliance with this section is subject to a minimum fine of $50.
Additionally, said owner or user may be required to remove such an
alarm system.
e. Any owner or user of an alarm system shall be notified by the township
police department once two false alarms have occurred with said
system.
§ 3-13.5 HOPEWELL CODE § 3-13.8
AO:96
§ 3-13.8. Effective Date. [Ord. #680-85]
This section shall take effect upon final passage and publication in
accordance with law.
§ 3-14. HANDICAPPED PARKING.
§ 3-14.1. Definitions. [Ord. #700-86, § 1]
As used in this section:
HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES — Shall mean restricted parking spaces
for use by persons who have been issued a special vehicle identification
card by the Division of Motor Vehicles pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:4-205 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS — Shall mean any new or remodeled building,
structure, facility or complex used by the general public, of at least 10,000
square feet in size, including, but not limited to, theatres, concert halls,
auditoriums, museums, schools, libraries, recreation facilities, public
transportation terminals and stations, factories, office buildings, business
establishments, passenger vehicle service stations, shopping centers, hotels
or motels and public eating places constructed by any State, county or
municipal government agency or instrumentality or any private individual,
partnership, association or corporation.
SPECIAL LICENSE PLATES, CARDS AND OTHER INSIGNIA — Shall mean
those license plates and special vehicle identification cards issued by the
Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles of the State of New Jersey
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 and 39:4-206.
§ 3-14.2. Location of Spaces. [Ord. #700-86, § 2]
Location of handicapped parking spaces. Handicapped parking spaces shall
be provided at all public and quasi-public buildings with parking facilities
within the Township of Hopewell in accordance with the following
guidelines:
a. One parking space shall be used for handicapped parking for each 100
parking spaces or part thereof in a parking facility.
b. The handicapped parking spaces shall be located in an area of the
parking facility which is most accessible and proximate to the building
or buildings which the facility serves. The determination of said location
shall be made by the code enforcement officer in conjunction and
consultation with the owner, except where the location has been
determined by the planning board or zoning board of adjustment of the
Township of Hopewell. In shopping centers and other multi-store
facilities, the handicapped spaces shall be as near to the flagship store
as possible and/or such other locations as may be agreeable between
the code enforcement officer and the owner.
§ 3-13.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-14.2
AO:97
§ 3-14.3. Persons Parking In Handicapped Spaces. [Ord. #700-86,
§ 3]
Only handicapped persons, or persons driving handicapped persons, in
vehicles with special license plates, cards and other insignia, may park
in designated area. No person shall park, stop or stand a motor vehicle
anytime in an area designated as reserved for the benefit of physically
handicapped individuals unless such person is a handicapped person or is
driving such handicapped person for the handicapped person's benefit.
§ 3-14.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #700-86, § 4; Ord.
#03-1291, § 1]
Any person parking a motor vehicle in a handicapped parking space without
a special license plate, or card or other insignia issued by the Director of the
Division of Motor Vehicles of the State of New Jersey, or by the jurisdiction
wherein the motor vehicle is registered, shall be liable to a fine of $250 for
the first offense and, for subsequent offenses, a fine of at least $250 and
up to 90 days of community service on such terms and in such form as the
Municipal Judge shall deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
§ 3-15. PARKING PROHIBITED IN FIRE LANES.14
§ 3-15.1. Authority to Establish. [Ord. #06-1379]
The fire official is authorized, by the Uniform Fire Code N.J.A.C.
5:70-3.1(a)3, F-311.0, to establish fire lanes on properties in the Township
of Hopewell where the operation and parking of motor vehicles or creating
other similar obstruction would interfere with adequate ingress, egress and
operation of firefighting equipment or other emergency vehicles.
c. Each space or group of spaces shall be identified with a clearly visible
sign displaying the International Symbol of Access along with the
following words, "These Spaces Are Reserved for Physically
Handicapped Only. Special Vehicle Identification Required."
d. Each space shall be 12 feet wide to allow room for persons in
wheelchairs or on braces or crutches to get in or out of either side of the
automobile on a level paved surface suitable for wheeling and walking.
e. Where possible, such spaces shall be located so that persons in
wheelchairs or using braces or crutches are not compelled to wheel or
walk behind parked cars.
f. Where applicable, curb ramps shall be provided to permit handicapped
persons access from parking area to sidewalk.
g. All public buildings as defined herein shall provide handicapped
parking spaces prior to receipt of a certificate of occupancy.
14.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 742-87, 750-87,
91-887 and 91-890.
§ 3-14.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 3-15.2
AO:98
§ 3-15.2. Regulations for Operation of Vehicles. [Ord. #06-1379]
The Hopewell Valley Bureau of Fire Safety is further authorized to
promulgate regulations limiting, restricting, or prohibiting the operation of
motor vehicles to be established pursuant to subsection 3-15.1.
§ 3-15.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #06-1379]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be liable, upon
conviction thereof, to a fine of $61 for the first offense and, for subsequent
offense, a fine of at least $61 and up to 90 days community service on such
terms and in such form as the municipal judge shall deem appropriate, or
any combination thereof.
§ 3-15.4. Removal of Vehicle. [Ord. #06-1379]
Township Police and Fire Code Enforcement Officials acting within their
official capacity shall have the power to order removed any vehicle violating
this section, and the owner shall be responsible for any towing or related
fees incurred, as well as penalties for violations of this section.
§ 3-16. DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES.
§ 3-16.1. Approval and Adoption of Drug-Free School Zone Map.
[Ord. #780-88, § 1]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of L. 1988 c. 44 (C.
2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Map produced on or about 2-12-1988
by the Hopewell Township Engineer, Van Cleef Engineering Associates,
is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the
location and areas within the municipality of property which is used for
school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board, and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet
of such school property.
§ 3-16.2. Location and Boundaries of School Property. [Ord.
#780-88, § 2]
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-16.1 of this section shall continue to constitute an official
finding and record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within
1,000 feet of property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary
school or school board which is used for school purposes until such time if
any that this section shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions
with respect to the location and boundaries of school property and Drug
Free-School Zones.
a. Procedure. The removal of vehicles pursuant to section 3-15.4 shall
follow the policies and procedures established by the Hopewell
Township Police Department.
§ 3-15.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-16.3
AO:99
§ 3-16.3. Location and Boundary Changes. [Ord. #780-88, § 3]
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in case of any private or
parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing obligation
to promptly notify the township engineer and the township attorney of any
changes or contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of any
property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or
school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 3-16.4. Map on File. [Ord. #780-88, § 4]
The clerk of the municipality is hereby directed to receive and to keep on
file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to subsection
3-16.1 of this section, and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof
to any person, agency or court which may from time to time request such
a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and of this section shall be provided without cost to the
county clerk and to the Office of the Mercer County Prosecutor.
§ 3-16.5. Additional Matters. [Ord. #780-88, § 5]
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
a. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-16.1 of this section was prepared and is intended to be
used as evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this
State, and that pursuant to State law, such map shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the following:
1. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality;
2. The boundaries of the real property which is owned or leased to
such schools or a school board;
3. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
4. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
b. All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
school property was owned by or leased to a school or school board and
was being used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being the
effective date of L. 1987, c. 101 (C. 2C:35-7).
c. Pursuant to the provisions of L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing, or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
§ 3-16.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 3-16.5
AO:100
§ 3-17. (RESERVED)15
§ 3-18. YARD WASTE COLLECTION.16
§ 3-18.1. Purpose. [Ord. #05-1356; Ord. #12-1541]
The purpose of this section is to establish a yard waste collection and
disposal program in the Township of Hopewell, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 3-18.2. Definitions. [Ord. #05-1356; Ord. #12-1541]
The purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the
text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Shall mean the placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, biodegradable bag or by any other method of containment, so as
to prevent the yard waste from spilling or blowing out into the street and
coming into contact with stormwater runoff.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
adopted pursuant to subsection 3-16.1 of this section. The failure of
the map approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any
property which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned
by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board,
whether the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent
omission or the result of any changes in the location and boundaries
of such property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised
approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record
that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or school
board, or that such property is not used for school purposes.
d. All of the requirements set forth in L. 1988, c. 44 concerning the
preparation approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map
have been complied with.
15.Editor's Note: Former section 3-17, Maintenance of Fences around Swimming Pools,
previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 817-89 was repealed
in its entirety by Ordinance No. 92-919.
16.Editor's Note: Former Section 3-18, Brush and Landscaping Debris, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 93-944, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 05-1356.
§ 3-16.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-18.2
AO:101
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing State, county or municipal
roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean leaves and brush/landscape debris. Brush/
landscape debris shall be more particularly defined by subsection 3-18.3.3.
Grass clippings are a separate waste product that is not collected by
Hopewell Township.
§ 3-18.3. Yard Waste Collection.
§ 3-18.3.1. Collection Schedules. [Ord. #05-1356; Ord. #05-1362;
Ord. #12-1541]
Yard waste collection schedules shall be determined annually. Schedules
shall be published at the earliest possible date on the Hopewell Township
website (www.hopewelltwp.org) and in the municipal calendar. Special
instructions shall be issued by the public works director in the event added
brush collections are to be provided as a result of storm damage. Such
instructions will be posted to the township website www.hopewelltwp.org.
§ 3-18.3.2. Placement of Yard Waste. [Ord. #05-1356; Ord.
#05-1362, § 1; Ord. #12-1541]
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste is only
permitted during a scheduled and announced collection and during the
seven calendar day period prior to the scheduled and announced collection.
Yard waste may not be placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain
inlet and may not be placed on any street pavement. Placement of yard
waste may occur up to the edge of pavement or to the inside edge of curb
for streets with no sidewalks. Under no circumstances shall yard waste be
placed on sidewalks or in a manner that obstructs safe street sight distances
or driveway sight distances. Placement of yard waste must occur on the
frontage of the tax lot from which the yard waste originated.
Placement of yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time
or in any other manner is a violation of this section. If such placement of
yard waste occurs, the party responsible for placement of the yard waste
must remove the yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed
in violation of this section.
§ 3-18.3.3. Regulations. [Ord. #05-1356; Ord. #05-1362, § 1; Ord.
#12-1541]
In order to allow for safe and efficient collection of brush, limbs and
landscape debris (Yard Waste), the following regulations must be followed
for each collection:
a. Collection shall be limited to brush and tree pruning.
§ 3-18.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 3-18.3.3
AO:102
§ 3-18.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #05-1356; Ord. #12-1541]
Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall
be subject to the penalty provisions set forth at section 3-1 of this chapter,
except that no person found to be in violation of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to imprisonment.
§ 3-19. FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS. [Ord. #94-994]
b. Limbs shall be no longer than four feet in length.
c. Limbs and brush shall be placed in an orderly manner with all butts (six
inches diameter maximum) facing road.
d. Maximum brush pile size - four feet wide by four feet high by 15 feet
long. Disposal of brush in excess of this volume shall be the
responsibility of the homeowner.
e. Small twigs must be bagged.
f. All wire, nails and metal shall be completely removed from the pile.
g. Do not place brush in street, gutter or within 10 feet of any storm drain
inlet per Ordinance No. 05-1356. Yard waste may be placed up to the
edge of pavement or to the inside edge of curb for streets with no
sidewalks. Under no circumstances shall yard waste be placed on
sidewalks or in a manner that obstructs safe street sight distances or
driveway sight distances. Placement of yard waste must occur on the
frontage of the tax lot from which the yard waste originated.
h. Diseased material and firewood will NOT be collected.
i. Tree stumps, trunks and limbs in excess of six inches diameter will NOT
be collected.
j. Brush in excess of above stated maximum brush pile size will NOT be
collected. Disposal of material in excess of the maximum brush pile size
shall be the responsibility of the homeowner within 10 calendar days of
the township having performed collection for that lot.
k. Brush mixed with leaves will NOT be collected.
a. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph b of this section, no
insurance company shall pay to any claimant any claim in excess of
$2,500 for fire damages on any real property located within the
Township of Hopewell, pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or
renewed after the adoption of this section and after the filing of this
section with the State Commissioner of Insurance, until such time as
any anticipated demolition costs and all taxes and assessments and all
other municipal liens or charges due and payable, appearing on the
official certificate of search, shall have been paid by either the owner of
the real property or by the insurance property.
§ 3-18.3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-19
AO:103
§ 3-20. PROPER HANDLING OF YARD WASTE.
§ 3-20.1. Purpose. [Ord. #05-1357]
The purpose of this section shall be to establish requirements for the proper
handling of yard waste and grass clippings in the Township of Hopewell so
as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply.
§ 3-20.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 05-1357]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Shall mean the placement of yard waste and grass
clippings in a trash can, bucket, biodegradable bag or by any other method
of containment, so as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or blowing out
into the street and coming into contact with stormwater runoff.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing State, county or municipal
roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean leaves, brush, and landscape debris.
§ 3-20.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. #05-1357]
The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or contractor
of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste in the
street unless the yard waste is placed in accordance with the Yard Waste
Collection Ordinance.17 If yard waste is not containerized and placed in the
b. The township committee may enter into an agreement with the owner
of any fire-damaged property to pay in full all delinquent taxes,
assessments or other municipal liens by installments, or for the
payment in full of any anticipated costs of demolition by installments, if
the township committee is satisfied that the claim for fire damages is to
be used to restore or improve the fire-damaged property. A certified
copy of any resolution of agreement shall be provided to the insurance
company that has insured the property for fire damage.
§ 3-19 HOPEWELL CODE § 3-20.3
AO:104
street in a manner inconsistent with the Yard Waste Collection Ordinance,
the party responsible for placement of yard waste must remove the yard
waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
section.
The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or contractor
of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place grass clippings in
the street. If grass clippings are not containerized and placed in the street,
the party responsible for placement of grass clippings must remove the
grass clippings from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of
this section.
§ 3-20.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #05-1357]
Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall
be subject to the penalty provisions set forth at section 3-1 of this chapter,
except that no person found to be in violation of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to imprisonment.
§ 3-21. ILLICIT CONNECTIONS TO MUNICIPAL STORMWATER
SYSTEMS.
§ 3-21.1. Purpose. [Ord. #05-1353]
The purpose of this section is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Hopewell so
as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply.
§ 3-21.2. Definitions. [Ord. #05-1353]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Shall mean waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Shall mean physical or nonphysical connection
that discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
17.Editor's Note: The Yard Waste Collection Ordinance, referred to herein, is codified as
section 3-18 of this chapter.
§ 3-20.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-21.2
AO:105
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Hopewell, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean nondomestic waste, including, but not
limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of
Hopewell or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Shall mean water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other than
heat) or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may however contain
algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat
exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Shall mean any water which, during
manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from
the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, by-product, or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is
not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling
water.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 3-21.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. #05-1353]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Township of Hopewell any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 3-21.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 3-21.4
AO:106
§ 3-21.4. Penalties. [Ord. #05-1353]
Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the penalty provisions set forth at section 3-1 of this section.
§ 3-22. WILDLIFE FEEDING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
§ 3-22.1. Purpose. [Ord. #05-1354]
The purpose of this section is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the
Township of Hopewell, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 3-22.2. Definitions. [Ord. #05-1354]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — Shall mean all animals that are neither human nor
domesticated.
§ 3-22.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. #05-1354]
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or
operated by Township of Hopewell any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife
(for example, wildlife contained in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 3-22.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #05-1354]
Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall
be subject to the penalty provisions set forth at section 3-1 of this chapter,
except that no person found to be in violation of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to imprisonment.
§ 3-23. UNDERAGE DRINKING.
§ 3-21.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-23.1
AO:107
§ 3-23.1. Alcoholic Beverage Consumption by Minors. [Ord.
#07-1410, § I; Ord. #11-1506]
It is hereby unlawful for any person under the legal age ("underage person")
to knowingly, without legal authority, possess or knowingly consume an
alcoholic beverage on private property. No person shall be considered
to knowingly possess an alcoholic beverage merely because he or she is
present where alcoholic beverages are being consumed.
§ 3-23.2. Exemptions to Prohibition on Alcohol Possession and
Consumption by Minors. [Ord. #1410, § I; Ord. #11-1506]
A person under the legal age shall not be prohibited from (a) possessing or
consuming an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious observance,
ceremony, or rite or possessing or consuming an alcoholic beverage in the
presence of, or with the written permission of such person's parent or
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase or consume
alcoholic beverages; or (b) the possession of an alcoholic beverage in the
preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management
program at a county vocational school or post secondary educational
institution.
§ 3-23.3. Lifeline Exemption. [Ord. #1410, § I; Ord. #11-1506]
An underage person and one or two other persons shall be immune from
prosecution under this section if:
§ 3-23.4. Call for Aid Exemption. [Ord. #1410, § I; Ord. #11-1506]
Any person who is a resident of a dwelling on private property and
affirmatively requests assistance from authorities (such as via a 911 call) or
from an off-site adult (such as a parent, guardian or neighboring resident)
for the purpose of controlling or removing nonresidents who are on that
a. One of the underage persons called 9-1-1 and reported that another
underage person was in need of medical assistance due to alcohol
consumption;
b. The underage person who called 9-1-1 and, if applicable, one or two
other persons acting in concert with the underage person who called
9-1-1 provided each of their names to the 9-1-1 operator.
c. The underage person was the first person to make the 9-1-1 report; and
d. The underage person and, if applicable, one or two other persons acting
in concert with the underage person who made the 9-1-1 call remained
on the scene with the person under the legal age in need of medical
assistance until assistance arrived and cooperated with medical
assistance and law enforcement personnel on the scene.
The underage person who received medical assistance also shall be immune
from prosecution under this section.
§ 3-23.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 3-23.4
AO:108
property shall not be charged under this section with underage possession
or consumption of alcohol on private property, as long as assistance is
provided as a result of such request.
§ 3-23.5. Definitions. [Ord. #1410, § I; Ord. #11-1506]
As used in this section:
GUARDIAN — Shall mean a person who has qualified as a guardian of the
underage person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — Shall mean the underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle,
sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 3-23.6. Penalties for Possession or Consumption of Alcohol by
Minors. [Ord. #1410, § I; Ord. #11-1506]
A violation by an underage person of this section shall be punished by a fine
of $250 for a first offense, and $350 for any subsequent offense. In addition,
the court may, in its discretion, require the performance of communityrelated
service.
§ 3-23.7. Driving Privilege Suspension of Minors for Violation of
Section. [Ord. #1410, § I; Ord. #11-1506]
a. The court may, in addition to the penalty authorized for this offense,
suspend or postpone for six months the driving privileges of the
defendant underage person. Upon the conviction of any underage
person and the suspension or postponement of that person's driver's
license, the court shall forward a report to the Motor Vehicle
Commission (Commission) stating the first and last day of the
suspension or postponement period imposed by the court pursuant to
this section. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is
less than 17 years of age, the period of license postponement, including
a suspension or postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized
bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall
run for a period of six months after the person reaches the age of 17
years.
b. If an underage person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a
valid driver's license issued by this State, the court may immediately
collect the license and forward it to the Commission along with the
report. If for any reason the license cannot be collected, the court shall
include in the report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye
color, and sex of the person, as well as the first and last date of the
license suspension period imposed by the court.
c. The court shall inform the underage person orally and in writing that if
the person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period
of license suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:340. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
§ 3-23.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-23.7
AO:109
§ 3-23.8. Mandatory Alcohol Counseling for Violation of Section.
[Ord. #1410, § I; Ord. 11-1506]
§ 3-23.9. Annual Review. [Ord. #1410, § I; Ord. #11-1506]
The chief of police and the health officer will annually present to the
governing body a report on the effectiveness of this section.
§ 3-24. REFUSE CONTAINERS/DUMPSTERS.
§ 3-24.1. Purpose. [Ord. #11-1517]
The purpose of this section is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of
liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Hopewell and/or the
waters of the State so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 3-24.2. Definitions. [Ord. #11-1517]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of
a written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
d. If the underage person convicted under this section is not a New Jersey
resident, the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the
nonresident driving privilege of the person based on the age of the
person and submit to the Commission the required report. The court
shall not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this
section. Upon receipt of a report by the court, the Commission shall
notify the appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the
suspension or postponement.
a. Any person 18 years of age or younger who is convicted of a violation of
this section, will be required to complete a court-approved alcohol
counseling program.
b. Any person 19 years of age or older who is convicted of a second or
subsequent violation of this section will be required to complete a
court-approved alcohol counseling program.
§ 3-23.7 HOPEWELL CODE § 3-24.2
AO:110
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by Township of
Hopewell or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Shall mean any waste container that a person
controls whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash
cans, garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 3-24.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. #11-1517]
Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Hopewell.
§ 3-24.4. Exceptions to Prohibition. [Ord. #11-1517]
a. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
b. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
c. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
d. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
e. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 3-24.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-24.5
AO:111
§ 3-24.5. Penalties. [Ord. #11-1517]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in Section 3-1 of this
chapter, except that no person found to be in violation of this section shall
be subject to imprisonment.
§ 3-25. PRIVATE STORM DRAIN INLET RETROFITTING.
§ 3-25.1. Purpose. [Ord. #11-1518]
The purpose of this section is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Township of Hopewell so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 3-25.2. Definitions. [Ord. #11-1518]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of
Hopewell or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — Shall mean an opening in a storm drain used to
collect stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grade inlet,
curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 3-24.5 HOPEWELL CODE § 3-25.3
AO:112
§ 3-25.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. #11-1518]
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 3-25.4. Design Standard. [Ord. #11-1518]
Storm drain inlets identified in subsection 3-25.3 above shall comply with
the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
subsection 3-25.4c below.
a. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
b. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in subsection 3-25.4
below prior to the completion of the project.
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
1. The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
2. A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than seven square inches, or is no greater than 0.5
inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
§ 3-25.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-25.4
AO:113
§ 3-25.5. Penalties. [Ord. #11-1518]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth at section 3-1 of this
chapter, except that no person found to be in violation of the provisions of
this section shall be subject to imprisonment.
Chapter 4
GENERAL LICENSING
§ 4-1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 4-1.1. Hearing for Suspension or Revocation. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Unless otherwise provided, any license or permit issued pursuant to this
chapter or described herein may, subject to law, be suspended or revoked by
the township committee upon hearing or otherwise as hereinafter provided.
§ 4-1.2. Revocation. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Upon notice to the licensee and an opportunity to be heard, any such license
may be revoked or suspended for violation of the applicable ordinance
c. This standard does not apply:
1. Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
2. Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches along and 1 1/
2 inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
3. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
4. Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 3-25.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-1.2
AO:114
pertaining to the license or permit, violation of the terms of the license or
permit or other good cause.
§ 4-1.3. Suspension. [Ord. #7/15/74; New]
Where a licensed activity involves hazard to health or public safety, such
license may be suspended by a majority of a quorum of the township
committee, or where an emergency requires, the chief of police or other
officer in charge. Upon such suspension, a hearing must be held within
72 hours upon notice to the licensee, otherwise the suspension shall
automatically terminate until a hearing is held.
§ 4-1.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #7/15/74]
In addition to suspension or revocation, any licensee or other person
violating any provision of this chapter or any condition of a license or permit
shall be liable to the penalties provided in Chapter 3, section 3-1.
§ 4-1.5. Unlicensed Persons. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Any person engaging in an activity for which a license is required who has
not obtained such license or whose license has expired shall be in violation
of this chapter.
§ 4-2. FIREWORKS.
§ 4-2.1. Permit Required. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Any person who shall purchase, keep, display or discharge fireworks in the
township in connection with a public celebration or exhibition shall first
obtain a permit from the township committee.
§ 4-2.2. Application. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Application shall be made in writing and in such form as shall be required
by the township clerk. It shall set forth:
a. The name, address and experience of the applicant.
b. The place and time of display.
c. The nature of the display.
d. The method of storage.
e. Applicable liability insurance.
f. Such other data as may be required by the township clerk as appears
necessary for public safety.
§ 4-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2.3
AO:115
§ 4-2.3. Permit. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Upon favorable action by the township committee, the clerk shall issue a
permit, which permit shall incorporate by reference and be subject to the
facts set forth in the application and such other conditions as may have been
required by the township committee.
§ 4-3. FESTIVALS AND LARGE ASSEMBLIES.
§ 4-3.1. Permit Required. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #95-1025]
No person or group shall promote, advertise, operate, conduct or
participate in any large (200 or more persons) public or quasi-public
exhibition, demonstration, show, festival, parade or similar planned event,
or other outdoor assembly of persons, which is directly or indirectly
advertised or touted in the public press, radio or television, or to which
large (200 or more) numbers of people are directly or indirectly invited or
anticipated to attend, unless the person, or group promoting, advertising,
operating or conducting the same shall first have obtained a permit from
the township committee.
§ 4-3.2. Application Information. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Written application for such permit shall be made to the township clerk
at least 10 days prior to the regular meeting of the township committee
at which the applicant wishes the application to be considered. Together
with the application, the applicant shall, in typewritten form, submit the
following information:
a. The proposed location and the portion of the premises available for
such event.
b. Past experience of the applicant in promoting, operating or conducting
similar such large outdoor events.
c. The reasonably projected number of persons who will attend such
outdoor event and the basis of such projection.
d. Existing and proposed additional sanitary and water facilities sufficient
to accommodate the number of persons reasonably projected to attend
the outdoor event.
e. A parking and traffic control plan for the number of persons projected
to attend the event, which plan must be sufficient to insure a free flow
of traffic, available rapid access by emergency vehicles and adequate
off-street parking facilities sufficient to accommodate the projected
number of persons expected to attend.
f. A plan for the safe handling and sale of food and beverages and proof of
the ability to provide sufficient food and beverage to insure the health
and well-being of the projected number of persons expected to attend.
§ 4-2.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-3.2
AO:116
§ 4-3.3. Permit Fee. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The applicant shall pay to the township clerk a permit fee as established in
Chapter 10 for each 200 persons or fraction thereof reasonably projected
to attend the event, provided however, that the township committee may,
by resolution, waive the payment of the permit fee for any organization or
group enumerated in subsection 4-3.8.
§ 4-3.4. Insurance Requirement. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The applicant shall submit to the township clerk, with his application, a
written commitment from a responsible insurance company, licensed to
do business in New Jersey, to insure the applicant and the Township of
Hopewell as a coinsured during such event, on account of liability for
accidental injury to one person in the amount of $100,000; for accidental
injury to two or more persons in the amount of $1,000,000; for property
damage in the amount of $50,000. Where it shall appear that the nature
or size of the event or the existence of other applicable insurance will not
reasonably require the limits hereinabove related, the township committee
may fix such lesser limits or accept such evidence of other insurance
or financial responsibility as will reasonably afford protection to the
participants and the public.
§ 4-3.5. Report of Chief of Police and Health Officer. [Ord. #7/15/
74]
The township clerk shall, upon receipt of the application, refer the same
immediately to the chief of police and to the township health officer, in
order that each might complete and submit to the township committee an
investigative report and recommendations.
g. A plan for such medical and similar facilities as the applicant intends to
provide in view of the projected number of persons expected to attend.
h. A specific description of the nature of the assembly and the number
and, where available, the names of the exhibitors, demonstrators, or
other persons invited by or under contract with the applicant in
connection with the proposed event.
i. Annexed to such application shall be the written permission of the
record owner or owners of the premises intended to be used, or if the
same be owned by the State of New Jersey, the County of Mercer or
another governmental unit or school board, then the written permission
of the officer or agent having authority to permit the use of such
premises as are intended to be used.
a. The chief of police shall cause to be investigated and shall report upon
the following:
1. The background of the applicant and the factual accuracy of the
application.
§ 4-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-3.5
AO:117
§ 4-3.6. Additional Requirements. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The township committee may, upon consideration of the application and
the reports submitted, pursuant to subsection 4-3.5, together with such
additional information as may be adduced at the regular meeting of the
township committee, grant the permit for which application is made, to be
issued by the township clerk subject, however, to the following:
2. The extent to which the proposed outdoor assembly may adversely
affect the health, safety or welfare of the persons attending the
same or the health, safety or welfare of the persons in the
community.
3. The extent to which the nature of the event and its operation would
promote or facilitate criminal offenses, disorderly persons offenses,
juvenile delinquency or municipal ordinance offenses about the
premises proposed for the outdoor assembly.
4. The adequacy of the proposed parking and traffic control plan.
5. Such other matters as may reasonably be required by the nature
and size of the proposed event or as may be directed by the
township committee.
The report of the chief of police shall contain written recommendations
and the reasons therefor.
b. The township health officer shall cause to be investigated and shall
report upon the following:
1. The factual accuracy of the application as it pertains to sanitary
and health facilities.
2. The adequacy of provisions for sanitary facilities, water and the
dispensation of beverages and food.
3. Such other matters as may reasonably be required by the nature
and size of the proposed event, or as may be directed by the
township committee.
The report of the township health officer shall contain written
recommendations and the reasons therefor.
c. The reports of the chief of police and the township health officer shall
be filed with the township clerk at least 24 hours prior to the regular
meeting at which the application is to be considered and shall be
available for inspection by the applicant or his attorney.
a. No permit shall be granted for any event to be conducted upon private
premises in a residential zone unless the applicant shall first have
obtained a recommendation for a temporary activities permit from the
board of adjustment.
§ 4-3.5 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-3.6
AO:118
§ 4-3.7. Revocation of Permit. [Ord. #7/15/74]
A permit may be revoked by the township committee upon 24 hours' notice
to the applicant-permittee where it appears that:
b. Each permit shall contain such written conditions as are reasonable and
appropriate to the nature and size of the proposed event so as to insure
the public health, morals, safety and welfare.
c. No permit shall be issued unless a certified copy of the applicant's
liability insurance policy, or other required evidence of financial
responsibility, shall have been filed with the township clerk.
d. No permit shall be issued unless the full permit fee shall have been paid
to the township clerk, unless same has been waived.
e. The township committee may require of the applicant, prior to the
issuance of a permit, a cash deposit in an amount sufficient to insure
full payment of a permit fee based upon the number of persons actually
attending the event and to insure prompt repair of physical damage and
collection of refuse when the event is to take place in a public street,
park, playground, or other public facility. Such a cash deposit shall, as
well, be sufficient to pay for such special police officers and like
personnel as may reasonably be required by the event and for which the
township shall bill the applicant-permittee. In the event that the
township and the applicant-permittee are unable to agree as to the
number of persons actually attending, the cost of damage - repair or the
cost of refuse collection, the dispute shall be submitted to the American
Arbitration Association for resolution, the applicant-permittee to pay all
costs of such arbitration.
a. The application is materially false or purposely misleading and such
fact was not earlier discovered despite due diligence prior to such time.
b. The number of persons reasonably expected to attend is unexpectedly
greater by 50% than the number initially projected and the applicantpermittee
is unable to deposit sufficient monies to insure adequate
police protection or is unable by reason of such increase, to provide
proportionately greater sanitary, water, food and other health facilities.
c. New or substantially changed conditions have arisen so as to imperil or
materially endanger the public health, morals, safety or welfare.
If a permit is revoked for reasons denominated in paragraphs b or c,
the applicant's permit fee shall be returned to him.
1. A permit may be revoked at any time after 24 hours prior to the
event and at any time during such event where it appears that the
public health, morals, safety or welfare are being endangered,
where it appears that numerous acts of criminality, disorderly
conduct or juvenile delinquency are occurring or where nuisances
§ 4-3.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-3.7
AO:119
§ 4-3.8. Exemptions. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The township committee may, by resolution, exempt any or all of the
following persons, partnership, corporations, organizations, groups or
events from the operation of all or any part of this section:
substantially impairing the comfort or welfare of the community
are occurring.
Where such circumstances appear, a permit shall be revoked, upon
request of the chief of police or his designee, in the following
manner:
(a) By a majority of a quorum of the township committee.
(b) If a quorum of the township committee cannot reasonably be
convened or contacted by telephone, then by the mayor.
(c) In the absence of the mayor, by the deputy mayor.
(d) In the absence of the foregoing, by the chief of police or, if he is
unavailable, by the officer in charge.
In the event of revocation under this subsection, the permit fee and the
cash deposit, to the extent the latter is billed, used or required, shall
not be returned to the applicant-permittee.
2. In the event that a permit is revoked, oral notice by the mayor or
his designee to the applicant-permittee shall be deemed sufficient
notice to the applicant-permittee and his agents, servants,
employees and contractees, that the permit has been revoked.
3. In the event that a permit is revoked, oral notice, audible to any
individual and oral notice reasonably audible to any person within
normal hearing range of any electronic device given by an
authorized official or police officer, shall be deemed sufficient
notice that the permit has been revoked.
a. Charitable or nonprofit organizations.
b. Veterans organizations and local service groups.
c. Quasi-governmental groups and associations such as police, firemen
and civil defense organizations.
d. Bona fide scholastic and interscholastic contests and officially
sponsored affairs.
e. Governmental units.
f. Events which are necessarily within the beneficial provisions of H.T.
17:7-6.
§ 4-3.7 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-3.8
AO:120
§ 4-3.9. Renewal of License Previously Approved. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Any applicant who shall have obtained a permit for an event which is
commonly held at annual or other periodic intervals shall, once having
obtained such permit, be entitled to renew the same, upon the same
conditions as are contained in the original permit by notifying the township
clerk in writing at least 20 days prior to the proposed holding of such event
and submitting with such notification, evidence of financial responsibility
and the fulfillment of such other conditions as may theretofore have been
required. The application for renewal shall be presented to and acted upon
by the township committee at the first meeting next after receipt by the
township clerk unless a bona fide complaint concerning the past operation
of such event by the applicant or new or changed circumstances or a
different mode of operation by the applicant have been brought to the
attention of the township committee. Where such matters are brought to the
attention of the township committee, it shall hold a hearing upon notice to
the applicant and may thereafter grant the application for renewal, impose
new or different conditions upon the applicant, or deny the application, as
the evidence adduced at the hearing shall warrant.
§ 4-3.10. Violations. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Any person, organization or group who shall promote, advertise, operate,
conduct or participate in any event described in subsection 4-3.1, for which
no permit has been duly issued, shall be in violation thereof.
Any person, partnership, corporation, organization or group who has been
notified of the revocation of a permit pursuant to the provisions of
subsection 4-3.7c2 and thereafter promotes, advertises, operates, conducts
or participates in any event described in subsection 4-3.1 shall be in
violation.
Any person who has been notified of the revocation of a permit pursuant
to the provisions of subsection 4-3.7c3, and who has been requested by a
police officer to quit the premises, not his own, for which such permit was
issued and who loiters thereon or fails forthwith to quit such premises or
who obstructs, hinders, or delays the quit of himself or others shall be in
violation thereof.
Any person, partnership, corporation, organization or group who violates
any other provisions of this section, including the submission of a false or
materially misleading application, shall be in violation hereof.
§ 4-4. (RESERVED)18
§ 4-5. AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
g. Events which will benefit the health, morals, safety, welfare of the
community and which, in the reasonable opinion of the township
committee, will not involve or attract 500 persons or more as
participants or spectators.
§ 4-3.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-5.1
AO:121
§ 4-5.1. License Required. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Any person placing, operating or maintaining any amusement device shall
obtain a license from the township clerk.
§ 4-5.2. Definition. [Ord. #7/15/74]
As used in this section:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Shall include any pin game, skeeball, machine
showing moving pictures or like devices which operates as a game, contest
or amusement upon the insertion of a coin or slug.
§ 4-5.3. Applications. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Application shall be made in the form prescribed by the clerk and shall
contain:
§ 4-5.4. License. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The license shall be annual and shall expire on August 31 each year. Such
licenses are not assignable but may be transferred from one machine to
another upon payment of a transfer fee as established in Chapter 10.
§ 4-5.5. Gambling Uses Prohibited. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No licensee shall use or permit or suffer any licensed machine to be used
for gambling.
§ 4-5.6. Fees. [Ord. #7/15/74]
See Chapter 10.
§ 4-6. SHOOTING RANGE.
a. The name and address of the licensee.
b. The name and address of the person or proprietor of the premises
where the machine is to be installed.
c. A description of the machine or machines including the manufacturer's
serial number.
d. The amount of money required to operate the machine or machines.
e. A certification that the applicant is over the age of 18 and is the actual
owner of the business conducted in the place where the device is to be
placed.
18.Editor's Note: Former section 4-4, Automobile Service Stations, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance No. 7/15/1974 was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 95-1007.
§ 4-5.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-6.1
AO:122
§ 4-6.1. Application for License. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #583-81; Ord.
No. 2017-1675]
§ 4-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #583-81; Ord. No.
2017-1675]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the respective
meanings ascribed to them:
DBA — The sound pressure level, in decibels, as measured on a precision
sound level meter on the A-weighted scale.
a. All licenses for shooting range or places for the holding of target
shooting of any kind to which the public are admitted or invited, may be
granted in the discretion of the Township Committee to any person who
may apply therefor.
b. Any new shooting range shall obtain a shooting range license, if an
existing shooting range is intended to be substantially changed or
expanded to include different types of shooting ranges, operations, or
activities not covered by an existing license, application for a new
license shall be made prior to such changes being implemented. Any
license issued hereunder does not relieve the licensee of compliance
with all other applicable ordinances or codes.
c. A shooting range license shall be issued prior to issuance of any permits
for building or other improvements related to the shooting range.
d. Such application shall be made using Township application forms and
shall be filed with the Township Clerk. The application shall be
reviewed by the Municipal Engineer who shall consult with the Police
Department. The Municipal Engineer shall advise the Clerk in writing if
the application includes all of the information required by this section
has been provided within 20 calendar days of the date of submission.
e. Once the Municipal Engineer has confirmed that all information has
been received, the application shall be deemed complete and the Clerk
will schedule a hearing on the application. The date of the hearing shall
allow a minimum of 15 calendar days to permit adequate time for the
applicant to provide notice. The applicant shall be required to send
certified mail notice of the application, return receipt requested, to all
property owners within 200 feet of the property upon which the
shooting range will be located a minimum of 10 days prior to the
hearing date. The owner listing for the notice shall be obtained from the
Department of Community Development. The applicant shall provide
proof that notice was given as required by this section prior to the start
of the hearing.
f. The Township Committee will review the application, reports from the
Municipal Engineer and Police, hear public comment and then decide
the application within 30 calendar days of the hearing date.
§ 4-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-6.2
AO:123
EPA LEAD MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES — At any given time, the latest
edition of the United States Environmental Protection Agency's Best
Management Practices for Lead at Outdoor Shooting Ranges.
FIREARM(S) — A weapon, including but not limited to pistols, rifles, and
shotguns, capable of firing a projectile using an explosive charge as a
propellant.
NRA RANGE SOURCE BOOK — At any given time, the latest edition of The
Range Source Book, as published by the National Rifle Association.
OCCUPIED DWELLING(S) — Any residential structure which is legally
occupied by one or more persons.
PERSON(S) — Any individual, corporation, association, club, firm, or
partnership.
SHOOTING RANGE — Public or private areas designed and improved to
encompass shooting stations or firing lines, Target areas, berms and baffles,
safety fans or shotfall zones, structures, parking areas, and other associated
improvements which are designed for the purpose of providing a place for
the discharge of various types of firearms.
SHOTFALL ZONE — An area within which the shot or pellets contained in a
shotgun shell typically fall.
STRUCTURE(S) — A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground or any other permanent, man-made facilities.
SURFACE DANGER ZONE — Any area that may reasonably expect
projectile impact resulting from direct fire, including misdirected and
accidental discharges, and ricochets from any firearm which takes into
consideration all mitigation efforts as submitted by the applicant and
determined by a certified engineer.
TARGET — Any object or area which is used as the intended recipient of the
projectiles fired from a firearm.
TOWNSHIP — Hopewell Township.
§ 4-6.3. Shooting Range License Procedure. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord.
#583-81; Ord. No. 2017-1675]
a. Submission Requirements. The Shooting Range License application
shall include the following information:
1. Ownership. Information demonstrating that the applicant is the
legal property owner(s) or lessees (or their agent), and shall also
include the contact information for the applicant.
2. Written Description. Written description of the shooting range, its
location and uses abutting the property.
3. Survey. A standard boundary survey made and certified by a
licensed land surveyor in the State of New Jersey, a copy of the
§ 4-6.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-6.3
AO:124
deed for the property and copies of any easements, restrictions or
covenants.
4. Site Plan. A site plan for the entire shooting range to a scale of no
less than one inch equals 100 feet. The site plan shall depict the
property lines for any parcel upon which the shooting range is
located, north arrow, plan scale, date, and ownership information
for the site. The complete layout of the shooting range, including
existing and proposed structures, shooting stations, firing lines,
target areas, shot fall zones, surface danger zone, berms, baffles
and other significant elements of the shooting range. The site plan
shall also depict adjacent streets, access roads, and parking areas
for the shooting range facility. The Township may allow different
site plan scales where it deems appropriate. Designs shall be based
upon the Range Source Book published by the National Rifle
Association (NRA).
5. Occupied Dwelling. A map depicting occupied dwellings within
one-half mile (2,640 feet).
6. Secure Access. Fencing, gates, and other features used by the
shooting range to control access to the facility.
7. Hours of Operation. A note shall be added to the site plan stating
the hours of operation of the shooting range.
8. Shot Containment. The license application shall include a plan
describing how all of the bullets, shot or other projectiles or any
other debris shall be contained on the shooting range. Structures
or devices that shall be installed for shot containment shall be
shown on the site plan. Shooting range rules of operation that
promote shot containment shall be provided when applicable.
9. Noise. A plan showing the projected dBA levels at the property line
and at the 65 dBA level prepared by a professional noise expert. For
existing shooting ranges, dBA levels shall also be provided for any
new firearm with a caliber not currently used or ammunition not
currently used.
10. Firearms. A detailed description of the types and uses of firearms
and ammunition used and proposed to be used at the site.
11. Lead. A plan describing how lead will be managed on the site and
how that plan complies with the EPA lead management guidelines.
12. Warning Signs. Locations where warning signs will be installed, a
detail indicating the size and material of the warning sign, and a
description of how the proposed signage compares to the NRA
Source Book.
§ 4-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-6.3
AO:125
§ 4-6.4. License Standards of Review. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #583-81;
Ord. No. 2017-1675]
13. Maintenance. A maintenance plan for the shooting range and a
description of how the maintenance plan compares with the NRA
Range Source Book.
14. Safety Design. A description of how the proposed shooting range
design compares to the design standards in the NRA Range Source
Book.
15. Insurance. Documentation of the insurance coverage of the
shooting range.
a. The following standards shall be used to review a shooting range
license application. The license shall be issued unless the Township
Committee determines that one or more standards have not been met.
In each instance, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant to
produce sufficient information to warrant a finding that the standards
have been met.
1. Surface Danger Zone. The surface danger zone shall be contained
within the property boundary line. For new shooting ranges, the
surface danger zone is satisfactory when all shooting stations and
targets on a shooting range facility shall be located a minimum of
300 feet from any property line. For existing shooting ranges, no
new shooting stations or targets shall be placed within 300 feet of
the property boundary, unless they can demonstrate that the
surface danger zone will be reduced in size. For existing shooting
stations and targets, the applicant shall demonstrate that the
shooting range will contain the surface danger zone within the
property boundary.
2. Occupied Dwelling. For new shooting ranges, all shooting stations,
targets and firing lines shall be located at least one-half mile (2,640
feet) from any existing occupied dwelling. For existing shooting
ranges located closer than one-half mile from any existing occupied
dwelling, shooting ranges shall not be permitted to relocate or
enlarge said range to further encroach within said setback, unless
they can demonstrate that shot containment will be improved and
the surface danger zone will be reduced in size.
3. Access. Access to the shooting range and shooting range shall be
secured and controlled, with ingress and egress permitted only
during approved operating hours, except for access to perform
routine maintenance or other business that does not involve
discharge of firearms.
4. Hours of Operation. The shooting range shall be allowed to operate
between 8:00 a.m. to one-half hour before sunset Monday through
Saturday and from noon to one-half hour before sunset on Sundays.
§ 4-6.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-6.4
AO:126
§ 4-6.5. Fees. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. No. 2017-1675]
See Chapter 10 Fees and Permits.
5. Shot Containment. The shooting range shall be designed to contain
all of the bullets, shot or other projectiles or any other debris within
the shooting range.
6. Noise. For new shooting ranges, noise levels measured at the
property line where the shooting range is operated or, in the case of
leased land, at the property line of any leased parcel, shall not
exceed 65 dBA when said property line is located within 1,000 feet
of an occupied dwelling. For existing shooting ranges, noise shall
be mitigated where practicable and subject to the limitations of
30-A M.R.S.A.3011, as it may be amended, regarding existing
shooting ranges. Firearm types that have not previously been used
at the shooting range shall not produce noise that exceeds 65 dBA
at the property line.
7. Lead. Shooting range facilities shall provide a plan using best
management practices for lead management which meets or
exceeds EPA lead management guidelines.
8. Warning Signs. Warning signs meeting or exceeding the standards
set forth in the NRA Range Source Book shall be posted at 100-foot
intervals along the entire perimeter of the shooting range and
along the entire perimeter of the property boundary in the same
intervals.
9. Maintenance. Shooting range facilities shall be operated and
maintained in a manner that shall meet or exceed the standards
specified in the NRA Range Source Book.
10. Safety Design. Shooting range facilities shall meet or exceed the
design standards for general and utility type of range specified by
the NRA Range Source Book, unless otherwise specified in this
section.
11. Insurance. The shooting range shall be covered by a minimum
$1,000,000 per occurrence of liability insurance. Such insurance
shall name the Township as an additional insured and shall save
and hold the Township, its elected and appointed officials, and
employees acting within the scope of the their duties harmless from
and against all claims, demands, and causes of action of any kind of
character, including the cost of defense thereof, arising in favor of a
person or group's members or employees or third parties on or its
agents or representatives. The Township shall be notified of any
policy changes or lapses in coverage.
§ 4-6.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-6.6
AO:127
§ 4-6.6. Term. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #583-81; Ord. No. 2017-1675]
Every such license shall remain in force and be valid for one year from the
date of issue thereof. It shall apply only to the person to whom granted, and
shall not be transferable without the consent of the Township Committee.
§ 4-7. TAXICAB.
§ 4-7.1. Definition. [Ord. #7/15/74]
As used in this section:
TAXICAB — Shall mean any passenger vehicle with a capacity of up to six
persons which is for hire to transport persons from place to place.
§ 4-7.2. Application. [Ord. #7/15/74]
This section shall apply to the operation of taxicabs, solely within the
township and from within the township to destinations outside thereof.
§ 4-7.3. Permits and Fees. [Ord. #7/15/74]
§ 4-7.4. Insurance. [Ord. #7/15/74; New]
Each taxicab shall be insured in the following minimum amounts:
§ 4-7.5. Registration and Capacity of Vehicle. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Each vehicle shall be properly registered and shall have a current motor
vehicle inspection sticker. The safe passenger limit shall be determined by
the chief of police and so noted on the vehicle permit.
a. The owners shall obtain a permit for the operation of each taxicab from
the township clerk upon proper certification and the payment of a fee.
The permit shall run from July 1 to June 30 of the following year. All
owners must be over the age of 18 and possess a valid New Jersey
driver's license.
b. Any operator of a duly licensed taxicab shall also be licensed by the
township clerk upon certification and the payment of a fee. The term of
this license shall also run from July 1 to June 30 of the following year. All
owners must be over the age of 18 and posses a valid New Jersey
driver's license.
c. Fees. (See Chapter 10.)
a. Personal injury for one person, $250,000; and for more than one
person, $500,000.
b. Property damage, $50,000.
c. Uninsured motorist coverage in such amounts as shall be fixed by
statute at the time of application.
§ 4-6.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-7.6
AO:128
§ 4-7.6. Operation. [Ord. #7/15/74]
§ 4-7.7. Rates and Charges. [Ord. #7/15/74]
§ 4-8. HAWKERS, PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS.
a. The owner shall provide proper phone service so that contact can be
made by possible customers.
b. No cruising for pickups shall be permitted.
c. The establishment of a taxi stand shall not be permitted within the
township unless specifically authorized by ordinance.
d. Taxicabs shall be maintained in good repair and in a clean and neat
condition.
e. All taxicabs shall be marked on the exterior to properly designate their
service.
f. The driver shall see that the taxicab license and his operator's license
together with the approved rate schedule are displayed in full view of
the passengers.
g. No person or persons other than the passengers being transported for
hire shall be allowed in or about the taxicab while under hire.
h. The driver shall operate the vehicle in a safe and careful manner to
safeguard the safety and comfort of the passengers.
a. The fees charged shall be determined by an approved meter according
to the following schedule:
First mile $0.50
Each additional 1/8 of a
mile
$0.05
Each extra passenger $0.25 per trip
b. The operator may accept fares to designations outside the township on
a lump sum basis if agreed to by both parties prior to the trip.
c. No person carrying a handbag or valise shall be charged extra for the
same. Luggage or parcels in excess of this shall be subject to prior
agreement by both parties.
d. Upon request of passenger, the operator shall furnish a receipt stating
trip origin and destination, date, fee charged and operator's name.
e. The driver shall not be expected to wait over five minutes beyond the
contracted time to pick up the passenger, and may charge $0.25 for
each additional five minutes, after so notifying the prospective
customer.
§ 4-7.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8.1
AO:129
§ 4-8.1. License Required. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #610-82]
No hawker, peddler, solicitor, or canvasser, except any person honorably
discharged from the military services of the United States, possessing a
peddler's license issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 shall operate in the
township without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the
provisions of this section.
§ 4-8.2. Definition. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #610-82]
A HAWKER, PEDDLER, SOLICITOR OR CANVASSER — Is defined as any
individual, whether a resident of the Township of Hopewell or not, traveling
either by foot, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance,
from place-to-place, from house-to-house, or from street-to-street, taking
or attempting to take orders for sales of goods, wares and merchandise,
personal property of any nature whatsoever for present or future delivery,
or for services to be furnished or performed in the present or future,
whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample
of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments
on such sales or not, provided that such definition shall include any person
who, for himself, or for another person, firm or corporation, hires, leases,
uses, or occupies any building, structure, apartment, shop, or any other
place within the township for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and
taking orders for future delivery.
§ 4-8.3. Application. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #610-82]
Application shall be made to the chief of police in writing on a form
promulgated by the chief of police, which shall include the following
information:
a. Name and description of the applicant;
b. Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant;
c. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods or
services to be sold;
d. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship;
e. A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior
to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two
inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant
in a clear and distinguishing manner;
f. The fingerprints of the applicant;
g. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the
nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
§ 4-8.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-8.3
AO:130
§ 4-8.4. Annual Fee Required. [Ord. #7/15/84; Ord. #610-82]
See Chapter 10.
§ 4-8.5. Investigation and Issuance. [Ord. #7/15/84; Ord. #610-82]
§ 4-8.6. Revocation of License. [Ord. #610-82]
h. Payment of a nonrefundable license fee upon submission of the
application.
a. Upon receipt of such application, the chief of police shall cause an
investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be
made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good.
b. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police
shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for
the same, and return the application to the township clerk, who shall
notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no
permit and license will be issued.
c. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of
police shall endorse on the application his approval, execute a license
addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied
for and return said license, along with the application to the township
clerk, who shall deliver to the applicant his license.
d. The township committee shall be notified of the issuance of each
license.
a. Licenses issued under the provisions of this section may be revoked by
the township committee of the Township of Hopewell after notice and
hearing, for any of the following causes:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as a hawker, peddler, solicitor or
canvasser;
3. Any violation of this ordinance;
4. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
or
5. Conducting the business of hawking, peddling, soliciting, or
canvassing in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the
health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
§ 4-8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8.6
AO:131
§ 4-8.7. Appeal. [Ord. #610-82]
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police in the denial of
a license shall have the right of appeal to the township committee. Such
appeal shall be taken by filing with the clerk of the township, within 14 days
after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's
last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for
the appeal. The township committee shall set a time and place for a hearing
on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant
by regular mail at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
The decision and order of the committee on such appeal shall be final and
conclusive.
§ 4-8.8. Expiration of License. [Ord. #610-82]
All licenses issued under the provisions of this section shall expire on the
31st day of December in the year when issued.
§ 4-9. TRANSIENT MERCHANTS OR ITINERANT VENDORS.
§ 4-9.1. License Required. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No transient merchants or itinerant vendor, as defined in N.J.S.A. 45:24-1,
shall operate in the township unless he shall have first been licensed by the
township committee unless excluded by statute.
§ 4-9.2. Application. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Application shall be made to the chief of police in writing and as prescribed
by N.J.S.A. 45:24-1, et seq., and the applicant shall be subject to all the
requirements thereof.
§ 4-9.3. Licensing Authority. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The township committee shall constitute the licensing officer. The township
clerk shall constitute the agent for service.
§ 4-9.4. Fees. [Ord. #7/15/74]
As provided in Chapter 10.
§ 4-10. QUARRY LICENSE.
b. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of such complaint and the
time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at
his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for
hearing.
§ 4-8.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-10.1
AO:132
§ 4-10.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. #430]
By reason of prior use, certain quarrying operations are presently being
conducted within the township. The nature, extent and intensity of such
operations are such as to have progressively impaired the intent and
purpose of the zone plan and the zoning ordinance, depreciated the value
and enjoyment of neighboring properties and caused discomfort and
annoyance to persons living in the environs of such operations. The method
of operation, the absence of rehabilitation practices and the failure to
control the impact of quarrying operations on the environment have
resulted in impairment of the general welfare, hazard to public health and
safety and a reduction in the use and enjoyment of the areas surrounding
such operations.
It is the intent of this section to regulate quarrying operations within the
Township of Hopewell in such manner as to minimize the deleterious effect
of quarrying operations in the areas hereinabove recited.
§ 4-10.2. License. [Ord. #430]
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct the business of quarrying
within the township without first having obtained a license therefor in the
manner hereinafter set forth.
§ 4-10.3. Application for License. [Ord. #430]
An applicant shall annually apply for a quarrying license upon forms
approved by the township clerk. The application shall be signed and verified
by the applicant and shall set forth or be accompanied by a site plan
prepared in accordance with the provisions of H.T. 17:21. It shall be
submitted to the township clerk for reference to the township planning
board. The site plan shall include a site layout, plan of construction,
topographic details and such other information and material as are required
to indicate the full scope of the quarrying operation. In addition to the data
required in H.T. 17:21, the site plan and any supporting plans or documents
shall accurately show, to scale where applicable, the following:
a. The name and address of the applicant, if an individual; the name,
residence and business address of each partner, if a partnership; or if a
corporation, the name, date and State in which it was incorporated,
whether authorized to do business in New Jersey, the names of
directors, principal officers and local representatives, their residence
and business addresses.
b. Information showing the ownership of the tract involved and the
written consent of the owner thereof if the applicant is not the owner.
c. Topographic detail adequate to show existing and proposed grading of
the land.
§ 4-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-10.3
AO:133
d. Plans showing a complete layout of operations, the places on the tract
where quarrying and accessory uses shall be conducted, all entrances
or exits and fences or gates erected or to be erected.
e. Plans for the ongoing rehabilitation of the property in question showing
how it may be restored to a productive use after the mining operations
are completed, in keeping with the master plan adopted for the
township. Such plans shall indicate measures to be taken during the
course of the operation which will rehabilitate the site, and show the
ultimate plans for rehabilitation and shall include the following
provisions:
1. Where topsoil is removed, provision shall be made for the setting
aside and retention on the premises of sufficient arable soil to be
redistributed over the premises in accordance with the site plan.
2. To the extent practicable, the rehabilitation plan shall make
provision for simultaneous excavation and rehabilitation of the site
to the extent that not more than the face of the quarry areas of 50
acres or more each are in operation at one time and that
restoration of one of these areas will be commenced prior to the
opening of a new area of operation. The owner may operate three
faces simultaneously during the years when a new bench is being
constructed. Overburden may be moved outside the quarry zone
provided it is placed pursuant to the approved site plan and further
has the approval of the township administrator.
3. The foregoing provisions shall also apply to the rehabilitation and
restoration of other areas where the quarrying of rock is in process
or has been terminated or where stone or other material is being or
has been removed such as, but not limited to, the case in any road
realignment program.
4. Provision shall be made for performance and thereafter
maintenance guarantees by the applicant sufficient to insure the
completion of the rehabilitation plan or parts or stages thereof.
5. To the extent feasible the specific time limits which planned
reclamation shall be commenced and terminated as to the entire
rehabilitation/reclamation plan or any stage or part thereof.
6. Rehabilitation shall include the creation of berms or mounds to be
constructed, with available overburden material on premises, at
such locations and in such dimensions as will enable the reduction
of noise, dust and visual impact of quarrying operations to the
fullest extent practicable and feasible. All such berms or mounds
shall be planted with suitable plantings to assure reasonable
growth.
7. The rehabilitation plan shall coordinate all rehabilitation phases
with operating phases so that, as far as is possible and practical,
the rehabilitation of any area of the quarry site shall occur during
§ 4-10.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-10.3
AO:134
§ 4-10.4. Action by Planning Board. [Ord. #430; Ord. #561-80]
and immediately after that area's being phased out of active quarry
operations. Such plan shall provide specifically for phase-by-phase
coordination of activities in each of the following categories:
(a) Overburden treatment including initial temporary stockpiling,
creation of berms and spreading.
(b) Anti-erosion strategies, including seeding, soil redistribution
and other techniques.
(c) Planting of seedlings in stabilized areas in accordance with
State recommendations.
(d) Planting final ground cover material where appropriate.
(e) Initial and final planting on all benches.
f. Site plans shall include the nature, location and phasing of a screening
plan to minimize the visibility of quarry operations to neighboring
residents and persons utilizing adjacent roadways. The owner shall,
where feasible, provide effective visual screening of quarry operations.
In those areas of the quarry where fully effective visual screening is not
feasible, the owner shall make every reasonable effort through
screening to minimize the visual impact of quarry operations to
neighboring residents.
The design for such screening/buffer strip shall utilize existing land
contours, artificially created berms, natural vegetation on site and plant
material not presently on site, all of the above to be supplied and/or
maintained by the owner. Elements of the screening/buffer strip design
to be submitted by owner shall be as follows:
1. In those areas where natural contours of the land provide effective
visual screening, the design shall generally describe existing plant
material and, if necessary, indicate methods of preventing erosion
through planting of ground cover material.
2. In those areas where existing land contours do not in themselves
provide adequate screening, the design shall indicate the use of
berms or plantings to provide effective visual screening, or, where
effective visual screening is not feasible, to minimize the visual
impact of quarry operations.
The owner shall adequately maintain the screening/buffer strip at all
times as a continuing obligation.
Where required all planting shall be completed within two years from
the date of approval of license application; provided, however, that if the
planning board specifically approves, planting may be completed later than
two years from the date of license application, but not later than one year
from time ground is ready for planting by having stabilized.
§ 4-10.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-10.4
AO:135
a. Recommend and Advise. The planning board shall review the site plan
and such other data as is submitted therewith and thereafter, within 60
days, recommend the grant or denial of the license to the township
committee. The planning board shall consult with the Shade Tree
Advisory Committee and the township engineer, and shall have full
power and authority to make such other investigations as shall be
pertinent to the preparation of its recommendation.
b. Procedure and Recommendation.
1. In the event that the planning board shall recommend the grant of
the license in accordance with the site plan and other data
submitted by the applicant, the township engineer shall calculate
the estimated cost of the improvements based on current
competitive prices for similar work in the area. If the township
committee has approved the grant of a license, the township clerk
shall upon the filing of performance and maintenance guarantees in
the amount as determined by the township engineer and upon the
execution of a written agreement with the township to perform the
rehabilitation work and maintenance required by the approved site
plan for the ensuing year, and upon payment of a license fee, issue
the license forthwith.
2. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to preclude the
applicant's changing the site plan or binding itself to conform to the
specific recommendations of the planning board and in the event of
such conforming change or guarantee and approval by the
township committee, the township clerk shall issue the license
forthwith.
3. As a condition of issuance or renewal of any license, the applicant
shall file appropriate certificates of insurance to establish the
existence of a general liability insurance policy issued by a
company licensed to do business in New Jersey, in amounts of
$2,000,000 for personal injury, and $2,000,000 for property
damage. Such policy shall be maintained for the period of the
license and any renewal thereof.
c. Renewal of License. Upon application for renewal the applicant shall
not be required to resubmit a site plan but shall in writing:
1. Indicate only those changes or differences which have taken place
or occurred since its last application.
2. Set forth those changes in performance or maintenance guarantees
required by actual performance or changed conditions. No changes
shall be made to the operating plans, rehabilitation plans or other
operations set forth in previously approved licenses unless the
planning board specifically approves such changes.
3. Set forth fully all rehabilitation and similar operations which have
been completed during the past year.
§ 4-10.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-10.4
AO:136
§ 4-10.5. Fees. [Ord. #430]
As in Chapter 10.
§ 4-10.6. Quarrying Operation. [Ord. #430]
4. File performance and maintenance bonds in an amount determined
by the township administrator to be sufficient to cover the cost of
the rehabilitation work required by the initially approved site plan,
as officially amended from time to time, to be performed during the
ensuing year and maintenance of improvements during said year.
In addition to filing performance and maintenance bonds, the
applicant for renewal shall annually enter into a written agreement
with the township to perform the rehabilitation work and
maintenance required by the approved site plan for the ensuing
year.
5. In the event of a dispute as to the amount of the performance and
maintenance bonds or the rehabilitation work and maintenance
required by the approved site plan for the ensuing year, nothing
herein shall be construed to limit the right of the applicant to
contest by legal proceedings any determinations made by the
township administrator or other municipal agency.
6. Be subject in all other respects to the procedure set forth above.
d. Action by Township Committee.
1. In the event the planning board shall recommend a denial of the
grant of a license, the township clerk shall inform the township
committee and shall set the matter down for an advertised public
hearing within 60 days of the date of the negative recommendation,
which hearing shall be held by the township committee.
2. The applicant upon notice of the date of hearing, shall notice all
persons within 200 feet of the quarry zone within the time and the
manner provided by H.T. Section 17:13-1.
3. The township committee shall, upon such hearing, give the
applicant an opportunity to be heard and shall determine the
matter no later than at its next regular meeting. In the event that
the township committee shall direct the issuance of a license or
impose other or materially different conditions upon its grant than
appear in the recommendations of the planning board, it shall do so
only upon the vote of a majority of its full membership.
a. The quarry operator shall fully and completely carry out the operations
and procedures set forth in its subsisting site plan and supporting data.
b. Off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee on the
maximum work shift plus one parking space per visitor for the
maximum number of visitors expected at any one time, however, the
§ 4-10.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-10.6
AO:137
latter requirement shall in no case be less than 10 visitor parking
spaces.
c. The roads or rights-of-way within the quarry premises which do not
have permanent macadam surfaces shall be treated with road oil as is
determined to be necessary by the township engineer. Those roads or
rights-of-way which are permanently paved shall be wetted down
periodically to sufficiently control dust or spillage.
d. All explosives must be handled strictly in accordance with State
statutes and regulations.
e. Processing areas shall be maintained in the safest practicable condition
at all times. In no case shall permitted processing menace the physical
safety of persons or property on public streets or adjoining properties.
f. A fence shall be erected around the entire quarry area to be located at
least 50 feet from the quarry boundary line and at least 50 feet from any
excavation contained within such fence. This fence shall be of woven
wire or the chain link type at least six feet high and any entrance or exit
through the fence shall be by means of gates of equal height. Such
gates shall be locked shut when not in actual use. This fence shall have
three strands of barbed wire placed on top of same. In locating the
fence the owner shall give due regard to available screening and to
minimizing disturbance of plantings and may apply for a waiver from
the planning board of the 50 feet setbacks if necessary to meet these
objectives.
Construction of fence may be staged over a period not exceeding two
years from date of approval of application for license.
g. Land clearing and the removal of overburden shall not proceed more
than 200 feet in advance of the quarry face. Provision shall be made for
the disposal of any waste products resulting from any of the mining
operations on the premises thereof and a landfill cover method shall be
employed periodically to accomplish that result.
h. Where conveyors discharge material the average size of which is less
than 3/8 of an inch in diameter onto stockpiles of such materials, the
following shall be adhered to:
1. The free fall of the material being stockpiled from the conveyor to
the highest point of the stockpile shall not exceed a distance of 10
feet.
2. A high pressure mist water spray shall be directed on the material
as it falls from the conveyor to the stockpile so as to reduce
possibilities of dust.
3. Where screenings are stockpiled, same shall be enclosed within a
building or structure. For purposes of this subparagraph,
stockpiling shall mean piles of screening in excess of 30 feet in
§ 4-10.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-10.6
AO:138
height. Screenings which are not stockpiled shall be wetted down
as required by the township administrator to reduce possibilities of
dust or particles.
4. In the event other and equally effective methods of dust reduction
can be employed in conveyor operations, they may be used by the
licensee provided the same are approved in writing by the township
administrator.
i. All quarry operations, principal and accessory, shall comply with all
applicable requirements of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code,
New Jersey Administrative Code, Title 7, Chapter 27 and the New
Jersey Noise Pollution Code, Title 7, Chapter 29, promulgated by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. The township
may enforce the State standards, rules and regulations as they may be
promulgated.
j. The owner shall supply and install appropriate equipment for and
seismographic readings shall be taken by authorized quarry personnel
of each primary blast of a charge of 500 pounds or greater of
explosives. These readings shall be taken on a pad designated and
approved by the township administrator.
k. The township clerk shall be notified 24 hours in advance of any
scheduled blasting time and the scheduled blast reconfirmed one hour
in advance of actual blasting time. After each blast a copy of the
seismography report shall be forwarded to the township clerk within 10
days or, if not then received, contemporaneous with its forwarding to
designated State authorities. The report shall give:
1. Copy of the seismic reading, kind of blasting cap, distribution of
instantaneous or short period delay blasting caps or both, delay
interval used and the order of firing.
2. Maximum amount of explosives per delay.
3. Weather conditions including the direction and approximate
velocity of wind, atmospheric temperature, relative humidity and
cloud conditions.
4. Date and time of firing blast.
5. Name of the responsible person in charge of loading and firing, and
blasting permit number.
6. Name and location of quarry or construction site.
7. Signature of blaster making the report.
l. All quarries shall work the face by a multiple bench method with the
height of the face not exceeding 50 feet, provided that in circumstances
where the surface topography influences the height of the uppermost
bench, the height shall not exceed 65 feet unless the same has been
§ 4-10.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-10.6
AO:139
§ 4-10.7. Inspections. [Ord. #430]
validly waived by the Bureau of Engineering and Safety or other
designated State authority.
m. Hours of Operation.
1. Quarrying and related activities are prohibited on Sundays; New
Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day and Christmas Day.
2. Quarrying operations are restricted to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.; provided however, that an asphalt or concrete plant may
be warmed at 6:30 a.m.
3. Anything to the contrary herein notwithstanding, where a
particular job requires deliveries earlier than 7:30 a.m. or later
than 5:30 p.m. or when stone must be processed in order to keep
pace with demand, an asphalt or concrete plant may be warmed up
at 6:00 a.m. and commence operation at 6:30 a.m., quarry
operations, (other than crushing, blasting and stripping) may
commence at 6:30 a.m. and quarry operations (other than blasting
and stripping) may continue until 7:00 p.m. upon notification to the
township administrator of the circumstances requiring such hours
of operation. When required, the quarry operator shall provide in
advance satisfactory written justification of the existence of the
circumstances requiring earlier or later hours of operation.
4. Igniting of explosives commonly known as blasting is restricted to
the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and stripping is restricted to the
hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
5. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prevent the
emergency maintenance of equipment.
a. The township administrator, the zoning officer or the designees of
either such official shall have the right to enter upon quarry premises at
any time for the purpose of making inspections upon reasonable notice
and to determine the conditions of safety and compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Whenever such inspections are conducted
during the actual operation of the quarry, it shall be the duty of the
operations manager or such other person as is in charge of operations
at the site to stop such operations as may hinder the inspection or
hazard the person making the same. It shall further be the duty of the
operations manager or such other person as is in charge of operations
at the site to cooperate fully with such person as is making or
conducting any inspection.
b. The township administrator or his designee shall, when directed by the
township committee, periodically inspect the quarrying operations and
report in writing to the township committee respecting compliance with
this section and rehabilitation progress on the site.
§ 4-10.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-10.8
AO:140
§ 4-10.8. Revocation or Suspension of License. [Ord. #430]
§ 4-10.9. Penalties. [Ord. #430]
§ 4-10.10. Limitations on Applicability. [Ord. #430]
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to enable new or additional
quarrying uses or operations within the township, nor to validate such uses
as may have been abandoned, nor to permit the extension of any existing
prior nonconforming use, either directly or by implication.
a. Upon complaint of the township administrator, the chief of police or the
zoning officer, the township committee may revoke or suspend any
license issued pursuant to this section. No suspension or revocation
shall be ordered except upon 10 days' notice of the complaint to the
licensee and an opportunity to be heard. Suspensions or revocation
shall only be ordered after a finding by the township committee that:
1. The licensee is in violation of one or more provisions of this section,
or
2. A performance or maintenance guarantee has lapsed or is void, or
3. The conduct of the quarrying operation is such as to materially
impair the health, safely or welfare of persons on the site or
persons in the areas immediately surrounding the quarrying
operations, or
4. Quarrying operations are being so conducted as to cause material
physical damage to properties or structures beyond the boundaries
of the licensee's premises.
b. The township committee shall have the power, in addition to the
foregoing, to stay or relieve from any suspension or revocation in the
event that the license hearing shall have remedied the offending
operation or ceased the violation within a stipulated period of time after
hearing and order.
a. Any operator of a quarry or any agent, servant or employee of such
operator or any person directly or indirectly connected with a quarrying
operation who shall violate any provision of this ordinance, shall upon
conviction be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 3, section 3-1, and
each day such violation continues, shall be determined a separate
offense. Further, the zoning officer of the township or any other
interested party as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, may, in addition to the
other remedies provided in this section, institute appropriate actions or
proceedings to restrain, correct or abate violations of this section.
b. The penalties set forth in paragraph a above shall be in addition to any
suspension or revocation which may be imposed pursuant to subsection
4-11.8.
§ 4-10.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-11
AO:141
§ 4-11. GAMES OF CHANCE.
§ 4-11.1. Games of Chance on Sunday.
The township committee may, at its option, authorize the issuance of a
license to conduct a raffle on a Sunday.
§ 4-11.2. Raffle and Bingo Licensing. [Ord. #2016-1620]
The Municipal Clerk is hereby authorized and delegated the authority to
approve the granting of raffle and bingo licenses to be held in the Township
of Hopewell.
§ 4-12. BALLOONING.
§ 4-12.1. License Required. [Ord. #602-81]
A license must be obtained for the take-off, landing, or other operation of a
balloon within the township. Such license shall be issued for a period of one
year.
§ 4-12.2. Definitions. [Ord. #602-81]
The following words and terms, when used in this section shall have the
stated meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
a. ACCIDENT – Shall mean any damage or injury resulting from the
operation of a balloon or activities held in connection with ballooning;
to include any personal injuries and any property damage in excess of
$25, caused by contact with the balloon, or materials released, dropped
or thrown from the balloon; and damages caused by domestic animals
frightened or alarmed by the balloon either to themselves or other
animals, persons or property.
b. BALLOON – Shall mean an aircraft whose lift is derived from the
buoyancy of hot air or certain gases and is not engine driven.
c. BALLOONING – Shall mean the preparation, flight and recovery of
balloons, operated in a manned, free-flight, or moored or tethered
condition.
d. BALLOONIST – Shall mean an individual operating a manned, freeflight
or moored or tethered balloon.
e. BALLOONPORT or BALLOONSPOT – Shall mean any area of land, or
water, licensed for the take-off of a manned, free-flight balloon used for
commercial purposes.
f. COMMERCIAL BALLOONIST – Shall mean any balloonist operating for
commercial purposes, including but not limited to carrying people,
goods or materials, banners, advertising material with the expectation
of making a profit therefrom by having charged fees for the service.
§ 4-11 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-12.2
AO:142
§ 4-12.3. Application. [Ord. #602-81]
A completed application for such license and any renewal thereof, shall
be submitted on an approved form to the township clerk at least 10 days
prior to the next regular meeting of the township committee at which
the applicant wishes the application to be considered. The application
shall include the following, either within the body of that form or as an
attachment thereof:
g. DAMAGE – Shall mean any and all injury to persons, livestock, and/or
damage to property causing a loss in value or reduction in value of
cultivated fields, or damage to crops or seeded fields, standing grain
fields, so as to kill or injure the plantings, to destroy the product of the
plant, to hamper cultivation of the crop or harvest of the crop or to so
injure the commercial planting so as to reduce its yield to the farmer or
farm owner, and thereby reduce its value.
h. FREE FLIGHT – Shall mean the act of flying a manned balloon which is
not tethered to the ground.
i. MOORED OR TETHERED FLIGHT – Shall mean the act of operating a
balloon secured to the ground by sufficient and suitable means to
permit vertical movements where no intention of launch into free-flight
exists. A tethered balloon is a potential free balloon.
j. NONCOMMERCIAL TAKE-OFF SITE – Shall mean any area of land or
water of dimensions not less than required minimums for a balloonspot
approved by the municipal construction official for the take-off of
manned, free-flight or manned or tethered balloons used in private
noncommercial operation.
k. SPORTS BALLOONIST – Shall mean any balloonist operating for sport
purposes, but not as a commercial venture or for hire.
a. A copy of the current valid balloon pilot's license which was obtained in
accordance with Federal regulations. The pilot's license must be
continued in effect during the period of the license issued under this
section. Should the balloon pilot fail to maintain a valid balloon pilot's
license, or should such license be revoked, the permit issued under this
section shall be returned to the township clerk for cancellation.
b. The application shall include the following:
1. Commercial balloonists and/or commercial operations:
(a) Takeoffs: Identification and location of the balloonport(s) or
balloonspot(s) licensed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 16:54-6.1
which will be used by the balloonist for the purpose of
ascending from the ground.
(b) Landings: Identification, location and written approval
received from the owner(s) and/or lessee(s) of the properties
§ 4-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-12.3
AO:143
§ 4-12.4. Rules of Construction. [Ord. #602-81]
§ 4-12.5. (Reserved) [Ord. #602-81]
which will be used by the balloonist for the purpose of
descending upon the ground.
2. Sports balloonists or activities:
(a) Takeoffs: Identification, location and written approval received
from the owner(s) and/or lessee(s) of the properties which will
be used by the balloonist for the purpose of ascending from the
ground.
(b) Landings: Identification, location and written approval
received from the owner(s) and/or lessee(s) of the properties
which will be used by the balloonist for the purpose of
descending upon the ground.
c. A declaration that no person shall board or disembark from a balloon
nor shall there be any loading or unloading of any equipment, cargo, or
other material or supplies from a balloon which is being operated as or
for the purposes of: (1) Commercial balloonist and/or commercial
operations; while on property not licensed as a balloonport or
balloonspot in accordance with N.J.A.C. 16:54-6.1; (2) Sports balloonists
or activities; while a property not licensed as a balloonport/balloonspot
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 16:54-6.1, unless previous written approval
for take-off or landing has been received from the owner and/or lessee
of the property which will be used by the balloonist, and which approval
has been filed as part of the application for license under subsection
4-12.1.
d. A certificate of insurance evidencing compliance with subsection
4-12.19 of this section and which recites the requirement that if the
policies of insurance coverage are cancelled or changed in such manner
as to affect the certificate, the insurance carrier will notify the township
of any such change or cancellation 10 days in advance of the date
wherein such cancellation or material change becomes effective.
a. The provisions of this section pertaining to the regulation of balloon
operations shall be construed to effectuate the purpose of securing the
property rights, health and safety of persons hereby affected.
b. If any portion, subparagraph or provision of this section shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative in whole or in
part, by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion, subparagraph
or provision shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, be enforced and effectuated, and no such determination
shall be deemed to invalidate or make ineffectual the remaining
provisions of the portion, subparagraph or provision of the ordinance.
§ 4-12.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-12.6
AO:144
§ 4-12.6. Violations. [Ord. #602-81]
The following shall be considered as in violation of this section:
§ 4-12.7. Penalties. [Ord. #602-81]
Penalties for violations of this section shall be those provided under Chapter
3, section 3-1 of the Township of Hopewell Ordinances.
§ 4-12.8. Commercial Balloonist. [Ord. #602-81]
A commercial balloonist shall submit to the township clerk a description
(photograph) and Federal registration number of each balloon to be used by
that operator.
§ 4-12.9. Sports Balloonist. [Ord. #602-81]
A sports balloonist shall submit to the township clerk a description
(photograph) and Federal registration number of each balloon to be used by
that operator.
§ 4-12.10. Balloonport, Balloonspot. [Ord. #602-81]
No license shall be issued under this section which recites the intended
use of any balloonport, balloonspot for take-off and/or landing unless such
balloonport, balloonspot has been approved by the municipal construction
official of the Township of Hopewell as meeting the requirements set forth
in N.J.A.C. 16:54-6.4(A.I.)ii.
§ 4-12.11. Take-off. [Ord. #602-81]
It shall be unlawful for any commercial balloonist to take off from any
location, other than a balloonport or balloonspot duly licensed by the State
of New Jersey, Department of Transportation, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
16:54-6.1 et seq.
It shall be unlawful for any sports balloonist to take off from any site other
than a balloonport, balloonspot or noncommercial take-off site.
§ 4-12.12. Landings. [Ord. #602-81]
It shall be unlawful for any balloonist to land upon the lands, or waters, of
another or to allow persons to board or disembark for transfer purposes
a. Failure to obtain a license in accordance with this section.
b. Operations other than as prescribed in subsection 4-12.10 et seq.
c. Violating, and/or failing to comply with any terms and/or conditions of
this section, the license obtained hereunder or the rules and
regulations of the State of New Jersey set forth in N.J.A.C. 16:54-6.1.
§ 4-12.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-12.12
AO:145
unless such balloonist has previously obtained the specific assent and
written approval of the landowner and/or lessee.
This requirement shall not apply in cases of forced landings, under
subsection 4-12.15.
§ 4-12.13. Time of Operation. [Ord. #602-81]
No balloon shall be operated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 4-12.14. Height and Distance of Operation. [Ord. #602-81]
No balloon shall be operated below 500 feet above the ground, except
upon landing and take-off. No balloon shall take-off or land within 500 feet
(measured horizontally) of residential structures, outbuildings, etc.
§ 4-12.15. Forced Landings. [Ord. #602-81]
In cases of forced landings, wherein exists a condition provoking imminent
peril, the operator must report the emergency landing to the township
police department. The aircraft must remain on the site and may not take off
or be removed until arrival and full investigation by the police department
and such State officials as are required in accordance with State of New
Jersey regulations.
Landing for refueling and transfer of passengers is not considered a forced
landing, but is subject to the restrictions of subsections 4-12.11 and
4-12.12.
§ 4-12.16. Noise. [Ord. #602-81]
Unnecessary noise by operators, or passengers, of the balloons is
prohibited.
§ 4-12.17. Requirements. [Ord. #602-81]
The operator must maintain a record or log of each flight which provides
the following minimum information:
a. Number and identity of crew and passengers.
b. Duration of flight.
c. Location and time of take-off.
d. Location and time of landing.
e. Any malfunction of or damage to balloon and its equipment.
f. Any injury to persons or damage to property caused by the operation of
the balloon.
§ 4-12.12 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-12.18
AO:146
§ 4-12.18. Revocation of License. [Ord. #602-81]
Any license granted by the township under this section may be revoked by
the township committee for violation of any provision of this section or any
other township ordinance upon notice to the licensee.
§ 4-12.19. Insurance. [Ord. #602-81]
§ 4-12.20. Identification. [Ord. #602-81]
The operator of a balloon shall not fail to properly identify himself upon
request.
§ 4-12.21. Fees. [Ord. #602-81]
As provided in Chapter 10.
§ 4-13. LANDSCAPER REGISTRATION.
a. Insurance Required. Any person who operates, or causes to be
operated, a balloon, including takeoffs and landings from or to any point
in the township, shall maintain insurance against injury to persons and
damage to property caused by the operation of that balloon or any act
or omission of the operator, his agents or employees in the course of
that operation. The insurance shall protect against all hazards likely to
arise in connection with the operation of the balloon and shall provide
public liability and property damage coverage, a single limit not less
than $500,000. The insurance shall be issued by a company licensed to
do business in New Jersey and shall be maintained or otherwise remain
in force for the period of the license and any renewal thereof.
b. Certificate of Insurance. The operator shall cause the insurance carrier
to issue a certificate of insurance to the township indicating the types
and amounts of coverage in force and the expiration dates of such
policies.
c. An appropriate letter providing details of the insurance coverage or an
insurance identification card shall at all times be in the possession of
the operator of any balloon operated from a balloonport or balloonspot
or above land in the township. A letter or identification card shall
include the name and address of the insurance company, amount and
dates of coverage, and names and registration numbers and
descriptions of balloons insured.
d. The operator of a balloon shall exhibit the insurance document
prescribed in paragraph c above when requested to do so by any police
officer, or magistrate, while in the performance of the duty of their
office.
§ 4-12.18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-13.1
AO:147
§ 4-13.1. Purpose. [Ord. #11-1538, § 1]
The purpose of this section, requiring landscaper registration, is to ensure
that persons engaged in landscaping for hire in the township are cognizant
of the township's regulations concerning yard waste. Nothing in this
chapter shall relieve any owner, lessee or tenant of his or her responsibility
to comply with the requirements of the township's yard waste program set
forth herein.
§ 4-13.2. Definitions. [Ord. #11-1538, § 1]
As used in this section the following words and phrases shall have the
following meaning, unless otherwise noted:
FOR HIRE — Shall mean to demand and/or accept payment or
compensation for completion of services.
HEDGES, TREES AND SHRUBS — Shall have the same meaning as yard
waste as set forth in Section 3-20 of this code.
LANDSCAPE AND LANDSCAPING — Shall mean to be in the business,
occupation or trade of adorning or improving any property or portion of
property by trimming or cutting grass or shrubs; by planting, installing or
removing leaves, branches, logs, grass, flowers, mulch, hedges or shrubs;
or by planting or installing trees. As used in this section, landscape and
landscaping shall also refer to solicitation of the above-referenced services.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual or entity whose existence is
recognized by law, including, but not limited to, any partnership,
corporation (for-profit, nonprofit, or municipal and its agencies), firm,
association, or any combination of the foregoing.
§ 4-13.3. Registration. [Ord. #11-1538, § 1]
No person shall landscape or engage in any landscaping on any public or
private property within the township, for hire, without first completing an
application to register with the superintendent of public works.
a. At the time of registration, applicants shall sign an acknowledgment
that they have received a copy of and will comply with the provisions of
the township's ordinance regulating its yard waste program.
b. Every registration shall be issued and renewed on an annual basis,
effective March 1 of each year, upon payment of an annual fee to the
township in the amount set forth in Chapter 10 of the Revised General
Ordinances of Hopewell Township.
c. No registration shall be required of any owner, lessee or tenant of real
property who shall personally perform activities otherwise requiring a
registration; except that all such work must otherwise comply with the
township's ordinance.
§ 4-13.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 4-13.4
AO:148
§ 4-13.4. Suspension or Revocation of Registration. [Ord. #11-1538,
§ 1]
§ 4-13.5. Off-Site Disposal and Composting Encouraged. [Ord.
#11-1538, § 1]
Persons registered are encouraged, but not required, to either compost yard
waste themselves in accordance with applicable laws, or bring yard waste
to an ecological facility (facility) that may be designated by the township for
disposal. At the time of taking yard waste to a specific facility for disposal,
such persons shall provide their name and registration number, along with
the resident's name, address and signature, to the facility on forms for such
purpose available in the office of the superintendent of public works.
§ 4-13.6. Exemption of Home Improvement Contractors; Additional
Exemptions. [Ord. #11-1538, § 1]
§ 4-13.7. Penalties. [Ord. #11-1538, § 1]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in Chapter 3
Law Enforcement Regulations of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Hopewell, except that no person found to be in violation of the
provisions of this section shall be subject to imprisonment.
Chapter 5
a. The township committee may, upon recommendation of the township
engineer or township public works director or any designee, after
notice and an opportunity for a hearing, suspend or revoke any
registration for violation of law or related township ordinances, or for
good cause, which is shown to be detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare. When the township engineer or township public
works director or any designee, has reasonable cause or belief that an
emergency affecting the public health, safety or welfare so requires,
said official may temporarily suspend any registration for a period not
to exceed two weeks or until the township committee can be convened
to consider said suspension.
b. The township makes no guarantee or representation regarding the
fitness, knowledge or qualification of any person that is registered by
the township to engage in landscaping for hire.
a. Home improvement contractors registered pursuant to N.J.A.C.
13:45-17.1 et seq. on or after December 31, 2005, shall not be required
to register with the township as set forth in this section.
b. Persons who are specifically exempt from the registration requirements
of N.J.A.C. 13:45A-17.1 et seq. under N.J.A.C. 13:45A-17.4 on or after
December 31, 2005, shall not be required to register with the Township
as set forth in this section.
§ 4-13.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-13.7
AO:149
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 5-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #03-1277 § 1; Ord.
#19-1703]
As used in this chapter:
a. ALTERED – Shall mean rendered permanently incapable of
reproduction through neuter, spay, or other process as certified by a
licensed veterinarian.
b. ANIMAL – For the purpose of this chapter shall mean dog, cat, or other
domesticated species.
c. ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY – Shall mean any person or agency
designated or certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
d. CAT – Shall mean any member of the domestic feline species; male,
female, or altered.
e. CAT OF REGISTERING AGE – Shall mean any cat which has attained
the age of three months.
f. CATTERY – Shall mean any room or group of rooms, cage, or exhibition
pen, not part of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
g. CHICKEN TRACTOR – Is defined as a mobile cage or coop that fully
encloses the chickens, but which is bottomless to allow chickens direct
access to the ground.
h. DOG – Shall mean any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
i. DOG OF LICENSING AGE – Shall mean any dog which has attained the
age of three months except where a delay is ordered due to a medical
condition. A written certificate of exception must be issued by a
practicing veterinarian; it must state the condition(s) or reasons why in
their professional opinion the exception is recommended and specifying
the date when vaccination may be given.
j. DOMESTIC ANIMAL – Shall mean an animal that has been tamed and
kept by humans as a work animal, food source, or pet, especially a
member of those species that have, through selective breeding, become
notably different from their wild ancestors.
k. KENNEL – Shall mean any establishment where the business of
boarding or selling dogs/cats or breeding dogs/cats for sale is carried
on, except a pet shop.
l. OWNER – When applied to the proprietorship of a domestic animal shall
include every person having a right of property (or custody) in such
domestic animal and every person who has such domestic animal in his/
§ 4-13.7 HOPEWELL CODE § 5-1
AO:150
§ 5-2. PET LICENSURE.
§ 5-2.1. Dog License Required.
No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog of licensing age, within
the township, without first obtaining a license therefor, to be issued by
the board of health upon application by the owner and payment of the
prescribed fee, and no person shall keep, harbor or maintain the dog in the
township except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
her keeping, or who intentionally harbors or maintains a domestic
animal.
m. PERSON – Shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership,
organization or institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
n. PET – A domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
o. PET SHOP – Shall mean any room, group of rooms, cage or exhibition
bin, not part of a kennel, where dogs/cats for sale are kept or displayed.
p. POUND – Shall mean an establishment for the confinement of dogs/cats
seized either under the provisions of the chapter or otherwise.
q. REGISTERING AUTHORITY – Shall mean the agency or department of
the Township of Hopewell or any designated representative thereof
charged with administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits
and licenses under the provisions of this chapter.
r. RUN AT LARGE – Shall mean and include the running or standing of any
domestic animal on any street or other public place or any private
property where permission for the animal to be has not been granted,
and where the animal is unattended and not under the immediate
control of some responsible person able to control the animal.
s. SHELTER – Shall mean any establishment where domestic animals are
received, housed and distributed.
t. WORKING FARM – Shall mean any parcel of five acres or more which is
actively devoted to agricultural use and which supports an owner,
manager, or operator who is engaged in the growing, raising and
producing of farm products as a primary occupation.
a. New Dogs. The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of
any dog which attains licensing age shall make application for license
and registration tag for such dog and shall pay the necessary fee for the
same within 20 days after such acquisition or age attainment. New
residents of the township shall procure the license tag within 60 days of
establishing residence.
b. Rabies Vaccination. No license shall be issued unless the application is
accompanied by a certificate issued by a veterinarian or municipal
clinic, which certificate shall certify that the dog is immunized against
§ 5-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-2.1
AO:151
§ 5-2.2. Cat License Required. [Ord. #91-884; Ord. #93-941; Ord.
#03-1277; Ord. #08-1429; Ord. #19-1703]
No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any cat of licensing age, within
the township, without first obtaining a license therefor, to be issued by
the board of health upon application by the owner and payment of the
prescribed fee, and no person shall keep, harbor or maintain the cat in
the township except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The
provisions of this subsection do not apply to cats held in a cattery, or
those held by a State or Federal licensed research facility, or a veterinary
establishment where cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical,
surgical, or other treatments, or licensed animal shelters, pounds, kennels,
or pet shops.
the disease of rabies and the duration of immunity is compliant with
current New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services
regulations or guidelines. Vaccination may be delayed due to a medical
condition. A practicing veterinarian must issue a written certificate of
exception. It must state the condition(s) or reasons why the exception
is recommended and specify the date when vaccination may be given.
c. Fees and Renewal. Persons applying for the license and registration tag
or renewal thereof shall pay an annual fee as established in Chapter 10.
The licenses, registration tags and renewals shall expire annually on
January 31. The failure of an owner to renew on or before January 31
shall cause the owner to pay a late registration fee as established in
subsection 10-4.1b.
d. Registration Tag. Any person who shall own, harbor or maintain a dog
of licensing age shall in the month of January of each year or upon
acquisition thereof procure from the board of health or such other
official as may hereafter be designated by resolution of the township
committee, a dog license and official metal registration tag for each
such dog owned, maintained, or harbored and shall place upon each
such dog a collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened
thereto.
e. Changing Tags Prohibited. No person shall attach a registration tag to a
dog for which it was not issued.
a. New Cats. The owner of any newly acquired cat of licensing age or of
any cat which attains licensing age shall make application for license
and registration tag for such cat and shall pay the necessary fee for the
same within 20 days after such acquisition or age attainment. New
residents of the township shall procure the license tag within 60 days of
establishing residence.
b. Rabies Vaccination. No license shall be issued unless the application is
accompanied by a certificate issued by a veterinarian or municipal
clinic, which certificate shall certify that the cat is immunized against
the disease of rabies and the duration of immunity is compliant with
§ 5-2.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 5-2.2
AO:152
§ 5-3. PET REGULATIONS.
§ 5-3.1. General Prohibitions. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #03-1277; Ord.
BOH:2004-2; Ord. #19-1703]
No person owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a domestic animal
shall permit, suffer or allow their pet to:
current New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services
regulations or guidelines. Vaccination may be delayed due to a medical
condition. A practicing veterinarian must issue a written certificate of
exception. It must state the condition(s) or reasons why the exception
is recommended and specify the date when vaccination may be given.
c. Fees and Renewal. Persons applying for the license and registration tag
or renewal thereof shall pay an annual fee as established in Chapter 10.
The licenses, registration tags and renewals shall expire annually on
January 31. The failure of an owner to renew on or before January 31
shall cause the owner to pay a late registration fee as established in
subsection 10-4.8c.
d. Registration Tag. Any person who shall own, harbor or maintain a cat of
licensing age shall in the month of January of each year or upon
acquisition thereof procure from the board of health or such other
official as may hereafter be designated by resolution of the township
committee, a cat license and official metal registration tag for each
such cat owned, maintained, or harbored and shall place upon each
such cat a collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened
thereto.
e. Changing Tags Prohibited. No person shall attach a registration tag to a
cat for which it was not issued.
a. Run at large upon any of the public streets, or upon any private
property, except upon premises where permission has been given by the
owner.
b. All dogs, while off the premises of the owner or other authorized
location, shall be accompanied by a responsible person able to control
the animal and be securely confined and controlled by an adequate
leash not more than six feet long.
c. Bark, cry, whine, howl or otherwise disturb the peace or quiet of the
neighborhood or sleep of any person for any unreasonable length of
time; any domestic animal that frequently, or for continued duration,
makes sounds that create a noise disturbance across a residential
property line. For the purpose of this provision, a noise disturbance
from a pet animal shall be defined as that created by a pet animal
making noise continually for 10 minutes or intermittently for 30
minutes unless provoked.
§ 5-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-3.1
AO:153
§ 5-3.2. Animal Bites. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #19-1703]
Whenever a human is bitten by a domestic animal, the following
requirements shall be met:
§ 5-3.3. Removal of Pet Waste on Public or Private Lands. [Ord.
#BH: 2004-2; Ord. #19-1703]
To protect the health, safety and welfare of all those frequenting this
township, by preventing the needless health hazards, nuisances and surface
d. Cause any injury to any persons, domestic animals, or cause continued
disturbance to any person.
e. Allow a domestic animal to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery,
flowers, grounds or other property or run through or cross any
cultivated gardens or fields.
f. Be or become a public nuisance or to create a condition hazardous to
safety and health.
g. The owner of a female dog in season shall confine such dog in a kennel
or other enclosure in such manner as to prevent its being a
neighborhood annoyance and so as to isolate such dog from access by
male dogs.
h. Any cat shall be considered a public nuisance if it has no owner or
custodian; if it has no place of care, or shelter; or if it trespasses upon
or damages either private or public property; or if it bites, scratches or
harms persons within the township.
i. No residential property shall contain, keep, harbor or maintain for the
purpose of breeding, training or sale, more than four dogs of licensing
age at one time within the limits of the township except in a licensed
kennel or pet shop, excepting dogs that are held and confined in a
shelter or pound under the provisions of this chapter. Exceptions to this
provision may be granted in accordance with the use variance
procedures set forth in Chapter 17.
a. Whenever any person is bitten by a domestic animal, the owner or
person in charge of the animal shall immediately secure the same and
keep it alive and confined until receipt of a notice or order from the
local board of health. The owner or person in charge of the animal shall
make a report to the local board of health or to the police department
within 24 hours of the bite.
b. Whenever any person is bitten by a domestic animal or is bitten by any
animal suspected of having rabies, the owner or person in charge, the
victim or his guardian, the physician attending and any person having
knowledge of the occurrence shall make a report to the local board of
health or to the police department within 24 hours of the bite.
Notification shall state where the animal may be found.
§ 5-3.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 5-3.3
AO:154
water contamination caused by pet wastes (feces) upon public and private
property, the following standards shall apply to pet waste management:
a. No person owning or in charge of any pet shall cause or allow such pet
to soil, defile, defecate or do damage upon or commit any nuisance
upon any private property, without the permission of the owner of the
property. Any person owning or in charge of a pet which soils, defiles,
defecates or commits any such nuisance shall immediately remove all
waste deposited by such pet in a sanitary manner.
b. No person owning or in charge of any pet shall cause or allow such pet
to soil, defile, defecate or do damage upon or commit any nuisance on
any place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public
property. Any person owning or in charge of a pet which soils, defiles,
defecates or commits any such nuisance shall immediately remove all
pet waste deposited by such pet in a sanitary manner.
c. No person shall permit the accumulation of pet waste upon their
property, or property occupied by them, to the extent that the odor may
be noticeable to the adjoining property owners, attract insects or
rodents and/or become a source of pollution.
d. The pet waste removed from the aforementioned designated areas shall
be disposed of by the person owning or in charge of any such pet in a
sealed, nonabsorbent, leak proof container. Disposition in a sanitary
manner shall include taking the pet waste home for disposal, placing it
in a sealable plastic bag or wrapping and placing same in a trash can.
Disposal shall not include burial, disposal by placement in a storm
sewer, or placing unwrapped pet waste in a trash can.
e. It shall be a complete defense to violations of the above subsections if a
person shall have immediately removed such pet waste and disposed of
it in a sanitary manner.
f. The provision of this section shall not apply to disabled persons who
may use their dogs as guides unless accompanied by a sighted person.
g. In the event of a violation on private property, a complaint is only to be
filed by the owner of such property. In the event of such a violation
occurring on public property, thoroughfare, walkways or parks, a
complaint may be filed by any witness to such an act.
h. The animal control officer, police officer, registered environmental
health specialist, public health investigator, or any other authorized
representative of the township, may enforce the provisions of this
section. A property owner may enforce this section by filing a complaint
in municipal court.
§ 5-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-3.4
AO:155
§ 5-3.4. Standards for Keeping Chickens. [Ord. #11-1151; Ord.
#19-1703]
Chickens kept pursuant to the definition of "home agriculture" set forth in
Chapter 22, Section 22-3 of the Right to Farm Ordinance shall be subject to
the following requirements:
a. Minimum Lot Size. A minimum lot size of 1/2 acre is required to keep
chickens pursuant to this section.
b. Number of Allowable Chickens. No more than six chickens may be kept
on any parcel that meets the minimum lot size. For each additional onehalf
acre, four additional chickens may be kept.
c. Roosters and Cockerels. Mature roosters are prohibited; however,
roosters may visit the property for the purpose of fertilization so long as
there are no more than 10 days of visitation per parcel in any twelvemonth
period, and no more than five days consecutively, and provided
the roosters are certified as healthy by the New Jersey Department of
Agriculture. Any cockerel (defined as a young male chicken) that crows
must be culled or permanently removed from the property within five
days. If there are any crowing roosters or cockerels on a parcel for
more than 20 days in any calendar year, all roosters are prohibited from
the property for at least a 24-month period.
d. Slaughtering. Slaughtering chickens in public view is prohibited.
e. Required Shelters. Chickens shall be provided, and shall remain within,
a fully enclosed shelter with an optional fenced enclosure.
1. Shelters and enclosures shall be located in the rear yard.
2. Shelters and enclosures shall be located at least 25 feet from any
property line and at least 50 feet from any residential structure on
an adjoining property.
3. Shelters shall not exceed 150 square feet in size or 14 feet in
height.
4. No shelter may be utilized without first having received a shelter
permit from the zoning officer and any other State or local permit
required.
5. Fences shall not exceed six feet in height.
6. The use of enclosed mobile "chicken tractors" is permitted as a
supplement to, but not a replacement for, a fully enclosed shelter.
Chicken tractors must remain within the boundaries defined
herein, and may not be used as overnight shelters.
f. Waste Storage. Storage of manure, excreta, other waste odor or dustproducing
substances associated therewith shall be located at least 25
feet from any lot line and at least 50 feet from any residential structure
§ 5-3.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 5-3.4
AO:156
§ 5-4. ANIMAL FACILITIES.
§ 5-4.1. Kennels, Shelters, Pounds and Pet Shops. [Ord. #7/15/74;
New; Ord. #19-1703]
All kennels, shelters, pounds and pet shops shall comply with the following
requirements:
on an adjoining property, and shall be properly composted per health
code or USDA guidelines or kept in a watertight container until it can
be disposed of in a proper fashion off site.
g. Feed Storage. Animal feed stored outdoors shall be kept in metal
containers with tightly-fitting lids.
h. No Running at Large. No person owning, keeping, maintaining or
harboring a chicken shall permit, suffer or allow a chicken to run at
large upon any public streets or upon any private property except upon
premises where permission has been given by the owner.
i. No Disturbing the Peace. No person owning, keeping, maintaining or
harboring a chicken shall permit, suffer or allow a chicken to disturb
the peace or quiet of the neighborhood by creating a noise across a
residential property line continually for 10 minutes or intermittently for
30 minutes, unless provoked.
j. Penalty. Any person owning, keeping or harboring a chicken, who
violates or fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this section
5-3, shall be liable for a penalty as prescribed in Chapter 3, Law
Enforcement Regulations, section 3-1, for each and every offense.
a. License Required. Any person who keeps, operates, or proposes to
establish a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall apply to the board of
health or other designated official for a license entitling him to keep or
operate such establishment.
b. Application. The application shall describe the premises where the
establishment is located or is proposed to be located, the purpose for
which it is to be maintained and shall be accompanied by the written
approval of the zoning officer and the board of health of the township
showing compliance with the local and State rules and regulations
governing location and sanitation at such establishment.
c. License Fee. The annual license fee for a kennel shall be as provided in
subsection 10-4.2. The annual fee for a pet shop shall be as provided in
subsection 10-4.3. No fee shall be charged for a shelter or a pound.
d. Expiration and Revocation. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop,
shelter or pound shall state the purpose for which the establishment is
maintained. All such licenses shall expire on the last day of January of
each year. They shall be subject to revocation by the township
committee on recommendation of the State department of health or the
§ 5-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-4.1
AO:157
§ 5-5. ANIMAL CONTROL PERSONNEL.
§ 5-5.1. Animal Control Officer Established. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord.
#03-1277; Ord. #19-1703]
The position of animal control officer is hereby created, and employment of
a qualified person for that position is hereby authorized.
The township committee is hereby empowered to appoint an animal control
officer and deputy animal control officer(s) or may designate some other
authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
The township committee shall also have the power to enter into a contract
with one or more persons either individual or corporate to exercise the
duties of an animal control officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
All police officers of the township and the animal control officers, if any,
are hereby given full power and authority, and are charged with the duty to
enforce this chapter.
The following shall apply to Animal Control Officer and Deputy Animal
Control Officer:
board of health of the township for failure to comply with the applicable
rules and regulations of the State department or the local board after
the owner has been afforded a hearing by either the State department
or local board.
e. Exemption from Individual Dog Licenses. Any person holding such
license shall not be required to secure individual licenses for dogs
owned by such licensee and kept at such establishment; such license
shall not be transferable to another owner or to different premises.
Exempt dogs must wear identification tags while off premises.
a. Appointment and Compensation. The animal control officer shall be
appointed by the township committee and shall receive such
compensation as is provided by ordinance or by resolution of the
township committee.
b. Qualifications. The animal control officer shall be certified pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16a.
c. Powers and Duties. The animal control officer shall have the power and
authority, within the jurisdiction of the Township of Hopewell, to:
1. Investigate and enforce rabies control regulations per N.J.A.C.
8:52.
2. Investigate and sign complaints concerning any violation of an
animal control ordinances.
§ 5-4.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 5-5.2
AO:158
§ 5-5.2. Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer Established.
[Ord. #19-1703]
The position of municipal humane law enforcement officer is hereby
created, and employment of a qualified person for that position is hereby
authorized.
The township committee is hereby empowered to appoint municipal
humane law enforcement officer(s) or may designate some other authority
to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
The township committee shall also have the power to enter into a contract
with one or more persons either individual or corporate to exercise the
duties of a municipal humane law enforcement officer to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
The following shall apply to municipal humane law enforcement officer:
§ 5-6. CHARGES FOR ANIMAL IMPOUNDMENT. [Ord. #7/15/74;
Ord. #19-1703]
The expense encountered in holding and keeping a domestic animal for
the above stated seven days or part thereof, shall be paid by the domestic
animal's owner claiming as provided in Chapter 10.
§ 5-7. PENALTY. [New; Ord. #08-1429, § 1; Ord. #19-1703]
Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with this chapter,
shall be liable to a penalty as prescribed in Chapter 3, Law Enforcement
a. Appointment and Compensation. The municipal humane law
enforcement officer shall be appointed by the township committee and
shall receive such compensation as is provided by ordinance or by
resolution of the township committee.
b. Qualifications. The municipal humane law enforcement officer shall be
certified pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16a.
1. Enforcement of all Animal Welfare and Animal Cruelty Laws of the
State and Ordinances of the Municipality.
2. Investigate and sign complaints concerning any violations of an
Animal Welfare or Animal Cruelty Law of the State or Ordinance of
the Municipality.
3. Act as an Officer for the detection, apprehension and arrest of
offenders against the Animal Welfare or Animal Cruelty Law of the
State or Ordinance of the Municipality.
4. Comply with the provisions of Chapter 22 of Title 4 of the New
Jersey Revised Statutes.
5. Such other powers and duties required under ordinance or at law.
§ 5-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-7
AO:159
Regulations, Section 3-1 of this Code for each and every offense, except for
the first offense for failure to secure a license, the penalty shall be $50.
Owner must provide court with proof of license having been issued.
§ 5-8. REPEALS CONFLICTING ORDINANCES. [Ord. #19-1703]
All other ordinances of the Township of Hopewell which are in conflict with
this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 5-9. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. #91-884, § 1; Ord. #19-1703]
If any part of this chapter shall be invalid, such parts shall be deemed
severable and the invalidity thereof shall not affect the remaining part of
this ordinance.
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [New]
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township of Hopewell in accordance with the provisions
of an act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled An Act
Concerning Alcoholic Beverages, comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of
1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1
et seq., and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [New]
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in R.S. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [New]
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the act, rules and regulations
referred to in section 6-1, and all other applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey or the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Issuing Authority. [Ord. #7/15/74]
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the mayor and
township committee, which shall also administer the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 5-7 HOPEWELL CODE § 6-3.3
AO:160
§ 6-3.3. License Required. [New]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the township
without obtaining a license in accordance with the act referred to in section
6-1 and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.4. License Fees. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The annual fees of licenses for the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages
in the township shall be as contained in Chapter 10.
Licenses shall run for one year from July 1 to June 30 following; inclusive.
The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued.
The provisions of New Jersey's State Limitation Law, as provided in Chapter
72 of the Laws of 1960 and as the same may be hereafter amended,
shall control the number of and the issuance of plenary retail consumption
licenses and plenary retail distribution licenses; no limited retail
distribution licenses shall be issued. No seasonal retail consumption
licenses shall be issued. No club license shall be issued to any organization
or club that renders or performs any protective township service.
§ 6-4. REGULATIONS OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, delivered or served to or consumed in
any licensed premises on any day between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 7:00
a.m. except Sundays and New Year's Day each year as hereinafter provided.
§ 6-4.2. Sundays. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #740-87, § 1]
The provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on Sundays. On Sundays,
no alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in
any establishment for which a plenary retail consumption license is held
between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.
§ 6-4.3. New Year's Day. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #740-87, § 2]
The provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on January 1. On that
day alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, delivered or consumed in a
licensed premises at all times if January 1 is a weekday. When New Year's
Day is a Sunday, no alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, delivered to
or consumed in any establishment for which a plenary retail consumption
license is held between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.
§ 6-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-4.4
AO:161
§ 6-4.4. Sales to Certain Persons. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly
or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any habitual drunkard, intoxicated
person or minor, nor permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on any
licensed premises by any of the above named classes of persons, or permit
any such person to congregate in or about the licensed premises.
§ 6-4.5. (Reserved)
§ 6-4.6. Personal or Telephone Solicitation Prohibited. [Ord. #7/15/
74]
No licensee shall directly or indirectly solicit from house to house personally
or by telephone, the purchase of alcoholic beverages nor allow, permit or
suffer such solicitation.
§ 6-4.7. Persons Frequenting the Licensed Premises. [Ord. #7/15/
74; Ord. #644-83]
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed premises the
habitual presence of any known prostitute, gangster, racketeer, notorious
criminal, or other person of ill repute.
§ 6-4.8. Lewdness, Fighting and Noise Prohibited. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No licensee shall allow, permit, or suffer in or upon the licensed premises
any disturbances, lewdness, immoral activities, brawls, or unnecessary
noise, or allow, permit, or suffer the licensed place of business to be
conducted in such manner as to become a nuisance.
§ 6-4.9. Illegal Lottery. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No licensee shall allow, suffer or permit any illegal lottery to be conducted,
or any ticket, or participation right in any lottery to be sold or offered for
sale, on or about the licensed premises.
§ 6-4.10. Gambling Prohibited. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No licensee shall engage in or allow, permit, or suffer any poolselling,
bookmaking or any playing for money at faro, roulette, rouge et noir or any
unlawful game or gambling of any kind, or any device or apparatus designed
for any such purpose, on or about the licensed premises.
§ 6-4.11. Slot Machines Prohibited. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No licensee shall possess, allow, permit or suffer on or about the licensed
premises any slot machine or device in the nature of a slot machine which
may be used for the purpose of playing for money or other valuable thing.
§ 6-4.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 6-4.12
AO:162
§ 6-4.12. Adulterated Beverages. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No licensee shall manufacture, transport, possess, sell, barter, give away,
offer for sale or furnish any alcoholic beverages adulterated with methanol,
alkaloids, acetone, phenols, formaldehyde, isopropyl, alcohol or other
poisonous substance whatsoever.
§ 6-4.13. Liquored Candy Prohibited. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No licensee shall manufacture, sell, offer for sale, possess, allow, permit or
suffer on or about the licensed premises any candy containing rum, cognac,
brandy, cordial or other alcoholic beverage, generally known as liquored
candy.
§ 6-4.14. Transportation Regulations. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No licensee shall receive, possess, or sell any alcoholic beverages
transported into this State in violation of the Rules Governing the
Transportation of Alcoholic Beverages into New Jersey promulgated or to be
promulgated by the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-4.15. Retail Distributors Not to Allow Consumption. [Ord. #7/
15/74]
No retail distribution licensee shall permit any alcoholic beverages sold by
him to be consumed on the licensed premises, nor shall be permit their
containers to be opened on the licensed premises.
§ 6-4.16. Maintenance of Premises. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Licensed premises shall at all times be kept in a safe, clean and sanitary
condition. All rooms, passageways, entrances, exits and stairways must be
well lighted.
§ 6-4.17. Rooms Open to the Public. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No person shall be served in any room or place which is not open to the
public generally, except that in hotels guests may be served in their rooms
or in private dining rooms, and further provided that this regulation shall
not apply to club licenses.
§ 6-4.18. Full View of Premises; Lighting. [Ord. #7/15/74]
All places in which alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed, excepting
those which hold club licenses, and guests' rooms and private dining rooms
in hotels, shall at all hours be so arranged, and blinds open, so that a
full view of the interior may be had from the public thoroughfare or from
adjacent rooms to which the public is freely admitted. All such premises
during business shall be lighted sufficiently so that a full view of the interior
may be had by the public.
§ 6-4.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-4.19
AO:163
§ 6-4.19. Interference With Inspections. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No licensee or other person shall interfere with any inspection or search
of the premises for which a license has been issued, or of any building
containing the same, by any duly authorized agent of the Federal, State
or municipal government, nor shall any licensee interfere with any such
duly authorized agent testing or taking reasonable samples of any alcoholic
beverage on the premises for which a license has been issued, or in any
building containing the same.
§ 6-4.20. Full Disclosure Required for All Interested Persons. [Ord.
#7/15/74]
No person, other than the licensee, shall have any interest, directly or
indirectly, in the license granted or the business to be conducted under the
license, without a full disclosure having been made, either in the application
for the license or as soon after the interest in the license or in the business
conducted under the license shall have come into being.
§ 6-4.21. Sale of Illicit Beverages. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No person shall possess, have custody of, offer for sale, or sell, any illicit
beverage in violation of this chapter or the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
§ 6-4.22. Display of License. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Each licensee shall at all times conspicuously display his license and these
regulations in a place convenient for inspection in the main business room
of the licensed premises. He shall keep a true copy of the application for
the current license on the licensed premises as well as a list in the form
prescribed by the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control
containing the names, address and other required information regarding
all persons currently employed on the licensed premises. Such license
application and list shall be available for the inspection of any officer as
defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1p.
§ 6-5. PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE.
§ 6-5.1. Sale to Persons Under the Legal Age Prohibited. [Ord. #7/
15/74; Ord. #588-81; Ord. #644-83]
No licensee shall sell or serve any alcoholic beverage to any person under
the legal age as established by State Statutes.
§ 6-5.2. Presence. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #588-81; Ord. #644-83]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age as established by State
Statute to enter any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages
for the purpose of purchasing or having served or delivered to him/her any
alcoholic beverage.
§ 6-4.19 HOPEWELL CODE § 6-5.3
AO:164
§ 6-5.3. Consumption or Purchase of Alcoholic Beverages by a
Person Under the Legal Age. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #588-81; Ord.
#644-83]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age as established by
State Statute to consume any alcoholic beverage or to purchase, attempt to
purchase, or have another purchase for him, any alcoholic beverage on any
premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-5.4. Misstating Age. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #588-81; Ord.
#644-83]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age as established
by State Statute to misrepresent or misstate his age for the purpose of
inducing any retail licensee to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage
to him.
§ 6-5.5. Performers. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #588-81; Ord. #644-83]
No person under the legal age as established by State Statute shall be
permitted to sing, dance, perform, act, play in any orchestra, or in any
manner exhibit himself or herself in any performance or entertainment held,
given, offered or conducted on the licensed premises.
§ 6-5.6. Persons Under the Legal Age to Be Accompanied by Parent
or Guardian. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #588-81; Ord. #644-83]
Persons under the legal age as established by State Statute shall not be
allowed to frequent, loiter or remain in any room or rooms used or devoted
to the sale, service or consumption of alcoholic beverages upon a licensed
premises, unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or adult husband or
wife; provided that this provision shall not apply to restaurants, or to guests'
rooms and private and public dining rooms in hotels.
§ 6-6. INSPECTIONS AND SUPERVISION. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Any officer, as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1p, shall have full authority to
inspect, investigate and supervise the licensed premises for the purpose
of enforcing the provisions of these regulations, the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act or any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 6-7. VIOLATIONS. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Any person who shall knowingly aid or abet another in the violation of any
provision of these regulations shall be punishable in the same manner as
the violation aided or abetted.
Any attempt to evade these regulations or any provisions thereof, either
directly or indirectly, by acquiescence, collusion or connivance by or with
any licensee, his agents, servants or employees, shall be considered a
violation of these regulations.
§ 6-5.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-8
AO:165
§ 6-8. REPORTS. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Whenever there shall be a conviction for violation of any provision of this
chapter, the judge shall forthwith certify such conviction to the township
committee. Where the conviction is of a person other than a licensee, the
judge shall indicate the name of the licensee upon whose premises the
violation occurred.
§ 6-9. REVOCATION OF LICENSE. [New]
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for
hearing.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
[Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 92-922 provides that the name of
Hopewell-Princeton Road from the intersection of Pennington-Rocky
Hill Road and Cherry Valley Road to Lawrence Township boundary be
changed to Carter Road.]
§ 7-1. WORDS AND PHRASES. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 7-2. OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. [New]
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use in the township.
§ 7-3. PARKING.
§ 7-3.1. Regulations Not Exclusive. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set
§ 6-8 HOPEWELL CODE § 7-3.1
AO:166
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 7-3.2. Parking Prohibited During State of Emergency. [Ord. #7/15/
74]
§ 7-3.3. Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain Streets. [Ord.
#7/15/74; Ord. #578-81; Ord. #683-85; Ord. #94-990; Ord.
#97-1072, § I; Ord. #97-1082, § II; Ord. #99-1123, § 1; Ord.
#09-1483, § 1; Ord. #12-1551; Ord. #2017-1663; Ord. #2018-1701]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-3.4. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain
Streets. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #97-1082, § I; Ord. #00-1167, § 1; Ord.
#00-1168, § 1]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II
of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule II of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-3.5. Stopping or Standing Prohibited During Certain Hours on
Certain Streets. [Ord. #7/15/74; Res. #79-98; Ord. #90-871; Ord.
#94-966]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified in
Schedule III on any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III of Chapter 7A.
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The chief of police or, in his absence, the
ranking police officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, fires and public celebration, dictate or require
the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the
free flow of traffic. Notification the EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs
are being or will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner of
any vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic and any police officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of removal
and storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
c. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
§ 7-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-3.6
AO:167
§ 7-3.6. Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV at any time between the hours listed in Schedule IV of any day
(except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule IV of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-3.7. Tow Away. [Ord. #404]
Any vehicle parked in violation of the above referenced prohibited parking
or stopping or standing regulations, may be removed to such garage or
other place as may be designated by the township committee as a garage
or place for the impounding of such vehicles, and such vehicle shall be
there retained and impounded until the person owning such vehicle shall
pay the reasonable costs of such taking and removal, together with a garage
charge of $2 for each removal, every day such vehicle is retained and
impounded. Immediately after a vehicle is so removed, the chief of police or
such other police officer acting shall notify the registered owner in writing,
by personal service or by certified mail, at the last known address of the
owner, concerning the removal of such vehicle, the reason for the same,
and the location of the vehicle. After the vehicle has been in possession of
the police department for 30 days and the owner is unknown or cannot be
found or refuses to receive such vehicle, the vehicle shall be deemed to be
abandoned and shall be disposed of pursuant to R.S. 39:10A-1 et seq.
§ 7-3.8. Parking and/or Standing Prohibited During Significant
Snowfalls. [Ord. #07-1416, § I]
§ 7-4. TRUCK ROUTES AND VEHICLES WEIGHING FOUR TONS.
a. Whenever a significant snowfall wherein the accumulation is such that
it covers the streets or roadways to a depth equal to or in excess of two
inches, an emergency shall exist. Parking and/or standing of any vehicle
shall be prohibited during such time on any and all improved and
unimproved township streets or roadways or portion thereof as shown
on the attached map.
b. These parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snowfall has
ceased and until such a time the streets and roadways have been
plowed to the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow
of traffic or impede the passage of ambulance, fire or other emergency
vehicles.
c. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and menace to the safe and proper clearing
and removal of snow and regulation of traffic. Any police officer may
provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the
reasonable costs of the removal and storage that may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle. In addition, the
penalty provision of section 7-12 may apply to any violation of this
section.
§ 7-3.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 7-4.1
AO:168
§ 7-4.1. Truck Routes. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #772-88; Ord. #819-89;
Ord. #90-849; Ord. #91-896; 03-1290; Ord. No. 11-1537]
All trucks having a total combined gross weight of vehicle plus load, in
excess of four tons, shall be excluded from all streets within the township,
except from those streets which form a part of the system of truck routes
upon which trucks are permitted to travel and operate, which are contained
in Schedule V and VB of Chapter 7A. Nothing within this section shall be
construed to prevent such trucks from making deliveries of merchandise
or other property along streets from which such trucks are excluded, or
from excluding trucks used by public utility companies for construction,
installation, operation or maintenance of public utility facilities in the
township from any street in the township.
§ 7-4.2. Vehicles Weighing Four Tons Excluded from Certain
Locations. [Ord. #771-88; Ord. #90-871]
All vehicles weighing four tons shall be excluded from the streets or
locations described in Schedule VA of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-5. ONE-WAY STREETS. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #784-88; Ord.
#09-1480]
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI of Chapter 7A are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated.
§ 7-6. THROUGH STREETS, STOP INTERSECTIONS, AND YIELD
INTERSECTIONS.
§ 7-6.1. Through Streets. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VII of Chapter 7A are hereby designated as
Through Streets. STOP signs shall be installed on the near right side of each
street intersecting the Through Street except where YIELD signs having
sides 36 inches in length are provided for in the designations.
§ 7-6.2. Stop Intersection. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #779-88; Ord.
#802-89; Ord. #91-986; Ord. #01-1182, § 1; Ord. #09-1469, § 1;
Ord. #13-1584]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule VIII of Chapter 7A are hereby designated as Stop Intersections.
STOP signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 7-6.3. Yield Intersections. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule IX of Chapter 7A are hereby designated as Yield Intersections.
YIELD signs having sides 36 inches in length shall be installed as provided
therein.
§ 7-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7
AO:169
§ 7-7. LOADING ZONES. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The locations described in Schedule X of Chapter 7A are hereby designated
as Loading Zones.
§ 7-8. TAXI STANDS. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The locations described in Schedule XI of Chapter 7A are hereby designated
as Taxi Stands.
§ 7-9. BUS STOPS. [Ord. #7/25/74]
The locations described in Schedule XII of Chapter 7A are hereby
designated as Bus Stops.
§ 7-10. TURN PROHIBITIONS.
§ 7-10.1. Left Turn Prohibition. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #99-1128, § 1;
Ord. #02-1242, § 3; Ord. #02-1245, § 1; Ord. #07-1386; Ord.
#09-1478]
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in
Schedule XIII of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-10.2. U-Turn Prohibition. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No person shall make a U-Turn at any of the locations described in Schedule
XIV of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-10.3. No Turns. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No person shall make a turn at any of the locations described in Schedule
XV of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-10.4. Right Turn on Red Traffic Signal Prohibited. [New]
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (STOP)
indication whenever an official sign is present prohibiting such turn on the
red signal as described in Schedule XVI of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-10.5. Prohibited Turns. [Ord. #91-900]
No person shall make a turn at any location and only in the manner
described in Schedule XVIII of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-11. SPEED LIMITS. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #404; Ord. #418; Ord.
#435; Ord. #439; Ord. #440; Ord. #462; Ord. #473; New; Ord.
#568-80; Ord. #570-80; Ord. #621-82; Ord. #695-85, § 1; Ord.
#751-87, § 1; Ord. #753-87, § 1; Ord. #91-885, § 1; Ord. #93-930,
§ 1; Ord. #93-954; Ord. #94-967; Ord. #97-1071; Ord. #00-1151,
§ 1; Ord. #00-1175, § 1; Ord. #1176, § 1; Ord. #01-1181, § 1; Ord.
§ 7-7 HOPEWELL CODE § 7-11
AO:170
#01-1183, § 1; Ord. #01-1202, § 1; Ord. #02-1257; Ord. #03-1293,
§ 1; Ord. #09-1464; Ord. #09-1474; Ord. #10-1486, § 1; Ord.
#10-1494; Ord. #10-1499; Ord. #12-1560, § 2]
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XVII of Chapter 7A
shall have the speed limits designated in such schedule.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits as authorized by the department of
transportation.
§ 7-12. PENALTY. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #776-88, § 1; Ord. #777-88,
§ 1]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this ordinance or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Hopewell covered in this
traffic chapter are hereby repealed except that this repeal shall not affect
or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or
committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking
effect of this ordinance.
§ 7-13. APPLICABILITY OF SUBTITLE ONE OF TITLE 39 TO SEMIPUBLIC
ROADS, STREETS, DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING LOTS.
§ 7-13.1. Brandon Farms. [Ord. #95-1021, §§ 1 - 7; Ord. #02-1249;
Ord. #12-1560 § 1]
The provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey are made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Brandon Farms located in the Township of Hopewell, County
of Mercer and the following regulations shall be enforceable:
a. General Parking.
1. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
2. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described below:
§ 7-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13.1
AO:171
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Denow Road Both All From Lawrence Township-
Hopewell Township
corporate line to
Amberleigh Drive
Treymore
Court
Both All Entire length
Shrewsbury
Court
Both All Entire length
3. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be twelve-foot wide as shown
on the attached site plan19 and signed with R7-8 and R7-8P
(Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the Handicapped
Parking Permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
b. Through Streets, Stop and Yield Intersections.
1. Through Streets. The following streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs shall be installed
on the near right side of each street intersecting the Through
Street except where Yield signs are provided for in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Denow Road From the Lawrence Township-Hopewell
Township corporate line to 50 feet north
of Amberleigh Drive
Navesink Drive Entire length
Chicory Lane Entire length
Brandon Road Entire length
2. Stop Intersections. The following described intersections are
hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein:
Intersection Stop Signs On
Hedgecroft Drive and Kunkel
Court
Kunkel Court
Chicory Lane and Brandon Road Chicory Lane
c. Speed Limits.
19.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
township clerk.
§ 7-13.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 7-13.1
AO:172
1. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Street m.p.h. Limits
Denow Road 25 From Lawrence Township-
Hopewell Township corporate
line to Van Brunt Road
Chicory Lane 25 Entire length
Brandon Road 25 Entire length
Rumson Court 25 Entire length
Larchmont Court 25 Entire length
Navesink Drive 25 Entire length
Hedgecroft Drive 25 Entire length
Kentsdale Drive 25 Entire length
Welwyn Court 25 Entire length
Treymore Court 25 Entire length
Shrewsbury Court 25 Entire length
Wycoff Drive 25 Entire length
Kunkel Court 25 Entire length
2. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
d. Tow Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil
fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's or operator's expense.
e. That all signs, posts, or other necessary materials be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and
N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
f. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this ordinance or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
g. Effect of Regulations. If any part of this regulation is for any reason held
to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion of the regulation.
§ 7-13.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13.2
AO:173
§ 7-13.2. Drake's Mill Condominiums. [Ord. #95-1026, §§ 1 — 4]
The provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey are made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at the Drake's Mill Condominiums located in the Township
of Hopewell, County of Mercer and the following regulations shall be
enforceable:
a. General Parking.
1. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
2. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
All Streets Both All Entire length
3. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be twelve-foot wide as shown
on the attached site plan20 and signed with R7-8 and R7-8P
(Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the Handicapped
Parking Permits by the Motor Vehicle Commission.
b. Through Streets and Stop Intersections.
1. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs shall be installed
on the near right side of each street intersecting the Through
Street except where Yield signs are provided for in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Brandon Road West Entire length
Amberleigh Drive Entire length
Bollen Court Entire length
Pebble Creek Court Entire length
Voorhees Court Entire length
2. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are
hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein:
Intersection Stop Signs On
Tuxford Court (Both Intersects) Tuxford Court (Both Intersects)
c. Speed Limits.
20.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
township clerk.
§ 7-13.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 7-13.2
AO:174
§ 7-13.3. Wawa, Inc./Route NJ 31 and CR 518. [Ord. #95-1028, §§ 1
— 5; Ord. #00-1150, § 1]
The provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39 of the revised statutes of New
Jersey with various Traffic Regulations are made applicable to the semipublic
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots of Wawa, Inc. NJ Route
31 and County Route 518 (Block 23, Lot 9) located in the Township of
Hopewell, County of Mercer and the following regulations shall be
enforceable:
1. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s)
shall be 15 MPH.
2. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Street m.p.h. Limits
All roads 25 Entire length
3. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
d. Tow Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil
fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's or operator's expense.
e. That all signs, posts, or other necessary materials be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and
N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
f. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this ordinance or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
g. Effect of Regulations. If any part of this regulation is for any reason held
to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion of the regulation.
a. General Parking.
1. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
2. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be twelve-foot wide as shown
on the attached site plan21 and signed with R7-8 and R7-8P
(Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in the designated
§ 7-13.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13.3
AO:175
§ 7-13.4. Ewing Pennytown Enterprises, Inc/NJ Route 31 and CR
654. [Ord. #99-1130, § 1]
The provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39 of the revised statutes of New
Jersey with various Traffic Regulations are made applicable to the semipublic
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots of Ewing Pennytown
Enterprises, Inc., located at New Jersey Route 31 and County Route 654
parking areas for persons who have been issued the Handicapped
Parking Permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
b. No Parking for Tractor-Trailers. In accordance with the site plan on file
in the office of the township clerk, there shall be no tractor-trailer
parking on the site.
c. Loading Zone. The location described is hereby designated as a loading
zone; no person shall park at this location other than for loading or
unloading of goods and materials. (As shown on the enclosed site
plan.)22
d. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s)
shall be 15 MPH.
2. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
e. Tow Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil
fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's or operator's expense.
f. All signs, posts, or other necessary materials be installed and paid for
by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and
N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
g. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this ordinance or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
h. Effect of Regulations. If any part of this regulation is for any reason held
to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion of the regulation.
21.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
township clerk.
22.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
township clerk.
§ 7-13.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 7-13.4
AO:176
(Block 33, Lot 1.01) located in the Township of Hopewell, County of Mercer,
State of New Jersey, and the following regulations shall be enforceable:
a. General Parking.
1. All vehicles must park in designated areas between the lines
provided.
2. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be twelve-foot wide as shown
on the attached site plan23 and signed with R7-8 and R7-8P
(Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the Handicapped
Parking Permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
3. With the exception of trucks which are making deliveries to the
property, no trucks in excess of 12 tons gross vehicle weight shall
enter, stand or park on the property.
4. No parking shall be permitted in the right-of-way along Mercer
County Route 654 (Pennington-Hopewell Road) from the southerly
property line of the property north to and including the bridge over
the dam spillway.
b. Reserved Parking for Trucks. The following areas are hereby
designated for trucks only as shown on the enclosed site plans.
c. Loading Zone. The location described is hereby designated as a loading
zone; no person shall park at this location other than for loading or
unloading of goods and materials. (As shown on the enclosed site
plan.)24
d. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s)
shall be 15 MPH.
2. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
e. Tow Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil
fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's or operator's expense.
f. All signs, posts, or other necessary materials to be installed shall be
paid for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current
23.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
township clerk.
24.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
township clerk.
§ 7-13.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13.4
AO:177
§ 7-13.5. Quick Chek Food Store. [Ord. #00-1153, §§ 1 — 3]
The provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey are hereby made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets,
driveways and parking lots at the Quick Chek Food Store, located at New
Jersey Route 31 and County Route 654 (Block 33, Lot 1.01) in the Township
of Hopewell, County of Mercer, State of New Jersey, and the following
regulations shall be enforceable:
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
g. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this ordinance or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
h. Effect of Regulations. If any part of this regulation is for any reason held
to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion(s) of the regulation.
a. General Parking.
1. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
2. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
All roads and aisles Both All Entire length
3. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be twelve-foot wide as shown
on the attached site plan (on file in the office of the Township Clerk)
and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and
Penalty Plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who
have been issued the Handicapped Parking Permits by the Division
of Motor Vehicles.
b. Through Streets and Stop Streets.
1. Through Streets. The following streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs shall be installed
on the near right side of each street intersecting the Through
Street except where Yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Road "A" Entire length
2. Stop Intersections. The following described intersections are
hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein.
§ 7-13.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 7-13.5
AO:178
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on:
Aisle "A" and Aisle "B" Aisle "A"
c. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s)
shall be 15 MPH.
2. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Roadway m.p.h.. Limits
All roads 15 Entire length
3. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effectuate the above-designated speed limits as authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
d. Tow Away Zones. Any vehicle parked or standing so as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading
zones, oil fills, any grassy area(s) or pedestrian walkway(s), or
representing in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's expense.
e. Loading Zone(s). The locations described are hereby designated as
Loading Zones. No person shall park a vehicle in said location during
the times indicated other than for the loading or unloading of goods and
materials.
Name of Street Time Location
Road "B" All As indicated on site plan (in the
office of the Township Clerk)
f. Vehicles Over Designated Weight Excluded from Certain Streets.
Vehicles over the gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets or
parts of streets described except for the pick up and delivery of
materials on such streets.
Name of Street Weight Location
All roads 12 ton Entire length
g. All signs, posts, or other necessary materials to be installed shall be
paid for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
h. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this subsection or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 7-13.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13.6
AO:179
§ 7-13.6. Pennington Shopping Center/25 Route 31 South (Block
66, Lot 1). [Ord. #01-1209, § 1]
The provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39 of the revised statutes of New
Jersey with various Traffic Regulations are made applicable to the semipublic
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots of Pennington Shopping
Center, located at 25 Route 31 South (Block 66, Lot 1) in the Township
of Hopewell, County of Mercer, State of New Jersey, and the following
regulations shall be enforceable:
a. General Parking.
1. All vehicles must park in designated areas between the lines
provided.
2. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the attached site plan25 and signed with R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved
Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in the designated parking areas
for persons who have been issued the Handicapped Parking
Permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
3. With the exception of trucks which are making deliveries to the
property, no trucks in excess of 12 tons gross vehicle weight shall
enter, stand or park on the property.
b. Reserved Parking for Trucks. The following areas are hereby
designated for trucks only as shown on the enclosed site plan.
c. Loading Zone. The location described is hereby designated as a loading
zone; no person shall park at this location other than for loading or
unloading of goods and materials. (As shown on the enclosed site
plan.)26
d. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s)
shall be 15 MPH.
2. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
e. Tow Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil
fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's or operator's expense.
25.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
township clerk.
26.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
township clerk.
§ 7-13.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 7-13.6
AO:180
§ 7-13.7. Hopewell Grant Residential Subdivision. [Ord. #02-1230]
The provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey are made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at the Hopewell Grant Residential Subdivision located in the
Township of Hopewell, County of Mercer and the following Regulations
shall be enforceable:
f. All signs, posts, or other necessary materials to be installed shall be
paid for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
g. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this subsection or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
h. Effect of Regulations. If any part of this regulation is for any reason held
to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion(s) of the regulation.
a. General Parking.
1. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
2. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of the streets described below:
Name of Street Sides Hours Locations
Wellington Drive Both All Entire length
3. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the approved site plan27 and signed with R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved
Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in the designated parking areas
for persons who have been issued the Handicapped Parking
Permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
b. Through Streets, Stop and Yield Intersections.
1. Through Streets. The following streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs shall be installed
on the near right side of each street intersecting the Through
Street except where Yield signs are provided for in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Wellington Drive Entire length
27.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
township clerk.
§ 7-13.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13.7
AO:181
2. Stop Intersections. The following described intersections are
hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein:
Intersection Stop Signs On
Heath Court and Sutton Court Heath Court
Knox Court and Sutton Court Knox Court
Valmore Court and Ashford
Drive
Valmore Court
Newman Court and Ashford
Drive
Newman Court
Haddon Court and Ashford
Drive
Haddon Court
Blake Drive and Ashford Drive Blake Drive
Concord Place and Vista Drive Concord Place
c. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s)
shall be 15 MPH.
2. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Roadway m.p.h. Limits
All roads 25 Entire length
3. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
d. Tow Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil
fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's or operator's expense.
e. Signage. All signs, posts, or other necessary materials be installed and
paid for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
f. Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey
Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this ordinance or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 7-13.7 HOPEWELL CODE § 7-13.7
AO:182
§ 7-13.8. Bristol-Myers Squibb Farm Stand Parking Area. [Ord.
#02-1260]
The provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey are made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways and/
or parking areas which are opened to and used by the public, tenants and/
or employees at the farm stand parking area located on the Bristol-Myers
Squibb Company property. (Block 46, Lot 8.01) located in the Township
of Hopewell, County of Mercer, and the following regulations shall be
enforceable:
g. Effect of Regulations. If any part of this regulation is for any reason held
to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of the regulations.
a. General Parking.
1. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided, where applicable.
2. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the site plan on file in the office of the township clerk and signed
with the R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate),
in the designated parking areas for persons who have been issued
the Handicapped Parking Permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
b. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s)
shall be 15 miles per hour.
2. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
c. Tow Away Zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading
zones, oil fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any
way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's or operator's expense.
d. Signs. All signs, posts or other necessary materials to be installed shall
be paid for by the applicant. All signage shall conform to the current
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
e. Violations and Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided
by New Jersey statute, every person convicted of a violation of this
subsection or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not
more than $100 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or
both.
§ 7-13.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13.8
AO:183
§ 7-13.9. Athletic Field Parking Lots of Timberlane Middle School.
[Ord. #04-1324, §§ 1, 2]
§ 7-13.10. Hopewell Crossing. [Ord. #05-1333 § 1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the provisions of Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the
Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey shall be made applicable to
the semi-public or private roads, streets, driveways, trails, terraces, bridle
paths, parkways, public areas, or other roadways located on such property
that are open to or used by any persons for purposes of vehicular travel,
for the property known as Block 80, Lot 145 and Block 78, Lot 15.99 on
the Hopewell Township Tax Map, and as more particularly described on the
"Hopewell Crossing Overall Site Plan, Phase One," dated October 14, 1999.
§ 7-13.11. Hopewell Gardens Senior Apartment Complex. [Ord.
#06-1377 § 1]
f. Effect of Regulations. If any part of this regulation is for any reason held
to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of the regulation.
a. Purpose and Authority. The purpose of this subsection is to permit the
township to assert Title 39 jurisdiction over the athletic field parking
lot(s) associated with the Timberlane Middle School, as agreed to
through the Interlocal Services Agreement between the Township of
Hopewell and the Hopewell Valley Regional School District, and as
permitted by law.
b. Violations and Penalties. A penalty for a violation of any Title 39
provision, or any Hopewell Township ordinance shall be in accordance
with the penalty(s) set forth in Title 39, of the Hopewell Township
ordinances, and shall be administered in the same manner as if the
violation occurred on a public road or parking lot under the
municipality's jurisdiction.
a. Purpose and Authority. The provisions of Subtitle 1, Title 39, of the
revised Statutes of New Jersey are made applicable to the semi-public
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at the Hopewell Gardens
Senior Apartment Complex, located at 725 Denow Road, Lot 10.03,
Block 78 on the Hopewell Township Tax Map.
b. Violations and Penalties. A penalty for a violation of any Title 39
provision, or any Hopewell Township Ordinance, shall be in accordance
with the penalty(s) set forth in Title 39, or the Hopewell Township
ordinances, and shall be administered in the same manner as if the
violation occurred on a public road or parking lot under the
municipality's jurisdiction.
c. This subsection will be enforced on all of the roads and parking areas as
shown on the plan entitled "Amended Preliminary and Final Site Plan of
Hopewell Gardens, Lot 10.03 in Block 78, Prepared 5-15-2002, Last
§ 7-13.8 HOPEWELL CODE § 7-13.11
AO:184
§ 7-13.12. Har Sinai Hebrew Congregation. [Ord. #07-1392 § 1]
§ 7-13.13. Dunkin Donuts at Tree Farm Village. [Ord. #08-1437, § 1]
§ 7-14. NO PASSING ZONES. [Ord. #97-1070, § 1; Ord. #09-1462,
§ 1]
No passing zones are hereby established and maintained along those streets
or parts of streets described in Schedule XIX of Chapter 7A.
§ 7-15. MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS. [Ord. #10-1495, § 1; Ord.
#11-1512 §§ I, II; Ord. #12-1562]
Mid-Block Crosswalks for pedestrian crossing are hereby established and
shall exist and be maintained at those locations set forth in Schedule XX
made a part of Chapter 7A. Regulatory and Warning signs shall be erected
and maintained to affect the above designated Mid-Block Crosswalk in
accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
Chapter 7A
Revised 12-1-2003." Plan is located in the Hopewell Township Planning
Office.
a. Purpose and Authority. The provisions of Subtitle I, Title 39 of the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey are made applicable to the semi-public
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at Har Sinai Hebrew
Congregation, located at 2411 Pennington Road, Pennington, New
Jersey 08534, Block 88, Lots 6 and 8 on the Hopewell Township Tax
Map.
b. Violations and Penalties. A penalty for a violation of any Title 39
provision or any Hopewell Township Ordinance shall be in accordance
with the penalty(s) set forth in Title 39 or the Hopewell Township
ordinances, and shall be administered in the same manner as if the
violation occurred on a public road or parking lot under the
municipality's jurisdiction.
a. Purpose and Authority. The provisions of Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey are made applicable to the semi-public
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at Dunkin Donuts at Tree
Farm Village, located at 1 Tree Farm Road, Pennington, New Jersey,
08534, Block 48.02, Lot 3 on the Hopewell Township Tax Map.
b. Violations and Penalties. A penalty for a violation of any Title 39
provision or any Hopewell Township ordinance shall be in accordance
with the penalty(s) set forth in Title 39 or the Hopewell Township
ordinances, and shall be administered in the same manner as if the
violation occurred on a public road or parking lot under the
municipality's jurisdiction.
§ 7-13.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-15
AO:185
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
§ 7A-1. SCHEDULE I: NO PARKING.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-3.3, no person shall park
a vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of
streets.
Name of Street Sides Location
Benjamin Trail [Ord.
No. 2017-1663]
North Blackwell Road for a distance of 500
feet from Blackwell Road
Benjamin Trail [Ord.
No. 2017-1663]
South Blackwell Road for a distance of 100
feet from Blackwell Road
Brandon Road West
[Ord. #2018-1701]
Both From the intersection of Denow Road,
southwest to the intersection of
Plymouth Street
Grant Street Both Between N.J. Route 29 and 135 feet
west of N.J. Route 29
Minnietown Lane Both Entire length
Penn View Drive Both From the intersection of Pierson
Drive east to the end of Penn View
Drive
Pennington-Titusville
Road
Southerly Between 150 feet east from the
eastern curb line of the intersection
of Timkak Lane and 150 feet west
from the western curb line with
Timkak Lane
Pennington-Titusville
Road
Southerly From the intersection of Scotch Road
to the intersection of Timberlane
Drive
Plymouth Street Cul-desac
Within the cul-de-sac area 250 feet
north of the Brandon Road West
centerline
Reed Road [Ord.
#2018-1701]
Both From the intersection of Mercer
County Route 546 (Washington
Crossing-Pennington Road), south to
the Ewing Township/Hopewell
Township boundary
Timkak Lane Both Between 50 feet south of the curb line
of the intersection with Pennington-
Titusville Road and the curb line at
such intersection
§ 7-15 HOPEWELL CODE § 7A-1
AO:186
Name of Street Sides Location
Upper River Drive West Beginning 1,830 feet north of the
northerly curb line of Church Road to
a point 110 feet north therefrom
§ 7A-2. SCHEDULE II: PARKING PROHIBITED CERTAIN HOURS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-3.4, no person shall park
a vehicle between the hours specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets.
Names of
Streets Sides Hours Location
Dublin Road Both 9:00 a.m.-10:00
a.m. Monday-
Friday
Entire length
Glenwood Drive Both 9:00 a.m.-10:00
a.m. Monday-
Friday
Entire length
Morningside
Court
Both 9:00 a.m.-10:00
a.m. Monday-
Friday
Entire length
Morningside
Drive
Both 9:00 a.m.-10:00
a.m. Monday-
Friday
Entire length
Pine Tavern
Court
Both 9:00 a.m.-10:00
a.m. Monday-
Friday
Entire length
Timberlane Drive Both 7:00 a.m.-4:00
p.m. Monday-
Friday
Between the intersection of
Timberlane Drive with
Delaware Avenue and the
intersection of Timberlane
Drive with Pennington-
Harbourton Road
§ 7A-3. SCHEDULE III: NO STOPPING OR STANDING.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-3.5, no person shall stop
or stand a vehicle between the hours specified upon any of the following
described streets or parts of streets.
§ 7A-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7A-3
AO:187
Names of
Streets Sides Hours Location
Church Road Both All Between 150 feet east of the
center line of Route #29 and a
point 150 feet west of the center
line of Route #29
Pennington-
Washington's
Crossing Road
Both All Between 200 feet east of the
center line of Route #29 and a
point 100 feet west of the center
line of Route #29
Crusher Road Both All hours
from June 1
to Sept. 30
Between the Pennington-
Hopewell Road to a point 2,000
feet easterly therefrom
Timberlane Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.
Between Pennington-Harbourton
Road and Pennington-Titusville
Road
Scotch Road Both All Between the northerly curb line
of Washington Crossing-
Pennington Road to a point 200
feet northerly therefrom
§ 7A-4. SCHEDULE IV: TIME LIMITED PARKING.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-3.6, no person shall park
a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown on any of the following
described streets or parts of streets.
(Reserved)
§ 7A-5. SCHEDULE V: TRUCK ROUTES.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7.4.1, all trucks having a
total combined gross weight of vehicle plus load, in excess of four tons,
shall be excluded from all streets within the township, except from those
streets which form a part of the system of truck routes upon which trucks
are permitted to travel and operate, which are as follows:
(Reserved)
§ 7A-5A. SCHEDULE VA: VEHICLES WEIGHING FOUR TONS
EXCLUDED FROM CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-4.2, all vehicles weighing
four tons shall be excluded from the following streets or locations.
§ 7A-3 HOPEWELL CODE § 7A-5A
AO:188
Name of Street Location
North Main Street Bridge Pennington Borough
North Main Street Pennington Borough/Hopewell
Township Corporate Line
§ 7A-5B. SCHEDULE VB: TRUCK ROUTES LIMITED TO 10 TONS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-4.1, all trucks having a
total combined gross weight of vehicle plus load in excess of four tons, and
having a total combined gross weight of vehicle plus load of no greater
than 10 tons are excluded from all streets within the township except those
streets which will serve as part of a system of truck routes as follows:
Street Location
Bull Run Road From State Highway 31 to Federal
City Road
§ 7A-6. SCHEDULE VI: ONE WAY STREETS.
In accordance with the provisions of section 7-5, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated.
Name of Street Direction
Plymouth Street Southbound from Denow Road to
Orchard Avenue only
Van Dyke Road (From Route 518 to
Overlook Road)
Southbound travel only
§ 7A-7. SCHEDULE VII: THROUGH STREETS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-6.1, the following
described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as Through
Streets. STOP signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the Through Street except where YIELD signs are provided for
in the designation.
Name of Street Location
Moores Mill-Mount Rose Road Between Pennington-Hopewell Road
and Pennington-Rocky Hill Road
Pleasant Valley Road Between Route 29 and Trenton-
Harbourton Road
Maddock Road Between Route 29 and Trenton-
Harbourton Road
Patterson Avenue Between Route 29 and its easterly
terminus
§ 7A-5A ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7A-7
AO:189
Name of Street Location
Lafayette Avenue Between Route 29 and its easterly
terminus
Church Road Between Route 29 and Trenton-
Harbourton Road
Harbourton-Woodsville Road Between Trenton-Harbourton Road
and Marshalls Corner-Woodsville
Road
Alta Vista Drive Between Elm Ridge Road and
Bayberry Road
Woosamonsa Road Entire length
Pennington-Titusville Road Entire length
Federal City Road Entire length
Pennington-Rocky Hill Road (1) Between County Road 24 and
Hopewell-Princeton Road
(2) Between Hopewell-Princeton
Road and Province Line Road
Hopewell-Wertsville Road Entire length
§ 7A-8. SCHEDULE VIII: STOP INTERSECTIONS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-6.2, the following
intersections are hereby designated as STOP intersections.
Intersection STOP Sign On
River and Grant Street Grant Street
Van Dyke Road and Featherbed
Lane
Featherbed Lane
Titus Mill Road and Wargo Road Wargo Road
Stoney Brook Road and Mine Road Mine Road
Stoney Brook Road and Van Dyke
Road
Van Dyke Road
Province Line Road and Amwell
Road
Amwell Road
Valley Road and Goat Hill Road Goat Hill Road
Harbourton-Rocktown Road and
Lynnbrook Drive
Lynnbrook Drive
Burd Road and Yard Road Yard Road
Search Avenue and Johnstone Drive Johnstone Drive
Dublin Road and Morningside Drive Morningside Drive
§ 7A-7 HOPEWELL CODE § 7A-8
AO:190
Intersection STOP Sign On
Reed Road and Diverty Road Diverty Road
Sioux Road and Cherokee Drive Cherokee Drive
Bull Run Road and Flower Hill Lane Flower Hill Lane
River Drive and Church Road Church Road
River Drive at Church Road River Drive on the north and south
approaches of River Drive to Church
Road
River Knoll Drive and Creek Rim
Drive
Creek Rim Drive
Wildwood Way and Fern Ridge Lane Fern Ridge Lane
Access Road from Route 29 to the
Washington Crossing Bridge and
River Drive
River Drive
East Curlis Avenue and East Welling
Avenue
East Welling Avenue
Birch Street and East Curlis Avenue East Curlis Avenue
West Shore Drive and Arvida Drive Both sides of West Shore Drive
Arvida Drive and West Shore Drive Arvida Drive
Blue Spruce Drive and West Shore
Drive
Blue Spruce Drive
Flower Hill Terrace and Flower Hill
Lane
Flower Hill Terrace at Flower Hill
Lane
Flower Hill Drive and Flower Hill
Lane
Flower Hill Drive at Flower Hill
Lane
Tanglewood Drive and Jacobs Creek
Road
Tanglewood Drive
Tanglewood Drive and Pond View
Lane
Pond View Lane
Todd Ridge Road and Tanglewood
Drive
Two on Todd Ridge Road, one north
and one south of Tanglewood Drive
Tanglewood Drive and Grace Hill
Court
Tanglewood Drive
Todd Ridge Road and Grace Hill
Court
Grace Hill Court
Todd Ridge Road and Brookside
Drive
Two on Brookside Drive, one west
and one east of Todd Ridge Road
Todd Ridge Road and Keithwood
Court
Keithwood Court
§ 7A-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7A-8
AO:191
Intersection STOP Sign On
Todd Ridge Road and Brookside
Drive
Brookside Drive.
Todd Ridge Road and Jacobs Creek
Road
Todd Ridge Road
Coach Lane and Harbourton
Rocktown Road
Coach Lane
Overlook Road and Van Dyke Road Overlook Road
Coventry Lane and Van Dyke Road Coventry Lane
Spring Hollow Drive and Van Dyke
Road
Spring Hollow Drive
Spring Hollow Drive West and Van
Dyke Road
Spring Hollow Drive West
Long Way and Province Line Road Long Way
Benson Lane and Province Line
Road
Benson Lane
Nelson Ridge Road and Stout Road Stout Road
Province Line Road and Stout Road Stout Road
Wargo Road and Bradford Lane Bradford Lane
Morris Drive and Caroline Drive Morris Drive
Caroline Drive and Morris Drive Caroline Drive
Bailey Drive and Morris Drive Bailey Drive
Glenwood Drive and Pine Tavern
Court
Pine Tavern Court
Titus Mill Road and Willow Creek
Drive
Willow Creek Drive
Willow Creek Drive and Lake
Baldwin Drive
Willow Creek Drive
Voorhees Way and Lake Baldwin
Drive
Voorhees Way
Jefferson Place and Madison Avenue Jefferson Place
Roosevelt Avenue and Jefferson
Place
Roosevelt Avenue
Madison Avenue and Woodmere
Way
Madison Avenue
Linden Lane and Woodmere Way Linden Lane
Blackwell Road and Beechwood
Drive
Beechwood Drive
Blackwell Road and Benjamin Trail Benjamin Trail
§ 7A-8 HOPEWELL CODE § 7A-8
AO:192
Intersection STOP Sign On
Search Avenue and Harvest Drive Harvest Drive
Meadowbrook Farm Road and Tree
Farm Road
Meadowbrook Farm Road
Hunters Ridge Road and Burd Road Hunters Ridge Road
Madaket Lane and Yard Road Madaket Lane
Independence Way and Stockton
Road
Stockton Road
Independence Way and Hart Court Hart Court
Independence Way and Clark Court Clark Court
Scotch Road and Michael Way Michael Way
Burd Road and Nobadeer Drive Nobadeer Drive
Nobadeer Drive and Dionis Court Dionis Court
Continental Lane and Grenloch
Drive
Grenloch Drive
State Park Drive and Grenloch Drive State Park Drive
State Park Drive and George
Washington Drive
State Park Drive
Birch Street and Maple Lane Birch Street
Municipal Athletic Complex (MAC
Drive) and Scotch Road
MAC Drive
River Drive at Grant Street North and south approaches of
River Drive to Grant Street
§ 7A-9. SCHEDULE IX: YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-6.3, the following
intersections are designated as Yield Intersections:
(Reserved)
§ 7A-10. SCHEDULE X: LOADING ZONES.
In accordance with the provisions of section 7-7, the following described
locations are hereby designated as Loading Zones:
(Reserved)
§ 7A-11. SCHEDULE XI: TAXI STANDS.
In accordance with the provisions of section 7-8, the following described
locations are hereby designated as Taxi Stands:
(Reserved)
§ 7A-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7A-12
AO:193
§ 7A-12. SCHEDULE XII: BUS STOPS.
In accordance with the provisions of section 7-9, the following described
locations are hereby designated as Bus Stops:
(Reserved)
§ 7A-13. SCHEDULE XIII: NO LEFT TURN. [Ord. #02-1242, § 3; Ord.
#07-1386, § 1; Ord. #09-1478, § 3]
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-10.1, no person shall
make a left turn at any of the following locations:
Location
Turn
ProhibitedMovement Prohibited Hours
Intersection of
Crest Avenue and
Route 31
Left Left turn from Crest
Avenue onto Route 31
All
Intersection of
Diverty Road and
Route 31
Left Left turn from Diverty
Road onto Route 31
All
Intersection of
Orchard Avenue
and Route 31
Left Left turn from Orchard
Avenue onto Route 31
All
Intersection of
Pennington-
Titusville Road
and Dublin Road
Left Left turn from westbound
lane of Pennington-
Titusville Road onto the
southbound lane of
Dublin Road
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. Mondays
through Fridays
Intersection of
Washington
Crossing-
Pennington Road
and Dublin Road
Left Left turn from eastbound
lane of Washington
Crossing-Pennington
Road onto the
northbound lane of
Dublin Road
2:30 p.m. to 6:00
p.m. Mondays
through Fridays
Intersection of
Bear Tavern Road
and Fabrow Drive
Left Left turn from
northbound lane of Bear
Tavern Road onto the
westbound lane of
Fabrow Drive
4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m. Mondays
through Fridays
Intersection of
Washington
Crossing-
Pennington Road
and Fabrow Drive
Right Right turn from
eastbound lane of
Washington Crossing-
Pennington Road onto the
eastbound lane of Fabrow
Drive
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. Mondays
through Fridays
§ 7A-12 HOPEWELL CODE § 7A-14
AO:194
§ 7A-14. SCHEDULE XIV: NO U-TURN.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-10.2, no person shall
make a U-Turn at any of the following locations:
(Reserved)
§ 7A-15. SCHEDULE XV: NO TURN.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-10.3, no person shall
make a turn at any of the following locations:
(Reserved)
§ 7A-16. SCHEDULE XVI: NO RIGHT TURN ON RED SIGNAL.
In accordance with subsection 7-10.4, no person shall make a right turn
when facing a steady red signal (STOP) indication at any of the following
locations:
(Reserved)
§ 7A-17. SCHEDULE XVII: SPEED LIMITS.
In accordance with the provisions of section 7-11, the following speed limits
shall be established on the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of
Street Direction Speed Location
Church Road Both Zone 1 - 35
MPH
From Route 29 to Cedar Lane
Church Road Both Zone 2 - 40
MPH
From Cedar Lane to County Road
579
Barry Road Both 30 MPH Between Pleasant Valley Road
(County Route 623) and the
Hopewell Township Corporate
line-West Amwell Corporate Line
Bull Run Road Both 40 MPH Entire Length
Province Line
Road*
Both 40 MPH Between Pennington-Rocky Hill
Road (also known as Cherry
Valley Road) and Route 518
Province Line
Road*
Both 35 MPH From Route 518 to East Amwell
Township Line
Pennington-
Rocky Hill
Road
Both Zone 1 - 45
MPH
From Titus Mill Road to Moores
Mill-Mount Rose Road; thence
§ 7A-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7A-17
AO:195
Name of
Street Direction Speed Location
Pennington-
Rocky Hill
Road
Both Zone 2 - 40
MPH
To Hopewell-Princeton Road
(also called Carter Road); thence
Pennington-
Rocky Hill
Road
Both Zone 3 - 45
MPH
To Province Line Road,
Montgomery Township-Somerset
County and Princeton Township -
Mercer County Corporate line
Hopewell-
Wertsville
Road
Both 40 MPH Entire Length
Federal City
Road
Both 45 MPH From the Lawrence Township
border to the Ewing Township
border
Federal City
Road
Both Zone 1 - 25
MPH
From East Delaware Avenue
(County Road 624) to the
easterly leg of Blackwell Road
Federal City
Road
Both Zone 2 - 40
MPH
From the easterly leg of
Blackwell Road to Pennington-
Lawrenceville Road (County
Road 546)
Harbourton-
Rocktown Road
Both Zone 1 - 25
MPH
From 900 feet north of
Harbourton-Woodsville Road to
1,200 feet north of Harbourton-
Mt. Airy Road
Harbourton-
Rocktown Road
Both Zone 2 - 45
MPH
To the southerly West Amwell
Township line
Scotch Road Both 40 MPH From Route 546 to Pennington-
Titusville Road
River Drive Both 20 MPH Along the entire length of River
Drive in Washington Crossing
State Park
Dublin Road Both Zone 1 - 30
MPH
From Washington Crossing-
Pennington Road (County Road
546) to 3,125 feet north of
Washington Crossing-Pennington
Road (County Road 546)
Dublin Road Both Zone 2-25
MPH
From 3,125 feet north of
Washington Crossing-Pennington
Road (County Road 546) to
Pennington-Titusville Road
Van Dyke Road Both Zone 1 - 25
MPH
Entire Length
§ 7A-17 HOPEWELL CODE § 7A-17
AO:196
Name of
Street Direction Speed Location
Reed Road Both Zone 1 - 25
MPH
Washington Crossing-Pennington
Road (County Road 546) to
Diverty Road
Reed Road Both Zone 2 - 35
MPH
Diverty Road to the Ewing
Township border
Jacobs Creek
Road
Both Zone 1 - 35
MPH
From Trenton-Harbourton Road
(Route 579) to 4,130 feet east of
Trenton-Harbourton Road
Jacobs Creek
Road
Both Zone 2 - 40
MPH
From 4,130 feet east of Trenton-
Harbourton Road to Pennington-
Washington Crossing Road
(Route 546)
Harbourton-
Mt. Airy Road
Both 35 MPH Entire Length
Pennington-
Titusville Road
Both Zone 1 - 40
MPH
Between County Road 579 and
Timkak Lane
Pennington-
Titusville Road
Both Zone 2 - 25
MPH
Between Timkak Lane and the
Pennington Borough-Hopewell
Township line
Poor Farm
Road
Both 25 MPH Entire Length
Aunt Molly
Road
Both 25 MPH Entire Length
Bayberry Road Both 30 MPH Entire Length
Old Mill Road Both 30 MPH Entire Length
Mine Road Both 25 MPH Entire Length
Harbourton-
Woodsville
Road
Both 35 MPH Entire Length
Goat Hill Road Both 35 MPH Entire Length
Pleasant
Valley-
Harbourton
Both 35 MPH Entire Length
Stony Brook
Road
Both 35 MPH Entire Length
Valley Road Both 25 MPH Entire Length
Woodens Lane Both 25 MPH Entire Length
§ 7A-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7A-17
AO:197
Name of
Street Direction Speed Location
Titus Mill Road Both Zone 1 - 25
MPH
Between Pennington-Rocky Hill
Road and a point 500 feet west of
Wargo Road
Wargo Road Both 25 MPH From Titus Mill Road to Moores
Mill-Mt. Rose Road
Blackwell Road Both 40 MPH From point of Hopewell Township
ownership (approx. 0.4 miles
northeast of Pennington-
Lawrenceville Road) northeast to
Lawrence Township boundary
Denow Road Both 35 MPH From N.J. Route 31 east to Van
Brunt Road
* Note: This road being a multiple jurisdiction, these speed limits are
applicable only to the Township of Hopewell.
§ 7A-18. SCHEDULE XVIII: PROHIBITED TURNS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-10.5 no person shall make
a turn at any location in the manner described.
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Rt. 31 and Brandon
Road
Left Westbound on Brandon Road to
southbound on Rt. 31.
§ 7A-19. SCHEDULE XIX: NO PASSING ZONES.
In accordance with the provisions of section 7-14, no vehicles shall pass on
any of the following streets or locations:
Street Direction Location
Cherry Valley Road Between Aunt Molly Road and
Province Line Road
Province Line Road Both Entire length
§ 7A-20. SCHEDULE XX: MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS.
In accordance with Section 7-15, mid-block crosswalks shall exist at the
following locations:
§ 7A-17 HOPEWELL CODE § 7A-20
AO:198
Street Location
Blackwell Road Approximately 2,400 feet measured northeast along
Blackwell Road from its intersection with Federal
City Road and coinciding with the Lawrence-
Hopewell Trail crossing on Blackwell Road
Denow Road Approximately 1,550 feet measured northeast along
Denow Road from its intersection with New Jersey
State Highway Route 31
Federal City Road Approximately 875 feet measured east along
Federal City Road from its intersection with Old Mill
Road
Federal City Road Approximately 1,414 feet measured north along
Federal City Road from its intersection with
Pennington-Lawrenceville Road (Mercer County
Route 546) and coinciding with the Lawrence-
Hopewell Trail crossing on Federal City Road
Wargo Road Approximately 1,350 feet measured north along
Wargo Road from its intersection with Titus Mill
Road
Chapter 8
(RESERVED)
[Editor's Note: Chapter 8, Police, containing an ordinance of
7-15-1974 and Ord. No. 420, was deleted in its entirety by Ord. No.
2016-1634. See subsection 2-2.10, Police Department.]
Chapter 9
UNIFORM FIRE SAFETY CODE
[Editor's Note: For provisions regarding the establishment of the
"Hopewell Township Fire District," see Ordinance No. 761-88, copies
of which are on file in the office of the township clerk. Prior
ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 688-85,
729-87, 90-848, 91-898, 92-924 and 01-1200.]
§ 9-1. LOCAL ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. #06-1380]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c.383),
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be enforced locally within the
established limits of Hopewell Township.
§ 9-2. AGENCY DESIGNATION. [Ord. #06-1380]
There is hereby established the bureau of fire prevention which shall be
the sole local enforcing agency for the Township of Hopewell. The enforcing
agency shall serve within the geographic boundary of Hopewell Township
§ 7A-20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-2
AO:199
as defined and delineated by the official fire service areas map located at
the Hopewell Township Police Department.
§ 9-3. DUTIES. [Ord. #06-1380]
The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries as defined and delineated
by the official fire service areas map located at the Hopewell Township
Police Department, and shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the
Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 9-4. LIFE HAZARD USES. [Ord. #06-1380]
The local enforcing agency established by section 9-2 of this chapter shall
carry out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the
Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the commissioner of community affairs.
§ 9-5. NONLIFE HAZARD USES. [Ord. #06-1380]
The local enforcing agency established by section 9-2 of this chapter shall
carry out the periodic inspections of nonlife hazard uses required by the
Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the commissioner of community affairs.
§ 9-6. ORGANIZATION. [Ord. #06-1380]
The local enforcing agency established by section 9-2 of this chapter shall
be part of the governmental and administrative structure of the Hopewell
Township Fire District and shall be under the direct supervision of the fire
official.
§ 9-7. APPOINTMENTS, REMOVAL.
§ 9-7.1. Appointment of Fire Official. [Ord. #06-1380]
The local enforcing agency shall be under the supervision of the fire official
who shall be appointed by the board of fire commissioners.
§ 9-7.2. Inspectors and Employees. [Ord. #06-1380]
Such inspectors and other employees as may be necessary in the local
enforcing agency shall be appointed by the Hopewell Township Board of
Fire Commissioners upon the recommendation of the respective fire
officials.
§ 9-7.3. Removal from Office. [Ord. #06-1380]
The fire official, inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency
shall be subject to removal by the Hopewell Township Board of Fire
Commissioners for inefficiency or misconduct. Any person to be so removed
§ 9-2 HOPEWELL CODE § 9-7.3
AO:200
shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the appointing authority or
a designated hearing officer.
§ 9-8. BOARD OF APPEALS. [Ord. #06-1380]
Pursuant to sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcing agencies shall have the right
to appeal to the construction board of appeals of Mercer County.
§ 9-9. BURNING OF REFUSE PROHIBITED. [Ord. #06-1380]
§ 9-10. RAPID ACCESS KEY BOXES.
§ 9-10.1. Definition. [Ord. #06-1380]
For the purposes of this section the term "key" shall be defined as any
device or information needed to release a lock such as but not limited to a
mechanical key, a magnetic card reader, or a pass code.
§ 9-10.2. Applicability of Regulations. [Ord. #06-1380]
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the disposal of rubbish,
garbage or trade waste of buildings or structures by burning.
b. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the disposal of fallen
leaves by burning.
c. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the disposal of any type of
plant by burning.
d. The provisions of this section shall not apply to burning of refuse for
training or research exercises in fire protection or prevention when
conducted at a permanent facility or training center designed to be
used solely for such purposes on a continuing basis.
e. The provisions of this section shall not apply to open burning in
accordance with the provisions of the NJ Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C.
5:70 et seq. and/or N.J.A.C. 7:27-2 with appropriate valid permits.
f. Penalty for any violation of this section shall be in accordance with the
penalties stated at section 3-1 of the Hopewell Township Revised
General Ordinances.
a. All properties within the Township of Hopewell having an automatic fire
alarm system or a fire sprinkler system shall be equipped with a key
box.
b. All properties within the Township of Hopewell on which hazardous
materials are used, handled or stored where the total aggregate
quantity is more than 55 gallons, 500 pounds, or 200 cubic feet, and
such materials are in the (3) or (4) range of the NFPA 704M symbol; or
materials are water reactive or materials are radioactive shall be
§ 9-7.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-10.2
AO:201
§ 9-10.3. Specifications of Key Box. [Ord. #06-1380]
§ 9-10.4. Key Box Contents. [Ord. #06-1380]
equipped with a HazMat cabinet. This subsection shall not apply to
underground fuel storage.
c. This shall not apply to owner-occupied one and two family dwellings.
d. Facilities which employ constant on-site security shall be exempt from
this section provided that such on-site security personnel will provide
access to all areas of the building(s) and shall have readily available any
other materials required by this section.
a. The key box shall be UL listed type and approved by the Hopewell
Valley Bureau of Fire Safety.
b. The key box shall be compatible with the Hopewell Valley master key.
c. The rapid entry box shall be installed in a location approved by the
Hopewell Valley Fire Official.
a. Rapid entry boxes required under paragraphs a and b of subsection
9-10.2 shall contain the following:
1. Keys to locked points of egress, whether on interior or exterior of
such buildings;
2. Keys to locked mechanical rooms;
3. Keys to locked elevator rooms;
4. Keys to elevator controls;
5. Keys to any fence or secured areas;
6. Keys to other areas as directed by the fire official;
7. A floor plan of the rooms within the building.
b. Rapid entry boxes required under subsection 9-10.2b shall contain the
following:
1. All contents required by subsection 9-10.4a;
2. Alphabetical list of all chemicals, room number, location, and
approximate quantity and strength;
3. Material safety data sheets (MSDS) of all chemicals in alphabetical
order;
4. A copy of the emergency response plan (ERP);
5. List of all responsible parties and phone numbers;
§ 9-10.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 9-10.4
AO:202
§ 9-10.5. Time for Compliance. [Ord. #06-1380]
All existing buildings shall comply with this section within 12 months of its
effective date. All newly constructed buildings, not yet occupied or buildings
under construction, shall comply immediately, and certificate of occupancy
shall not be issued until this requirement is met.
§ 9-10.6. Maintaining Current Keys and Information. [Ord.
#06-1380]
§ 9-10.7. Penalties. [Ord. #06-1380]
Any building owner violating this section shall be subject to penalties as set
forth in the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 9-10.8. Repealer. [Ord. #06-1380]
Any and all ordinances or part of ordinances inconsistent with this section
are hereby repealed to the extent of their inconsistency.
§ 9-10.9. Citation; Statutory Authority. [Ord. #06-1380]
Cite as N.J.A.C. 5:70-3.2(a) 45, F-4501.
§ 9-10.10. Firefighting Methods. [Ord. #06-1380]
The installation of the rapid access key box shall not preclude any fire
department, fire company or firefighter from using traditional firefighting
methods to gain access to the building. The failure of any fire department,
fire company or firefighter to use the rapid access key box shall not give rise
to liability.
Chapter 10
6. Locations and types of automatic suppression systems.
c. All keys contained within key boxes shall be labeled with the location of
the locks which they operate.
a. All key box contents required by subsection 9-10.4, or required by the
fire official, or placed in the key box voluntarily by the building owner or
occupant including but not limited to the keys, access cards, pass
codes, elevator controls, floor plans, hazardous materials inventories,
or MSDS sheets shall be kept current with any changes to the building,
occupancy, or contents.
b. It shall be the responsibility of the building owner to notify the
Hopewell Valley Bureau of Fire Safety of any changes falling under the
requirements of subsection 9-10.6a within two days and make
arrangements to update the key box contents.
§ 9-10.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-10.10
AO:203
FEES AND PERMITS
§ 10-1. ISSUANCE OF PERMITS AND LICENSES: COLLECTION OF
FEES. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #605-92; Ord. #660-84, § 1]
The township clerk or such other officer as may be designated is authorized
to collect and receive the following fees and to issue such permits or
licenses as may be required by ordinance.
§ 10-2. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL. [Ord. #427; Ord.
#584-81; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord. #735-87, § 1; Ord.
#11-1507]
§ 10-3. CONSTRUCTION FEE SCHEDULE.
§ 10-3.1. Building Subcode Fee. [Ord. #450; Ord. #445; Ord. #446;
Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord. #735-87, § 2; Ord. #798-89,
§ 1; Ord. #95-012; Ord. #01-1196, § 1; Ord. #03-1294, § 1; Ord.
#07-1403; Ord. #07-1406]
The building subcode fees shall be as follows:
a. Plenary Retail Consumption License. Per license year the annual fee
shall be:
July 1, 2011 thru June 30, 2012 $2,400
July 1, 2012 thru June 30, 2013 and
thereafter
$2,500
b. Plenary Retail Distribution License. Per license year the annual fee
shall be:
July 1, 2011 thru June 30, 2012 $2,400
July 1, 2012 thru June 30, 2013 and
thereafter
$2,500
c. Club License (Annual): $150
d. Transfer: 10% of annual fee.
a. Permit for new construction: $0.040 per cubic foot of nonfarm building
or structure volume; $0.005 per cubic foot of farm building or structure
volume. Farm building or structures are defined as barns, sheds, silos,
storage bins, granaries, cribs or other such structures used specifically
for agricultural purposes and located on property actively devoted to
agriculture or horticulture and assessed under the 1964 Farmland
Assessment Act; provided that the minimum fee shall be $46.
b. Permit for renovations, alterations and repairs: $25 per $1,000 of
estimated cost of the work. The minimum fee shall be $46. For the
purpose of determining estimated cost, the applicant shall submit to the
§ 9-10.10 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-3.1
AO:204
enforcing agency if available, cost data produced by the architect or
engineer of record, or by a recognized estimating company or by the
contractor. A bona fide contractor's bid, if available, shall be submitted.
The enforcing agency will make the final decision regarding estimated
cost.
c. Permit for additions: $0.040 per cubic foot of nonfarm building or
structure volume for the added portion; $0.005 per cubic foot of farm
building or structure volume, as defined in subsection 10-3.1a, provided
that the minimum fee shall be $46.
d. Permit for combinations of renovations and additions: the sum of the
fees computed separately as renovations and additions.
e. Demolition of a building or structure shall be $150 for Residential; $300
for Commercial and $45 for Utility Buildings.
f. The fee for a permit for the relocation of a building or structure from
one lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be $25 per
$1,000 or the sum of the estimated costs for moving, for new
foundations, and for placement in a completed condition in the new
location, provided that the minimum fee shall be $46.
g. Fees for Certificates of Occupancy.
1. The fee for a certificate of occupancy as required by N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.23(a) and (b) shall be in the amount of 10% of the new
construction permit fee that would be charged pursuant to this fee
schedule. The minimum certificate fee as specified by use shall be:
Residential, $30; Commercial and Industrial, $60; Agricultural,
$30.
2. The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy as required by the
UCC shall be $150 as specified in N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20(c)3v.
3. The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a change
of use as required by the UCC shall be $200 as specified in N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.20(c)3iv.
h. The fee for roofing and siding work as specified in N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.20(c)2i(6) shall be $46. The fee for commercial roofing and
siding work shall be $20 per $1,000 of estimated cost, with submission
of proposal of work to be done.
i. The fee to construct a sign shall be $1.20 per square foot of sign, with a
minimum fee of $46.
j. The fee to construct or install an above-ground swimming pool shall be
$100 for a pool with a surface area greater than 550 square feet; the fee
in all other cases shall be $75. The fee to construct or install an inground
swimming pool shall be $200 for a pool with a surface area
greater than 500 square feet; the fee in all other cases shall be $100.
§ 10-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-3.1
AO:205
§ 10-3.2. Plumbing Subcode Fees. [Ord. #446; Ord. #605-82; Ord.
#660-84, § 1; Ord. #90-852, § 1; Ord. #96-1038; Ord. #01-1196, § 2;
Ord. #07-1403; Ord. #07-1406]
Minimum fee shall be $46.
The plumbing subcode fees shall be as follows:
k. The fee to construct a fence that exceeds six feet in height shall be $9
per $1,000 in cost, with a minimum fee of $46. The height standard
does not apply to barriers surrounding public or private swimming
pools.
l. The fee for an application for a variation shall be as specified in N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.20(c)3vii.
m. The fee to construct a wood deck shall be $15 per $1,000 in cost, with a
minimum fee of $46.
n. The fee for a radon mitigation permit shall be the total of the minimum
fee charged for each discipline involved, i.e., building, electric. Revised
per DCA Bulletin 93-A.
o. The fee for an annual permit shall be as specified in N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.20(c)5.
p. The fee to remove or abandon an underground storage tank shall be
$40 for each tank.
q. The minimum building permit fee shall be $46.
r. An escrow deposit of $500 shall be paid for plot plan review and
certificate of occupancy inspections.
a. The fee shall be in the amount of $15 per plumbing fixture, device,
except as may be hereinafter set forth.
b. The fees shall be in the amount of $65 per special device for grease
traps, oil separators, water cooled air conditioning units, sewage
ejectors, domestic steam boilers, gas piping, active solar systems, fuel
oil piping, refrigeration units, backflow preventers, utility service
connections or other similar devices.
c. The minimum fee under subsection 10-3.2 shall be $46.
d. For the purpose of computing this fee, fixtures or stacks shall include
but not be limited to lavatories, kitchen sinks, sinks, slop sinks, urinals,
bath tubs, water closets, laundry tubs, shower stalls, floor drains,
drinking fountains, dishwashers, garbage disposals, clothes washers,
hot water heaters, hose bibs, roof drains, or other similar devices.
e. For cross connections and backflow preventers that are subject to
testing, requiring reinspection annually, the fee shall be $46 for each
§ 10-3.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-3.2
AO:206
§ 10-3.3. Electrical Subcode Fees. [Ord. #524; Ord. #559-80; Ord.
#587-81; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord. #735-87, § 3; Ord.
#736-87, § 1; Ord. #822-89, § 1; Ord. #92-914, § 1; Ord. #02-1256;
Ord. #07-1403]
Minimum fee shall be $46.
device when they are tested or retested due to failure at initial
inspection.
f. The fee for inspection of sub slab radon collection systems for new
construction shall be $33. The fee for inspection of radon vents shall be
$7.
a. Electrical Fixtures and Devices. The fees shall be as follows:
Level One Activity (1 - 200)
First 50 receptacles, fixtures, devices $40
Each additional block of 25 $20
Level 2 Activity (201 - 400)
First 50 receptacles, fixtures, devices $40
Each additional block of 25 $30
Level 3 Activity (400+)
First 50 receptacles, fixtures, devices $40
Each additional block of 25 $50
For the purpose of computing this fee, receptacles, fixtures or devices
shall include lighting fixtures, wall switches, convenience receptacles,
sensors, dimmers, alarm devices, smoke and heat detectors,
communications outlets, light-standards eight feet or less in height
including luminaries, emergency lights, electric signs, exit lights or
similar electric fixtures and devices rated 20 amperes or less including
motors or equipment rated less than one horsepower (hp) or one
kilowatt (kw).
b. The fee for each motor, electrical device rated from one horsepower or
one kw to 10 horsepower or 10 kw; for each transformer, generator,
storable pool, hydro massage bath tub; for each underwater lighting
fixture; for household electric cooking equipment rated up to 16 kw; for
each receptacle rated from 30 amperes to 50 amperes; for each lightstandard
greater than eight feet in height, the fee shall be $15.
c. The fee for each motor or electrical device rated greater than 10
horsepower or 10 kw to 30 horsepower or 30 kw; for each service
equipment, panel board, switchboard, switch gear, motor-controlcenter,
or disconnecting means rated 200 amperes or less; for each
transformer or generator rated from greater than 10 kw or 10 kva to 45
kw or 45 kva; for each electric sign rated from greater than 20 amperes
§ 10-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-3.3
AO:207
to 200 amperes including associated disconnecting means; for each
receptacle rated greater than 50 amperes; and for each utility load
management device, the fee shall be $75.
d. The fee for each motor or electrical device rated from greater than 30
horsepower or 30 kw to 100 horsepower or 100 kw; for each service
equipment, panel board, switch board, switch gear, motor-controlcenter
or disconnecting means rated from greater than 200 amperes to
800 amperes; and for each transformer or generator rated from greater
than 45 kw or 45 kva to 100 kw or 112.5 kva, the fee shall be $150.
e. The fee for each motor or electrical device rated greater than 100
horsepower or 100 kw; for each service equipment, panel board, switch
board, switch gear, motor-control-center or disconnecting means rated
greater than 800 amperes; and for each transformer or generator rated
greater than 100 kw or 112.5 kva, the fee shall be $1,200.
f. The fee charged for electrical work for each permanently installed
private swimming pool (as defined in the National Electrical Code), spa,
hot tub or fountain shall be a flat fee of $75, which shall include any
required bonding, and associated equipment such as one filter pump,
disconnecting means and the one required receptacle. Any additional
equipment such as pool heater, underwater pool lights, blower motors,
receptacles, site lighting and the like shall be additional to the base
pool fee. The additional work shall be priced in accordance with
paragraphs a through e above the base pool fee where encountered.
g. The fee for annual pool inspections shall be a flat fee of $75.
h. The fee charged for the installation of single and multiple station smoke
or heat detectors and fire, burglar or security alarm systems in any one
or two-family dwelling shall be a flat fee of $46 per dwelling unit.
i. The fee for each fire, security or burglar alarm control unit for other
than residential use shall be a base fee of $150 for up to 50 devices.
Thereafter the fee shall be increased above the base fee of $150
pursuant to Level One, Level Two, and Level Three above in 25 groups
of devices.
j. For installations consisting of multi-meter stacks, the fee shall be based
on the ampere rating of the main bus and not upon the number of
meters or rating of disconnects on the meter stack. Individual load side
panel boards shall be charged in accordance with paragraphs c through
e above.
k. For installations requiring replacement of service entrance conductors
or feeder conductors only, the fee shall be in accordance with
paragraphs b through e above, based on the designated ampere rating
of the overcurrent device of the service or feeder.
§ 10-3.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-3.3
AO:208
§ 10-3.4. Plan Review. [Ord. #445; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1;
Ord. #92-909, § 1; Ord. #07-1403; Ord. #08-1426]
Plan review shall be 25% of the amount to be charged for the construction
permit and shall be paid before the plans are reviewed. Plan review on a
prototype shall be 5% of the amount to be charged. The amount paid for
this fee shall be credited toward the amount of the fee to be charged for the
construction permit. Plan review is a nonrefundable fee. An additional fee
of $45 shall be charged for review of changes to the plan.
§ 10-3.5. Permit for Sign Construction. [Ord. #445; Ord. #605-82;
Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord. #07-1403]
Permit to construct a sign shall be $46 minimum.
§ 10-3.6. Surcharge Fee. [Ord. #445; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84,
§ 1; Ord. #95-1012; Ord. #07-1403]
In order for the training, certification, and technical support programs
required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the regulations, the
enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fees specified, the New
Jersey State surcharge fee in the amount specified in N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19(b).
This surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection,
Department of Community Affairs on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarters
ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 and not later
than one month next succeeding the end of the quarter for which it is due.
The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal year
to the Bureau of Housing Inspection and not later than July 31, the total
amount of surcharge fee collected in the fiscal year. In the fiscal year in
which the regulations first become effective, the report shall be for the third
and fourth (State fiscal year) quarters only.
§ 10-3.7. Report of Construction Official Concerning Fees. [Ord.
#446; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord. #01-1196, § 3; Ord.
#07-1403]
The construction official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the township committee, annually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
enforcing agency and any other expenses of the municipality attributable to
the enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code Act.
l. The fee for process equipment shall be based on the ampere rating of
the overcurrent device protecting the conductor feeding the process
equipment.
m. For the purpose of computing these fees, all electrical and
communications devices, utilization equipment and motors which are
part of a premises wiring, except those which are portable plug-in type,
shall be counted.
§ 10-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-3.8
AO:209
§ 10-3.8. Fire Subcode Fees. [Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord. #735-87, § 4;
Ord. #91-899, § 1; Ord. #95-1012; Ord. #95-1013, § 1; Ord.
#96-1053; Ord. #07-1403; Ord. #07-1406; Ord. #08-1426]
Fire protection and other hazardous equipment: sprinklers, standpipes and
risers, detectors (smoke and heat), smoke control system, pre-engineered
suppression systems, gas and oil fired appliances not connected to the
plumbing system, fire pump, fireplaces, chimney relining, solid fuel
appliances (wood and coal), kitchen exhaust systems, including
incinerators, crematoriums, and flammable and combustible liquid storage
systems, spray booths, underground water service-fire protection,
underground water storage tanks.
a. All Hopewell Township churches, fire companies and schools are
exempt.
b. Fire subcode application fee or miscellaneous inspection (Minimum):
$46.
c. Fire subcode fee for renovations, alterations and repairs: $12 per
$1,000 of cost up to $250,000; $8 per $1,000 cost from $250,001 to
$1,000,000 and $5 per $1,000 of cost over $1,000,001.
d. The fee for fuel storage tanks and similar equipment: $40 per 1 to 1,000
gallons plus $10 per each additional 500 gallons or fraction thereof.
e. The fee for 20 or fewer smoke/heat detectors shall be $60; for 21 to and
including 100 detectors, the fee shall be $125; for 101 to and including
200 detectors, the fee shall be $250; for 201 to and including 400
detectors, the fee shall be $750; for 401 to and including 1,000
detectors, the fee shall be $850 for over 1,000 detectors, the fee shall
be $1,500.
f. The fee for 20 or fewer heads shall be $65; for 21 to and including 100
heads, the fee shall be $125; for 101 to and including 200 heads, the fee
shall be $250; for 201 to and including 400 heads, the fee shall be $750;
for 401 to and including 1,000 heads, the fee shall be $850; for over
1,000 heads, the fee shall be $1,500.
g. The fee for each standpipe, each fire pump and each smoke control
system shall be $229.
h. The fee for each pre-engineered system shall be $125.
i. The fee for each gas or oil fired appliance that is not connected to the
plumbing system shall be $50.
j. The fee for each kitchen exhaust system and spray booth shall be $75.
k. The fee for each fireplace, coal stove or wood burning stove or chimney
relining shall be $50.
l. The fee for each incinerator shall be $550.
§ 10-3.8 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-3.8
AO:210
§ 10-3.9. Uniform Fire Safety Code Fees. [Ord. #703-86, § 1; Ord.
#95-1013, § 2; Ord. #06-1378]
Uniform Fire Safety Code permit fees shall be in the amounts as prescribed
in the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
§ 10-3.10. Uniform Fire Safety Code Fees for Nonlife Hazard Use
Inspections. [Ord. #730-87, § 1; Ord. #06-1378]
§ 10-4. ANIMAL CONTROL.
§ 10-4.1. License for Dogs. [Ord. #427; Ord. #513; Ord. #536; Ord.
#598-81; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #638-83, § 1; Ord. #660-82, § 1; Ord.
#90-836, § 3; Ord. #91-884, § 3; Ord. #07-1397; Ord. #10-1503, § 1]
m. The fee for each crematorium shall be $550.
n. The fee for underground water storage tanks shall be $100.
o. The fee for underground water service fire protection shall be $200.
p. The fee for fire protection backflow preventer shall be $65.
q. Inspection of smoke sensitive alarm devices shall be $50 per inspection.
a. Industrial and commercial uses not classified as "life hazard uses" by
the Uniform Fire Safety Code having a gross floor area of:
Gross Floor Area Fee
Under 1,000 square feet $25
1,000 square feet to 5,999 square feet $50
6,000 square feet to 9,999 square feet $75
10,000 square feet or above $100
The payment of the above fees shall be the responsibility of the
occupant of the premises.
The above described fees shall be paid by the party as designated
above or before the date specified in the notice served upon said party
by the fire official, which date shall be at least 30 days from the date
of the notice.
a. Annual license (due on or before January 31): $21.
b. Late fee schedule:
February: $10.
March: $20.
April-December: $30.
§ 10-3.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-4.1
AO:211
§ 10-4.2. Kennels. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1;
Ord. #10-1503, § 1]
§ 10-4.3. Pet Shops. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84,
§ 1; Ord. #10-1503, § 1]
§ 10-4.4. Shelter or Pound. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #605-82; Ord.
#660-84, § 1; Ord. #10-1503, § 1]
§ 10-4.5. Impoundment. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #605-82; Ord.
#660-84, § 1; Ord. #10-1503, § 1]
As set forth by contract.
§ 10-4.6. Destruction and Disposal Fee. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord.
#605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord. #10-1503, § 1]
As set forth by contract.
§ 10-4.7. Examination Fee for Animals Seized for Impoundment.
[Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord. #10-1503, § 1]
As set forth by contract.
§ 10-4.8. Cat Registration. [Ord. #91-884, § 3; Ord. #93-941, § 6;
Ord. #96-1053; Ord. #03-1277, § 2; Ord. #03-1284, § 1; Ord.
#07-1397; Ord. #10-1503, § 1]
c. Plus a State dog registration tag fee: $1.
d. Plus a State fee for a Pilot Spay/Neuter Clinic Fund: $20.
e. Plus a State surcharge fee for any nonneutered or nonspayed dog: $3.
f. Replacement tag: $1.
a. Ten dogs or less (annual): $10.
b. More than 10 dogs (annual): $25.
a. Annual license fee: $10.
a. License fee: No charge.
a. Annual Registration fee per registration period (effective 6/2007
through 12/31/2008 then annually thereafter): $21.
Nonneutered/Nonspay fee: $3.
b. Replacement tag: $1.
c. Late fee:
§ 10-4.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-4.8
AO:212
§ 10-5. HEALTH.
§ 10-5.1. Sewerage. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84,
§ 1; Ord. #731-87, § 1; Ord. #92-912, § 1; Ord. #95-1012; Ord.
#96-1053; Ord. #01-1201, § 1; Ord. #03-1284, § 1; Ord. #10-1503,
§ 2]
§ 10-5.2. Water. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #432; Ord. #555-80; Ord.
#605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord. #731-87, § 1; Ord. #95-1012; Ord.
#01-1201, § 1; Ord. 03-1284, § 1, Ord. #04-1319, § 2; Ord.
#10-1503, § 2; Ord. #2018-1684]
August $10
September $20
October-June $30
a. Location, construction and inspection of private sewage disposal
system: $650.
b. Repairs to private sewerage disposal system: $100.
Alterations to private sewerage disposal systems: $625.
c. Copy of Individual Sewage Disposal System Code: $5.
d. Transfer of ownership of a valid sewage disposal system construction
permit for a sewage disposal system design currently on file, but not
actively under construction, and without any design changes, from the
seller to the buyer of the property, upon sale of property: $50.
e. Application fee for a one year extension of a valid sewage disposal
system permit currently on file but not actively under construction. A
maximum of two extensions are permitted: $50.
f. Application for a permit for location, construction and inspection of a
redesigned sewage disposal system: $200.
g. Abandonment of a sewage disposal septic system/tank when connecting
to public sanitary sewage line in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:9A-12.8:
$50.
h. Application for septic system letter of review: $75.
a. Location, construction or alteration of an individual nonpublic water
supply system: $200.
b. Each reinspection caused by failure of permittee to act in accordance
with the term of the permit: $50.
c. Location, construction or alteration of a public noncommunity water
system: $300.
§ 10-4.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-5.2
AO:213
d. Copy of water ordinance: $5.
e. Well deepening permit: $80.
f. Well pump replacement permit: $80.
g. Well abandonment permit: $80.
h. Aquifer Test and Analysis.
1. Each applicant shall be required to reimburse the Township for all
reasonable and necessary professional fees related to the review of
aquifer test designs, septic system test designs and
hydrogeological report reviews. An applicant shall be required to
establish an escrow in the form of a development application fee in
minimum amounts as set forth below, to be used for professional
review fees and inspection fees. The minimum amount of the
development application fee/escrow will be determined as set forth
below. Each applicant shall agree in writing to pay for all
reasonable costs for professional review fees incurred in excess of
the minimum escrow amount. Any unused portion of the escrow fee
or escrow amount shall be returned to the applicant.
(a) Applicants for aquifer test designs, septic system test designs
and report reviews required by Section 16-6 et seq. of
Hopewell Township's Health Ordinance, Section 17-149 et seq.
of Hopewell Township's Municipal Land Use and Development
Ordinance, or review of hydrogeological reports in association
with septic system design or evaluations shall pay a minimum
development application fee/escrow as follows:
(1) Review Aquifer or Septic System Test Design.
(i) Residential subdivisions and site plans: $1,000. These
fees do not apply to existing dwelling units.
(ii) Nonessential well and well uses: $1,000 for the first
1,000 gallons of average daily demand and $100 for
each additional 1,000 gallons of average daily
demand.
(iii) Reviews for septic system design or septic system
suitability: $1,000.
(2) Hydrologic Report Review.
(i) Residential subdivisions and site plans: $1,000. These
fees do not apply to existing dwelling units.
(ii) Nonessential well and well uses: $2,000 for the first
1,000 gallons of average daily demand and $200 for
each additional 1,000 gallons of average daily
demand.
§ 10-5.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-5.2
AO:214
§ 10-5.3. Environmental Health Program Permits and Fees. [Ord.
#427; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord. #731-87, § 1; Ord.
#90-836, § 1; Ord. #95-1012; Ord. #96-1053; Ord. #05-1343, § 1;
Ord. #08-1447; Ord. #10-1503, § 2]
§ 10-5.4. Records of Vital Statistics. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #427;
Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord. #731-87, § 1; Ord. #95-1012;
Ord. #02-1259; Ord. #03-1284, § 1; Ord. #04-1319, § 1; Ord.
#04-1327, § 1; Ord. #07-1397; Ord. #08-1447; Ord. #10-1503, § 2;
Ord. #2016-1621]
(iii) Reviews for septic system design or septic system
suitability: $1,000.
i. Application for well water system letter of review: $75.
a. Supermarkets and food stores over 5,000 square feet, restaurants and
cafeterias with more than 100 seats: $225.
b. Retail food markets or convenience stores of less than 5,000 square feet
with food preparation on site and small restaurants with less than 100
seats: $125.
c. Food service facilities with limited preparation of nonhazardous foods.
Includes but not limited to day care center, coffee service only facilities,
alcoholic beverage facilities. Mobile units et al: $100.
d. Retail food establishments which sell prepackaged food or beverage
items or agricultural items which require no food preparation,
including but not limited to pharmacies, farm stands, package store, et
al: $75.
e. Temporary events: $25.
f. Establishment incident to nonprofit organizations: $25.
g. Retail Food Establishment Plan Review.
1. Less than 1,000 square feet: $150.
2. 1,000 square feet to 5,000 square feet: $200.
3. More than 5,000 square feet: $250.
h. Swimming pool and natural commercial bathing places —
nonresidential (annual): $200.
i. Body art establishments annual license: $250.
j. Fitness and recreation establishments: $200.
a. Birth Certificate (Certified Copy).
1. First Copy: $25.
§ 10-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-5.4
AO:215
§ 10-5.5. Soil Testing. [Ord. #508; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1;
Ord. #731-87, § 1; Ord. #739-87; Ord. #764-88, § 1; Ord. #90-836,
§ 2; Ord. #98-1101, § 1; Ord. #10-1503, § 2]
§ 10-5.6. Vending Machine. [Ord. #552; Ord. #605-82; Ord.
#660-84, § 1; Ord. #03-1284, § 1; Ord. #10-1503, § 2]
§ 10-5.7. Vaccination. [Ord. #638-83, § 2; Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord.
#99-1116; Ord. #01-1201, § 2; Ord. #03-1284, § 1; Ord. #06-1378;
Ord. No. #07-1397; Ord. #10-1503, § 2]
Vaccine Fee
Pneumonia vaccination (non-Medicare) $22
Influenza vaccination (if not senior or high risk) $12
Hepatitis B (adult) per dose $30
Hepatitis B (child - 18 years) per dose $10
Hepatitis A (adult) per dose $35
MMR (per dose) $30
Varicella $50
2. Additional copies of the same record ordered on the same day: $10.
b. Burial Permit: $5.
c. Death Certificate (Certified Copy).
1. First Copy: $25.
2. Additional copies of the same record ordered on the same day: $10.
d. Marriage license/civil union ($25 State): $28.
e. Marriage license/civil union (certified copy): $10.
f. Domestic partnership registration (State fee $25): $28.
g. Certificate of domestic partnership (certified copy): $10.
h. Correction to vital record: $35.
a. Soil testing in accordance with State regulation and township
ordinance — cost per day: $350.
b. Failure to cancel township witness, less than 72 hours prior to
scheduled date(s), except for inclement weather, the day of testing,
shall result in a cancellation penalty fee charge per day: $50.
a. Vending machine site permit fee (annual): $10.
b. Vending machine license fee (annual, per machine): $5.
§ 10-5.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-5.7
AO:216
Vaccine Fee
Lyme vaccine per dose $50
Td (adult) $20
Colon-Rectal Kit $3
Fees may be waived for low income, uninsured, Medicaid, Medicare or
special programs offered by health department.
§ 10-6. MISCELLANEOUS LICENSES, FEES AND PERMITS.
§ 10-6.1. Amusement Devices (Annual on or before August 31).
[Ord. #427; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1]
§ 10-6.2. Fireworks. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84,
§ 1]
None.
§ 10-6.3. (Reserved)28
§ 10-6.4. Hawkers, Peddlers and Canvassers. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord.
#605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord. No. 2016-1637]
§ 10-6.5. Itinerant Merchants or Vendors. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord.
#605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1]
License, 180 days: $1,000.
§ 10-6.6. Trapshooting/Private Target Range. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord.
#605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1]
§ 10-6.7. Taxicab, Limousine and Livery Service. [Ord. #7/15/74;
Ord. #427; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1]
a. Each machine: $10.
b. Each machine (moving picture): $100.
a. Application fee: $15.
b. License fee: $100.
a. Application fee: $25.
b. Annual fee: $20.
a. Owner (annual): $25.
28.Editor's Note: Former subsection 10-6.3, Gasoline Service Station, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 7/15/74, 605-82 and 660-84 was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 95-1007.
§ 10-5.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-6.7
AO:217
§ 10-6.8. Quarry License. [Ord. #430; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84,
§ 1; Ord. #08-1440, § I]
§ 10-6.9. Unsolicited and Unsubscribed Commercial Publications.
[Ord. #613-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1]
Distributor or Publisher License (annual): $150.
§ 10-6.10. Meeting Notice/Agenda and Minutes and Tapes. [Ord.
#427; Ord. #571-80; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord.
#735-87, § 5; Ord. #01-1201, § 2; Ord. #02-1259]
b. Operator (annual): $10.
c. Renewal: $15.
d. Per Vehicle: $10.
a. Upon initial application the applicant shall pay a license fee: $2,500.
b. Upon application for renewal, for each twelve-month period following
the original date of issue the applicant shall pay a license fee: $2,000.
a. Township committee notice/agenda: $0.75 per page.
1. Annual subscription fee for notice/agenda: $36 annually.
2. Township committee minutes: $0.75 per page.
3. Annual subscription fee for minutes: $200 annually.
4. Township committee meeting tapes: $10 per tape.
b. Planning board notice/agenda: $0.75 per page.
1. Annual subscription fee for notice/agenda: $54 annually.
2. Planning board minutes: $0.75 per page.
3. Annual subscription fee for minutes: $300 annually.
4. Planning board meeting tapes: $10 per tape.
c. Application review committee (ARC) notice/agenda: $0.75 per page.
1. Annual subscription fee for notice/agenda: $36 annually.
2. ARC minutes: $0.75 per page.
3. Annual subscription fee for minutes: $200 annually.
d. Board of adjustment notice/agenda: $0.75 per page.
1. Annual subscription fee for notice/agenda: $24 annually.
2. Board of adjustment minutes: $0.75 per page.
§ 10-6.7 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-6.10
AO:218
§ 10-6.11. Festivals and Large Assemblies. [New; Ord. #605-82; Ord.
#660-84, § 1; Ord. #02-1259]
Permit fee, each 200 people or fraction thereof: $10.
§ 10-6.12. (Reserved)29
§ 10-6.13. Official Township Publications (Books, Magazines,
Newsletters). [Ord. #90-834, § 1; Ord. #01-1201, § 2; Ord.
#2019-1705]
The fee for the book entitled "Hopewell: A Historical Geography" shall be:
$30 per copy.
§ 10-6.14. Recording and Plotting of Deeds. [Ord. #92-915, § 1; Ord.
#96-1045; Ord. #01-1201, § 2]
3. Annual subscription fee for minutes: $120 annually.
4. Board of adjustment meeting tapes: $10 per tape.
e. Other boards, commissions or committees (except Hopewell Township
Utilities Authority) notice/agenda: $0.75 per page.
1. Annual subscription fee for agenda: $24 annually.
2. Other boards, commissions or committees minutes: $0.75 per page.
3. Annual subscription fee for minutes: $120 annually.
a. The owner and owners of any lot in the township shall within 30 days
after becoming such owners, present the deed or other evidences of
title for such lot to the Township of Hopewell for the purpose of
recording the transfer and ownership of such lot in the official records
of the township.
b. The deed or other evidence of title presented for recording and plotting
shall contain a definite identification of the location of the lot or
property conveyed by insertion of a definite beginning point, the street
and house number, and the block and lot numbers according to the most
current revision of the township tax map.
c. The township may refuse to accept any deed or other instrument for
plotting or recording.
d. There shall be a fee of $45 paid to the Township of Hopewell for the
plotting and recording of each deed or other instrument exclusive of
filed map which is evidence of title.
29.Editor's Note: Former subsection 10-6.12, Vaccination, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 638-83, 660-84, 99-1116 and 01-1201 was repealed
in its entirety by Ordinance No. 03-1284. See subsection 10-5.7 for vaccination fees.
§ 10-6.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-6.14
AO:219
§ 10-6.15. Application for Public Defender. [Ord. #94-969; Ord.
#97-1088]
A person applying for representation by the public defender of the Township
of Hopewell shall pay an application fee of $200 at the time of application.
The court may waive the required application fee, in whole or in part, if the
court determines, in its discretion, that the application fee represents an
unreasonable burden upon the person seeking representation.
§ 10-7. LAND DEVELOPMENT FEES. [Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84,
§ 1; Ord. #686-85, § 31; Ord. #748-87, § 1; Ord. #820-89, § 1; Ord.
#94-978, § 1; Ord. #94-997; Ord. #95-1012; Ord. #95-1024, § 1;
Ord. #97-1075; Ord. #04-1330, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #07-1399 § 1; Ord.
#1461, § 1; Ord. No. 2016-1644]
e. Any person who fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding
$500.
a. Each applicant shall be required to reimburse the township for all
reasonable and necessary professional fees related to the review of
applications for development, review and preparation of documents,
stormwater reviews for any major development and inspection of
improvements. An applicant shall be required to pay a fee as set forth
below, together with the establishment of an escrow account for
professional review fees and inspection fees, the amounts of which
escrows will be determined as set forth below. Each applicant shall
agree in writing to pay for all reasonable costs for professional review
fees incurred in excess of the original escrow amount. Any unused
portion of the escrow fee or escrow amount shall be returned to the
applicant.
b. For projects including the actual construction of low and moderate
income housing units, the subdivision and site plan application fees
shall be reduced by eliminating the per lot fee for those lots in the
subdivision devoted entirely to low or moderate income units, and by
eliminating from the site plan fee that portion that would have been
generated by the low and moderate income housing units.
c. Affordable Housing Development Fees. In all developments other than
those involving the actual construction of low and moderate income
housing units, a fee shall be deposited to the township's interest
bearing Affordable Housing Trust Fund pursuant to section 10-17
"Affordable Housing Development Fees" of this chapter.
d. Escrow accounts for special meetings requested with the township
professional staff shall be arranged and coordinated by the
administrative officer, land use. Said escrow accounts shall fully cover
the township's anticipated expense for said meeting(s).
§ 10-6.14 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-7.1
AO:220
§ 10-7.1. Application Fees and Escrow for Review.30 [Ord. #95-1024,
§ 1; Ord. #96-1036, § 1; Ord. #96-1054, § 1; Ord. #00-1161, § 1; Ord.
#00-1162, § 2; Ord. #01-1201, § 3; Ord. #02-1259; Ord. #03-1298,
§ 1; Ord. #04-1319, § 3; Ord. #04-1328, § 1; Ord. #06-1367, § 1; Ord.
#08-1447; Ord. #14-1599; Ord. No. 2016-1644]
Applicant shall be responsible for payment of an application fee as set
forth below together with deposit of an escrow amount to cover the cost
of all reasonableness and necessary professional fees related to review of
applications for development. For any and all applications, the minimum
escrow amount shall be $500.
a. Minor Subdivision.
Type
Application
Fee
Escrow
Amount
Up to 3 lots (with inclusion of
original lot)
$250 $950 per lot
Resubmittal of application due to
being incomplete
$150 $1,000
160-day extension request for
signature of plans
$35 —
Amendment or extension of minor
subdivision approval
$150 $850
Conceptual review $150 $1,500
b. Site Plan Review.
Type
Application
Fee
Escrow
Amount
Preliminary plan — nonresidential $400 $1,200 plus $3
per 100 square
feet of
improvements
up to 1,000,000
square feet
If more than 1,000,000 square
feet
$700 $850 plus $2
per 100 square
feet of
improvements
thereafter
30.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history for former subsections 10-7.1 through 10-7.9
include portions of Ordinance Nos. 7/15/74, 509, 571-80, 605-82, 660-84, 686-85, 735-87,
748-87 and 820-89.
§ 10-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-7.1
AO:221
Type
Application
Fee
Escrow
Amount
Final plan — nonresidential $300 $850 plus $3
per 100 square
feet of
improvements
up to 1,000,000
square feet
If more than 1,000,000 square
feet
$600 $600 plus $1
per 100 square
feet of
improvements
thereafter
Preliminary plan — residential $300 $600 plus $50
per unit
Final plan — residential $250 $600 plus $50
per unit
Resubmittal of preliminary or final
application due to being
incomplete-nonresidential
$200 $600 plus $2.50
per 100 square
feet of
improvements
up to 1,000,000
square feet of
improvements
If more than 1,000,000 square
feet
$350 $600 plus $0.50
per 100 square
feet of
improvements
thereafter
Resubmittal of preliminary or final
application due to being
incomplete-residential
$200 $600 plus $10
per unit
Conceptual review $250 $2,000 up to
100,000 square
feet of
improvements
If more than 100,000 square feet $350 $7,500 up to
1,000,000
square feet of
improvements
If more than 1,000,000 square
feet
$600 $10,000 over
1,000,000
square feet of
improvements
§ 10-7.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-7.1
AO:222
Type
Application
Fee
Escrow
Amount
Amendment or revalidation of
preliminary or final site plan —
nonresidential
$250 $850 plus $3
per 100 square
feet of
improvements
up to 1,000,000
square feet
If more than 1,000,000 square
feet
$300 $600 plus $1
per 100 square
feet of
improvements
thereafter
Amendment or revalidation of
preliminary or final site —
residential
$250 $600 plus $10
per unit
Waiver of site plan approval $200 $1,500
180-day extension for signature of
plans
$35 None
Extension request for signature of
plans following expiration of initial
180-day extension
$150 $400
Extension of vesting period
approvals
$200 $850
c. Major Subdivision.
Type
Application
Fee
Escrow
Amount
Preliminary plan (with inclusion of
original lot)
$450 plus $10
per lot
$1,500 plus
$100 per lot
Final plat (with inclusion of
original lot)
$350 plus $10
per lot
$1,200 plus $75
per lot
Resubmittal of application for
preliminary or final due to being
incomplete
$200 $850 plus $50
per lot
Conceptual review $300 $1,800 plus $50
per lot
Amendment or revalidation of
preliminary or final subdivision
$250 $1,000 plus $50
per lot
180-day extension for signature of
plans
$35 None
§ 10-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-7.1
AO:223
Type
Application
Fee
Escrow
Amount
Extension request for signature of
plans following expiration of initial
180-day extension
$150 $400
Extension of vesting period
approvals
$200 $850
Conditional use permit $200 $1,500
General development plan or
amendment
$750 $7,500
d. Exemption from Application Fee and/or Escrow Amount. Disabled
persons, or a parent or sibling of a disabled person, shall be exempt
from the payment of applications fees as required by this section,
provided that the application relates to development which promotes
accessibility to the disabled person's own living unit.
e. Site plan application fees and escrows for communications and wireless
telecommunications towers, antennas, facilities and equipment shall be
as follows:
1. If no new tower is proposed, an application fee of $5,000 and an
escrow fee of $10,000.
2. If a new tower is proposed, an application fee of $10,000 and an
escrow fee of $20,000.
f. 1. Hydrogeologic Report Review.
(a) All residential subdivisions and site plans. $2,000, collected in
escrow, for the first lot or dwelling unit and $200, collected in
escrow, for each additional proposed lot or dwelling unit. These
escrow fees do not apply to existing dwelling units.
(b) Nonresidential site plans. $2,000, collected in escrow, for the
first 1,000 gallons of average daily demand and $200, collected
in escrow, for each additional 1,000 gallons of average daily
demand.
g. Development application fees, escrows, stream corridor permit fees
and appeal fees for development or disturbance in stream corridors
shall be as follows:
1. For all uses, a development application fee of $150. For a stream
corridor permit, a fee of $150 for every 100 square feet of
development or disturbance as defined in Chapter 17, Article X,
Section 17-181. In addition, for development applications, an
escrow fee of $150 for every 100 square feet of development or
disturbance as defined in Chapter 17, Article X, Section 17-181.
§ 10-7.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-7.1
AO:224
§ 10-7.2. Construction Inspection Fees. [Ord. #95-1024, § 1]
§ 10-7.3. Miscellaneous Fees. [Ord. #95-1024, § 1; Ord. #01-1201,
§ 3; Ord. #02-1259]
Type Fee
Copy of 2002 Master Plan Land Use and
Conservation Elements
$35
Other Master Plan Elements See Section 10-9.1
Amendments to Master Plan See Section 10-9.1
Certificate as to approval of subdivision $10
Information on CD (as available) $5 each
NOTE: Information that cannot be reproduced in-house will be sent to a
reproduction center and their current rate will be charged.
2. The fee for an appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment from the
decision of the administrative officer regarding a stream corridor
permit shall be $500. Where the Zoning Board reverses the
decision of the administrative officer, the $500 appeal fee will be
refunded to the applicant.
h. Stormwater reviews for any major development shall pay a
development application fee of $500 plus $2 for every 100 square feet
of disturbance in excess of one acre.
a. Inspection fees shall be calculated in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53h.
1. The applicant shall place in escrow the greater of $500 or 5% of the
costs of improvements as estimated by the municipal engineer in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4. For those developments for
which the reasonably anticipated fees are less than $10,000, the
fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in two installments,
with the initial amount being a deposit of 50% of the anticipated
fees, with the balance due when the deposit drops to 10% of the
reasonably anticipated fees. For those developments for which the
reasonably anticipated fees are $10,000 or greater, the fees may be
paid, at the option of the developer, in four installments. The initial
amount deposited by a developer shall be 25% of the reasonably
anticipated fees, with subsequent installments of 25% being due
when the escrow account has been reduced to 10% of the total fees
anticipated.
2. Upon expiration of the applicable maintenance period, any unused
portion of the construction inspection fee will be returned to the
developer.
§ 10-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-7.4
AO:225
§ 10-7.4. Interest. [Ord. #95-1024, § 1]
In the event the applicant fails to reimburse the township within 30 days of
receipt of a statement of professional fees paid by the township for either
review or inspection, interest shall accrue at the rate of 1 1/2% per month
on the outstanding balance.
§ 10-8. POLICE.
§ 10-8.1. Fees Required. [Ord. #427; Ord. #499; Ord. #555-80; Ord.
#593-81; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #652-84, § 1; Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord.
#703-86, § 1; Ord. #735-87, § 7; Ord. #800-89, § 1; Ord. #94-993,
§ 1; Ord. #02-1243, § 1; Ord. #05-1363, § 1; Ord. #09-1468, § 1; Ord.
#10-1500, § 1; Ord. #13-1571; Ord. No. 2016-1637; Ord. #19-1704]
§ 10-9. RECORDS.
a. Application for firearms identification card: $5.
b. Application for firearms permit to purchase: $2.
c. Nonresident fingerprinting fee: $15.
d. Letters of Good Standing: $5 each.
e. Motor vehicle accident report requested in person:
1. $0.05 per page for letter sized pages and smaller;
2. $0.07 per page for legal sized pages and larger;
3. If the actual costs to produce paper copies exceeds $0.05 and/or
$0.07 per page then the requestor shall be charged the actual cost
of duplication;
4. Electronic records (i.e. those records sent via e-mail or fax, etc.)
shall be provided to the requestor without any cost of duplication;
5. Records requested and provided in another medium (i.e. computer
disc, CD-ROM, DVD, etc.) shall be provided at the actual cost of the
duplication in medium requested.
f. Motor vehicle accident report requested other than in person: $5.
g. Special duty for full-time police officers for profit companies: $95/per
hour.
h. Special duty for full-time police officers for nonprofit organizations:
$85/per hour.
i. Application fee for providing municipal vehicle towing services: $400.
j. Vehicle towing service rotation fee: $100.
§ 10-7.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-9.1
AO:226
§ 10-9.1. Public Records (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2). [Ord. #432; Ord.
#605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord. #02-1259; Ord. #10-503, § II]
§ 10-9.2. Municipal Court Records. [Ord. #432; Ord. #605-82; Ord.
#660-84, § 1; Ord. #04-1327, § 1]
a. $0.05 per page for letter sized pages and smaller;
b. $0.07 per page for legal sized pages and larger;
c. If the actual costs to produce paper copies exceeds $0.05 and/or $0.07
per page then the requestor shall be charged the actual cost of
duplication;
d. Electronic records (i.e. those records sent via e-mail or fax, etc.) shall
be provided to the requestor without any cost of duplication;
e. Records requested and provided in another medium (i.e. computer disc,
CD-ROM, DVD, etc.) shall be provided at the actual cost of the
duplication in medium requested.
a. Fees pursuant to N.J.S.A. 22A:3-4.
b. All requests for discovery in matters pending in the Township of
Hopewell Municipal Court shall be submitted through the municipal
prosecutor.
c. The following fees shall be payable by the requestor to the Township of
Hopewell for the discovery provided:
1. $0.75 per page for each of the first 10 pages photocopied.
2. $0.50 per page for each of the next 10 pages photocopied.
3. $0.25 per page for each of the pages photocopied thereafter.
4. Actual postage for any discovery sent by mail.
5. $0.25 for the envelope for any discovery sent by mail.
6. Photographs will be photocopied at the rates established herein. If
requests are made for duplicate photographs, the actual cost of
making the photographs shall be charged.
7. Duplication of videotapes constitutes an extraordinary duplication
process and will be charged at the rate of $5 per videotape.
8. On any item that cannot be photocopied on the township copy
machine or not otherwise provided for in this schedule, the actual
cost incurred in making the copy shall be charged.
d. Where the discovery must be obtained from an entity other than the
Township of Hopewell, e.g. another police department, the actual costs
paid to the other entity shall be paid by the requestor.
§ 10-9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-9.3
AO:227
§ 10-9.3. Miscellaneous. [Ord. #427; Ord. #432; Ord. #454; Ord.
#567-80; Ord. #571-80; Ord. #580-81; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84,
§ 1; Ord. #672-85, § 1; Ord. #681-85, § 1; Ord. #702-86, § 1; Ord.
#735-87, § 8; Ord. #799-89, § 1; Ord. #96-1043]
§ 10-10. STREETS AND ROADS.
§ 10-10.1. Excavation. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #592-81; Ord. #605-82;
Ord. #660-84, § 1]
Deposit, per square yard $20
Minimum per application $140
§ 10-10.2. Curb Removal. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #605-82; Ord.
#660-84, § 1]
Fee: $5.
§ 10-10.3. Road Opening Permit. [Ord. #427; Ord. #592-81; Ord.
#605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord. #02-1259]
a. Street and Zoning maps: $2.
b. Codified ordinances: $85.
Each supplement: $10
c. Land Use and Development Ordinance (Zoning): $50.
d. Natural resources inventory: $15.
e. Photocopies (customer's material): $0.25 per page for 1-10 pages $0.10
page thereafter.
f. Standard specifications for construction of water supply system or
sanitary sewers (Available from H.T.M.U.A.): $5.
g. Certified list of property owners within 200 feet of applicant property:
$0.25 per name or $10, whichever is greater.
h. Bid documents fees — as set forth in bid notice to bidders.
i. Surplus tax maps of the previous year:
Small set of maps: $15
Large set of maps: $25
j. Individual tax map, page: $1 per page
a. Permit fee: $100.
b. Reinspection due to improper closure: $25.
§ 10-9.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-10.3
AO:228
§ 10-10.4. Driveway Permit. [Ord. #01-1197, § 1]
§ 10-11. TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS.
§ 10-11.1. Tax Search. [Ord. #427; Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1]
Fee: $10.
§ 10-11.2. Assessment Search. [Ord. #427; Ord. #605-82; Ord.
#660-84, § 1]
Fee: $10.
§ 10-11.3. Continuation Search Fee. [New; Ord. #605-82; Ord.
#660-84, § 1]
Per Calendar Year Within Three Years of Original Issue: $2.
§ 10-11.4. Duplicate Tax Bill. [Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1]
Fee: $2.
§ 10-11.5. Redemption Calculations. [Ord. #10-1489, § 1]
c. Nonrefundable fee for opening right-of-way on township road: $20.
a. Permit fee per opening: $30.
Refer to Township of Hopewell Land Use and Development Ordinance
subsection 17-83 for driveway specifications.
b. Performance guarantee for incomplete driveway: $1,000.
In the event that the driveway for a new home is not completed, but the
owner/occupant/builder desires to occupy the premises, a performance
guarantee shall be posted with the municipal construction official prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy in order to insure that the
driveway will be completed within six months. Upon completion of the
driveway, the bond shall be returned.
a. All requests for the calculation of the amount required for the
redemption of a tax lien shall be made in writing to the tax collector.
Any party entitled to redeem may request two calculations of the
amount required for redemption within a calendar year at no cost. Each
subsequent request made in the calendar year shall be submitted with a
$50 fee.
b. In a suit to foreclose redemption, a written request for the amount
required for the redemption of a tax lien shall be made in writing,
setting forth the date to be used in making the calculation. The request
shall be made to the tax collector and submitted with a $50 fee.
§ 10-10.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-11.6
AO:229
§ 10-11.6. Tax Information. [Ord. #605-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1]
For Real Estate Settlement and Internal Revenue Service (per year): $2.
§ 10-11.7. Certification of Search for Applications and Appeals.
[Ord. #605-82; Ord. #617-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1]
Planning board applications: $1.
§ 10-11.8. Certification of Search. [Ord. #617-82; Ord. #660-84, § 1]
For applications or appeals to the board of adjustment: $1.
§ 10-12. UTILITIES.
§ 10-12.1. Water Connection. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #605-82; Ord.
#660-84, § 1]
Set by the municipal utilities authority.
§ 10-12.2. Sewer Connection. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #605-82; Ord.
#660-84, § 1]
Set by the municipal utilities authority.
§ 10-13. ZONING.
The following fees apply to all applications to the zoning board of
adjustment. Applications shall be accompanied by the fees set forth below.
Each applicant shall agree in writing to pay all reasonable costs for
professional review and administration by the township. The applicant shall
be billed and shall pay all reasonable costs over and above the application
fee prior to the township issuance of a building permit. Any unused portion
of the application fee shall be returned to the applicant.
§ 10-13.1. Application to Zoning Board. [Ord. #432; Ord. #605-82;
Ord. #660-84, § 1; Ord. #702-86, § 1; Ord. #793-88, § 1; Ord.
#90-866, § 1; Ord. #95-1012; Ord. #98-1094; Ord. #98-1111; Ord.
#00-1161, § 2; Ord. #02-1259; Ord. #05-1367, § 2]
a. Appeal of Decision of Zoning Officer.
Fee $100
Escrow $750
Where the board of adjustment reverses the decision of the zoning
officer, $500 of the above cited escrow will be refunded to the
applicant.
b. Interpretation of Zoning Ordinance.
§ 10-11.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-13.1
AO:230
Fee $100
Escrow $600
c. Bulk Variance/Hardship Variance.
Residential fee $100
Escrow $750
Nonresidential fee $200
Escrow $1,000
d. Use Variance.
Residential fee $250
Escrow $1,000
Nonresidential fee $500
Escrow $1,500
Residential Fee/Escrow - Applications in residential zones.
Nonresidential Fee/Escrow - Application in other than residential
zones or for other than residential uses.
In the event the escrow amount is depleted, no further action will
be taken until such time as an additional amount is deposited as
determined by the township.
e. Exemption from Application Fee and/or Escrow Amount.
1. All charitable, philanthropic, fraternal and religious nonprofit
organizations shall be exempt from the payment of application fees
and escrow amounts as required by this section, provided that:
(a) The nonprofit organization holds a tax exempt status under the
Federal Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (26 U.S.C. Sections
501(c) or (d)); and
(b) The nonprofit organization is submitting a development
application for a minor or major subdivision which shall
preserve open space or farmland, and shall not create any new
buildable lots.31
2. The board of education shall be exempt from the payment of
application fees as required by this section.
31.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ordinance No. 00-1161, Section 3, application fees and/or
escrow amounts that have been paid since January 1, 2000 by qualifying charitable,
philanthropic, fraternal or religious nonprofit organizations which have submitted
development applications for major or minor subdivisions that preserve open space or
farmland and do not create new buildable lots shall be returned to the organization by the
township.
§ 10-13.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-13.1
AO:231
§ 10-13.2. Zoning Certificate. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #605-82; Ord.
#660-84, § 1; Ord. #95-1012]
Fee: $25.
§ 10-13.3. Zoning Permits. [Ord. #94-993, § 2; Ord. #95-1012; Ord.
#05-1343; Ord. #11-1519, § 1]
§ 10-14. BALLOONING.
§ 10-14.1. Fee for Commercial Balloon. [Ord. #586; Ord. #605-82]
$250 plus $50 for each balloon annually.
§ 10-14.2. Fee for Sports Balloon. [Ord. #586; Ord. #605-82]
$100 plus $25 for each balloon annually.
§ 10-15. PUBLIC WORKS. [Ord. #02-1259; Ord. #03-1286, § 1; Ord.
#05-1358, § 1; Ord. #11-1519, § 2; Ord. #11-1538, § 2; Ord. No.
2017-1651; Ord. No. 2019-1705]
3. Disabled persons, or a parent or sibling of a disabled person, shall
be exempt from the payment of application fees as required by this
section, provided that the application relates to development which
promotes accessibility to the disabled person's own living unit.
a. Residential.
1. Principal use: $50.
2. Accessory use: $25.
3. Shelter: $25.
b. Commercial.
1. Principal use: $100.
2. Accessory use: $60.
c. Temporary activity permit fee: $30.
d. Residential conversion: $50.
a. Nonrefundable tire collection fee (16 inches): $3 each.
b. Nonrefundable tire collection fee (larger than 16 inches): $10 each.
c. Nonrefundable freon disposal fee: $25.
d. Nonrefundable bulk pick-up fee: $39 each.
e. Landscaper registration fee: $25/annually.
§ 10-13.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-16
AO:232
§ 10-16. HOTEL USAGE TAX.
§ 10-16.1. Hotel Usage Tax; Establishment. [Ord. #03-1288, § 1]
The township does hereby impose a tax, at a uniform percentage rate of
1% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003, but
before July 1, 2004 and 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or
after July 1, 2004 on a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation pursuant
to the New Jersey State Sales Tax, more specifically set forth in subsection
(d) of Sec. 3 of P.L. 1966, c.30 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3). A tax imposed under
this section shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to
statute or local ordinance or resolution by the township.
§ 10-16.2. Administration. [Ord. No. 03-1288, § 1]
The hotel occupancy tax established in subsection 10-16.1 shall be
administered in conformance with Section 4 of Chapter 114 of the laws of
2003 as follows:
§ 10-16.3. Collection of Tax. [Ord. No. 03-1288, § 1]
The tax imposed pursuant to subsection 10-16.1 shall be collected on behalf
of the township by the person or persons collecting the rent from the hotel
customer. Each vendor or person required to collect the tax imposed by
subsection 10-16.1 shall be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected
or required to be collected. Any such vendor or person shall have the
same right in respect to collecting tax from a customer or hotel guest as
if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time; provided,
however, that the chief financial officer of the township shall be joined as
a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax imposed by
subsection 10-16.1. A person required to collect a tax imposed pursuant
to subsection 10-16.1 shall, on or before the dates required pursuant to
a. All taxes imposed by subsection 10-16.1 shall be paid by the purchaser
or guest renting a hotel room;
b. A vendor or hotel establishment (hereinafter "vendor") shall not assume
or absorb any tax imposed by subsection 10-16.1;
c. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, at any time, directly or indirectly, that the tax
will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer or hotel guest or that the
tax will be refunded to the customer;
d. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day the representation or advertisement continues shall be
deemed a separate offense; and
e. Any violation of this section shall be subject to penalties imposed by the
township municipal court, not to exceed $1,000 per violation.
§ 10-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-16.3
AO:233
Section 17 of P.L. 1966, c.30 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-17), forward to the Director
of the Division of Taxation in the New Jersey Department of the Treasury
(hereinafter the "Director"), the tax collected in the preceding month and
make and file a return for the preceding month with the Director on any
form and containing any information as the Director shall prescribe as
necessary to determine liability for the tax in the preceding month during
which the person was required to collect the tax. The Director may permit
or require returns to be made covering other periods and upon any dates
as the Director may specify. In addition, the Director may require payment
of tax liability at any intervals and based upon any classification as the
Director may designate. In prescribing any other periods to be covered
by the return or intervals or classification for payment of tax liability, the
Director may take into account the dollar volume of tax involved as well as
the need for ensuring the prompt and orderly collection of the tax imposed.
The Director may require amended returns to be filed within 20 days after
notice and to contain the information specified in the notice. The Director
shall collect and administer any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of
Section 3 of Chapter 114 of the Laws of 2003. In carrying out the provisions
of this section, the Director shall have all the powers granted pursuant to
P.L. 1966, c.30 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-1 et seq.).
§ 10-16.4. Payment of Tax to Township. [Ord. No. 03-1288, § 1]
The Director shall determine and certify to the State Treasurer on a
quarterly or more frequently basis, as prescribed by the State Treasurer,
the amount of revenues collected for the township pursuant to Section 3
of Chapter 114 of the laws of 2003. The State Treasurer, upon certification
of the Director and upon the warrant of the State Comptroller, shall pay
and distribute to the township on a quarterly or more frequent basis, as
prescribed by the State Treasurer, the amount of revenues determined and
certified pursuant to Section 3 of Chapter 114 of the laws of 2003. The tax
imposed pursuant to the provisions of subsection 10-16.1 shall be governed
by the provisions of the "State Uniform Tax Procedure Law", N.J.S.A. 54:48-1
et seq. Finally, the provisions of this section of Chapter 10 shall be subject
to any rules or regulations that may be adopted by the Director.
§ 10-17. AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT FEES. [Ord.
#09-1461, § 2]
a. Purpose.
1. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985
(the "Act"), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution,
subject to the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption
of rules.
2. Pursuant to P.L.2008, c.46 section 8 (C. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Non- Residential Development Fee Act (C. 40:55D-8.1
§ 10-16.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-17
AO:234
through 8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate
regulations necessary for the establishment, implementation,
review, monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable
housing trust funds and corresponding spending plans.
Municipalities that are under the jurisdiction of the Council or
court of competent jurisdiction and have a COAH-approved
spending plan may retain fees collected from nonresidential
development.
3. This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance,
and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's
regulations and in accordance with P.L.2008, c.46, Sections 8 and
32-38. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be used for the
sole purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This
section shall be interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules
on development fees, codified at N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
4. The purpose of this section is to update and replace the "Lower
Income Housing Fund" provisions previously set forth at section
10-7c of this Code.
b. Basic Requirements.
1. This section shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
2. The township shall not spend development fees until COAH has
approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
c. Definitions.
1. As used herein, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
(a) AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT – Shall mean a
development included in the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, and includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary
development, a municipal construction project or a 100%
affordable development.
(b) COAH OR THE COUNCIL – Shall mean the New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing established under the Act that has
primary jurisdiction for the administration of housing
obligations in accordance with sound regional planning
consideration in the State.
(c) DEVELOPMENT FEE – Shall mean money paid by a developer
for the improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C.
5:97-8.3.
(d) DEVELOPER – Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or
owners of a lot or of any land proposed to be included in a
§ 10-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-17
AO:235
proposed development, including the holder of an option or
contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land.
(e) EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE – Shall mean the assessed
value of a property divided by the current average ratio of
assessed to true value for the municipality in which the
property is situated, as determined in accordance with sections
1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (C.54:1-35a through C.54:1-35c).
(f) GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES – Shall mean those strategies
that minimize the impact of development on the environment,
and enhance the health, safety and well-being of residents by
producing durable, low-maintenance, resource-efficient
housing while making optimum use of existing infrastructure
and community services.
d. Residential Development Fees.
1. Imposed Fees.
(a) Within all zoning districts, residential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted
below, shall pay a residential development fee of 1 1/2% of the
equalized assessed value of land and improvements, provided
no increased density is permitted.
(b) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers shall be required to pay a development fee of 1 1/
2% of the equalized assessed value of the initial "by-right"
number of units and 6% of the equalized assessed value for
each additional unit that may be realized. However, if the
zoning on a site has changed during the two-year period
preceding the filing of such a variance application, the base
density for the purposes of calculating the bonus development
fee shall be the highest density permitted by right during the
two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on
a site that was zoned for two units, the fees shall equal 1 1/
2% of the equalized assessed value on the first two units, and
6% of the equalized assessed value for the two additional units,
provided zoning on the site has not changed during the twoyear
period preceding the filing of such a variance application.
2. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for
Residential Development.
(a) Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
§ 10-17 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-17
AO:236
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction
of affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(b) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a
site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building
permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan
approval for this purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested
on the date that the building permit is issued.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is
demolished and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is
not otherwise exempt from the development fee requirement.
The development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
(1) Exemption. Any change to a more intense use,
replacement or expansion of an existing structure that
does not result in an increase to the equalized assessed
value of the improved structure by greater than $19,999
shall be exempt from the development fee requirements of
this section.
(d) Developers of residential structures demolished and replaced
as a result of a natural disaster shall be exempt from paying a
development fee.
e. Nonresidential Development Fees.
1. Imposed Fees.
(a) Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 2008, c. 46, within all zoning
districts, nonresidential developers, except for developers of
the types of development specifically exempted, shall pay a fee
equal to 2 1/2% of the equalized assessed value of the land and
improvements, for all new non- residential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
(b) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types
of development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee
equal to 2 1/2% of the increase in equalized assessed value
resulting from any additions to existing structures to be used
for nonresidential purposes.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure is demolished and replaced. The
development fee of 2 1/2% shall be calculated on the difference
between the equalized assessed value of the preexisting land
§ 10-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-17
AO:237
and improvement and the equalized assessed value of the
newly improved structure, i.e. land and improvement, at the
time final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation
required under this section results in a negative number, the
nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
2. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for
Nonresidential Development.
(a) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or
market rate development shall be subject to the 2 1/2%
development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
(b) The 2 1/2% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized
assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use within
existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(c) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the
payment of non- residential development fees in accordance
with the exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as
specified in the Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" Form. Any
exemption claimed by a developer shall be substantiated by
that developer.
(d) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from
the non- residential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.
46 shall be subject to it at such time the basis for the
exemption no longer applies, and shall make the payment of
the nonresidential development fee, in that event, within three
years after that event or after the issuance of the final
certificate of occupancy of the nonresidential development,
whichever is later.
(e) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit
the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
nonresidential development fees under these circumstances
may be enforceable by the township as a lien against the real
property of the owner.
f. Collection Procedures.
1. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval, for a development, the applicable approving authority
shall direct its staff to notify the construction official responsible
for the issuance of a building permit.
2. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
§ 10-17 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-17
AO:238
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The tax assessor shall verify
exemptions and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the
instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
3. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local tax assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a
development fee.
4. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal tax assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
5. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which
is subject to a development fee.
6. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements
of the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter
notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
7. Should the township fail to determine or notify the developer of the
amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the
request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount
due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in subsection b of section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46
(C.40:55D-8.6).
8. Payment of Development Fees.
(a) For residential development, 50% of the estimated
development fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of
the building permit. The remaining portion shall be collected at
the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer
shall be responsible for paying the difference between the fee
calculated at building permit and that determined at issuance
of certificate of occupancy.
(b) For nonresidential development, and in accordance with Form
N-RDF, as said form may from time to time be amended, the
developer shall pay 100% of the calculated nonresidential
development fee amount prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for such development.
§ 10-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-17
AO:239
9. Appeal of Development Fees.
(a) A developer may challenge residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the County Board of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Board,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing escrow
account by the township. Appeals from a determination of the
Board may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law,
R.S.54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the date of such
determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be
credited to the prevailing party.
(b) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division
of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the
Director, which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the
challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing
escrow account by the township. Appeals from a determination
of the Director may be made to the tax court in accordance
with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law,
R.S.54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the date of such
determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be
credited to the prevailing party.
g. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
1. The township shall create and/or continue to maintain a separate,
interest- bearing housing trust fund that is maintained by the
township chief financial officer for the purpose of depositing
development fees collected from residential and nonresidential
developers and proceeds from the sale of units with extinguished
controls.
2. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source
and amount:
(a) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units.
(b) Developer contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible.
(c) Rental income from municipally operated units.
(d) Repayments from affordable housing program loans.
(e) Recapture funds.
(f) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units.
§ 10-17 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-17
AO:240
(g) Any other funds collected in connection with the township's
affordable housing program.
3. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
township shall provide COAH with written authorization, in the
form of a three-party escrow agreement between the township, the
bank, and COAH to permit COAH to direct the disbursement of the
funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
4. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
h. Use of Funds.
1. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan
approved by COAH. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may
be used for any activity approved by COAH to address the
township's fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or
revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are not limited
to: preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of
maintaining or implementing affordability controls, rehabilitation,
new construction of affordable housing units and related costs,
accessory apartment, market to affordable, or regional housing
partnership programs, conversion of existing non- residential
buildings to create new affordable units, green building strategies
designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted
national or State standards, purchase of land for affordable
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase
affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as
permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 8.9 and specified in
the approved spending plan.
2. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the township for past
housing activities.
3. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned
shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance
portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide
affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or less of
median income by region.
(a) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans,
rental assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance
with emergency repairs.
§ 10-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-17
AO:241
(b) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to
make them affordable to households earning 30% or less of
median income.
(c) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be
exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
4. The township may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
5. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees,
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative
marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no
more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
shall be expended for such administrative expenses. Administrative
funds may be used for income qualification of households,
monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance
with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or other fees related
to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to the
Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses of the
affordable housing trust fund.
i. Monitoring. The township shall complete and return to COAH all
monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements related to the
collection of development fees from residential and nonresidential
developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site,
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls, barrier free
escrow funds, rental income, repayments from affordable housing
program loans, and any other funds collected in connection with the
township's housing program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues
and implementation of the plan certified by COAH. All monitoring
reports shall be completed on forms designed by COAH.
j. Ongoing Collection of Fees. The township's ability to impose, collect
and expend development fees shall expire with its substantive
certification unless the township has filed an adopted Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive
certification, and has received COAH's approval of its development fee
ordinance. If the township fails to renew its ability to impose and collect
development fees prior to the expiration of substantive certification, it
may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its
municipal trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the
"New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to
§ 10-17 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-17
AO:242
§ 10-18. PARKS AND RECREATION FEES. [Ord. No. 12-1550; Ord.
No. 2016-1628; Ord. No. 2017-1653]
The Director of Parks and Recreation, or designee, is authorized to collect
and receive the following fees and to issue permits as set forth herein.
Ten dollars of each fee collected and received shall be designated as
"Administrative" and shall be used to offset administrative costs in the
current fund budget.
§ 10-18.1. User Fee Schedule. [Ord. No. 12-1550; Ord. No.
2016-1628; Ord. No. 2018-1698]
Any Youth Sport Organization using any Township field or facility shall pay
a User Fee to the Township in accordance with the following schedule:
Non-residents are all users who reside outside the boundaries of the
Township of Hopewell.
User Fee Schedule
User Fee, Yearly Per Organization
Hopewell Twp. Residents No charge
All Other/Nonresidents $15
§ 10-18.2. Field and Facility Use Fee Schedule. [Ord. No. 12-1550;
Ord. No. 2016-1628; Ord. No. 2018-1698]
A Field Use Fee shall be paid by the organizing party in accordance with the
following schedule for Independence Park, Twin Pines Recreation Facility
and the lighted fields at the Municipal Athletic Complex (MAC). Scheduling
shall be in accordance with the Field Use Policy established by the Hopewell
Township Recreation Advisory Committee.
section 20 of P.L. 1985, c.222 (C.52:27D-320). The township shall not
impose a residential development fee on a development that receives
preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration of its
substantive certification or judgment of compliance, nor shall the
township retroactively impose a development fee on such a
development. The township shall not expend development fees after the
expiration of its substantive certification or judgment of compliance.
k. Repealer. All ordinances or Code provisions or parts thereof
inconsistent with this section are hereby repealed.
§ 10-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-18.2
AO:243
Field Use Fee Schedule
User Grass Field/2 hrs.
Grass Lights/2
hrs. Turf Field/2hrs. Turf Lights/2hrs.
HT Parks & Rec.
Dept.
No charge No charge No charge No charge
HVRSD* No charge N/A No charge N/A
Resident non-profit No charge $60 $80 $160
Resident Adult/
Youth
$25 $60 $80 $160
Non-Resident
Youth
$50 $120 $160 $320
Non-Resident Adult $50 $120 $160 $320
Club/select teams/
Camps
$50 $120 $160 $320
Camps - Private or
for profit
$15 per camper
and field use fee
N/A $15 per camper
and field use fee
N/A
Tournament per
weekend**
$225 N/A N/A N/A
* No charge during established school use hours as per Field Use Policy.
** Pertains to tournaments on Township fields that require additional service due to event.
Twin Pines/Independence Park - Field Seasons
Spring Season — March/April/
May
Field Use Applications due by Feb. 1st
Approvals sent Feb. 15th
Summer Season — June/July/
Aug
Field Use Applications due by May 1st
Approvals sent May 15th
Fall Season — Sept/Oct/Nov Field Use Applications due by Aug. 1st
Approvals sent Aug. 15th
Winter Season — Dec/Jan/Feb Field Use Applications due by Nov. 1st
Approvals send Nov. 15th
§ 10-19. FOREST MANAGEMENT AND TREE REMOVAL. [Ord.
#12-1554]
a. Application Fees.
1. $25 for each tax lot.
b. Inspection Fees.
1. $50 for each tax lot.
c. Tree Escrow Fund Contribution.
§ 10-18.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 10-19
AO:244
Chapter 11
BUILDING AND HOUSING
§ 11-1. CODE INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE. [Ord. #7/15/74;
Ord. #408]
The township committee and the township board of health have adopted
certain standard codes promulgated by Departments of the State of New
Jersey together with stated amendments thereto as hereafter appears.
Copies of such codes are filed with the township clerk and may be obtained
from the promulgating agency, e.g., Department of Health, Department of
Environmental Protection, etc. Except to the extent amended, the full text
of the codes and the regulations promulgated thereunder are incorporated
herein by reference.
Amendments and supplements to these codes such as may be adopted in
the future by the pertinent Departments of the State of New Jersey are also
incorporated herein by reference.
§ 11-2. STATE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE.
§ 11-2.1. Established. [Ord. #444]
There is hereby established in the township a State Uniform Construction
Code Enforcing Agency to be known as the Township of Hopewell Building
Department, consisting of a construction official, building subcode official,
plumbing subcode official, electrical subcode official, fire protection
subcode official, and such other subcode officials for such other subcodes
as the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of New
Jersey shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code.
The construction official shall be the chief administrator of the enforcing
agency. The township committee shall by resolution name the construction
official and assign or reassign assisting personnel to the construction
department to serve as appropriate subcode officials.
Diameter of Removed Trees at
Breast Height in Inches
Tree Escrow Fund Contribution
(Value for Each Tree to Be
Removed and Not Replaced)
Greater than 10 inches to 16
inches
$480
Greater than 16 inches up to 23
inches
$840
Greater than 23 inches up to 30
inches
$1,680
Greater than 30 inches $2,100
§ 10-19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-2.1
AO:245
In lieu of an appointment of an electrical subcode official or a contract with
an electrical on-site inspection agency, the existing electrical inspection
authorities may continue to operate as per N.J.A.C. 14:5-71.1 et seq. until
the township directly contracts with same, but in no case shall such existing
electrical inspection authorities continue after January 1, 1978, except
in conformity with Article 35 of the Regulations of the New Jersey
Administrative Code.
§ 11-2.2. Appointment of Qualified Persons. [Ord. #444]
Each official position created in subsection 11-2.1 hereof shall be filled by
a person qualified for such position pursuant to N.J.S.A. 1975, C. 217 as
amended and N.J.A.C. 5:23; provided that, in lieu of any particular subcode
official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position may be held by the
same person.
§ 11-2.3. Location of Enforcing Agency. [Ord. #444]
The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency at
one office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances. This office shall be at the Hopewell Township Municipal
Building, Scotch Road and Route 546, Hopewell Township, New Jersey.
§ 11-2.4. Construction Fee Schedule. [Ord. #444]
The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees listed
in the General Ordinances of the Township of Hopewell, Chapter 10, Fees
and Permits, as amended.
§ 11-2.5. Establishment of Fire Limits, Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23.
[Ord. #444]
The establishment of fire limits and the requirements related thereto is
hereby deferred pursuant to the enabling legislation to be determined prior
to July 1, 1977.
§ 11-2.6. Internal Governance. [Ord. #444]
The enforcing agency may adopt rules for its internal governance, not
inconsistent with any specific provision of law or the regulations and subject
to the approval of the township committee.
§ 11-3. DESIGN OF STRUCTURES IN NEIGHBORHOODS.
§ 11-3.1. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Uniformity in the exterior design and appearance of buildings erected in the
same residential neighborhood for occupancy as dwellings adversely affects
the desirability of the immediate and neighboring areas for residential
purposes and impairs existing residential property in such areas; impairs
§ 11-2.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 11-3.1
AO:246
the stability and value of both improved and unimproved real property,
prevents the most appropriate development of such areas, produces
degeneration of residential property in such areas with attendant
deterioration of conditions affecting the health, safety and morals of the
inhabitants thereof and the community at large; deprives the municipality of
tax revenue which it otherwise could receive and destroys a proper balance
in relationship between the taxable value of real property in such areas and
the cost of the municipal services provided therefor. It is the purpose of
this chapter to prevent these and other harmful effects of uniformity in the
exterior design and appearance of buildings erected in the same residential
neighborhood for occupancy as dwellings and thus promote and protect the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community.
§ 11-3.2. Similarities Considered. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No building permit shall be issued under this chapter for the erection of any
building for occupancy as a dwelling, if it is like or substantially like any
neighboring building as hereinafter defined, then in existence or for which
a building permit has been issued, in more than three of the following six
respects:
a. Height of the main roof ridge, or, in the case of a building with flat roof,
the highest point of the roof beams, above the elevation of the first
floor;
b. Height of the main roof ridge above the top of the plate (all flat roofs
shall be deemed identical in this dimension);
c. Length of the main roof ridge, or, in the case of a building with a flat
roof, length of main roof;
d. Width between outside walls at the ends of the building measured
under the main roof at right angles to the length thereof;
e. Relative location of windows in the front elevation or in each of both
side elevations with respect to each other and with respect to any door,
chimney, porch or attached garage in the same elevation;
f. In the front elevation, both:
1. Relative location with respect to each other of garage, if attached,
porch, if any, and the remainder of the buildings; and
2. Either:
(a) Height of any portion of the building located outside the limits
of the main roof, measured from the elevation of the first floor
to the roof ridge, or, in the case of a flat roof, the highest point
of the roof beams; or
(b) Width of the portion of the building if it has a gable in the front
elevation, otherwise length of said roof ridge or said flat roof in
the front elevation.
§ 11-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-3.3
AO:247
§ 11-3.3. Basis of Determination. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Buildings shall be deemed to be like each other in any dimension with
respect to which the difference between them is not more than two feet.
Building between which the only difference in relative location of elements
is end to end or side to side reversal of elements shall be deemed to be like
each other in relative location of such elements. In relation to the premises
with respect to which the permit is sought, a building shall be deemed to be
a neighboring building if the lot upon which it or any part of it has been or
will be erected is any one of the following lots, as shown on the tax map of
the Township of Hopewell:
§ 11-3.4. Denial of Application. [Ord. #7/15/74]
In any case in which the construction official shall deny an application for
a building permit solely or partly because of the provisions of subsection
11-3.2, he shall promptly send to the applicant, by certified mail, or by
personal delivery, addressed to the address of the applicant set forth in the
application, a notice of his action which shall specify the ground or grounds
upon which the same is based.
§ 11-3.5. Appeal. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Any person aggrieved may appeal to the board of adjustment from the
action of the construction official in accordance with the Municipal Land
Use Law.
a. Any lot on the street upon which the building to be erected on the
premises would front which is the first or the second lot next along the
street in either direction from the premises, without regard to
intervening street lines;
b. Any lot any part of the street line frontage of which is across the street
from the premises or from a lot referred to in paragraph a of this
subsection;
c. Any lot any part of the street line frontage of which faces the end of, and
is within the width of the street, if there are less than two lots between
the premises and the end of the street;
d. Any lot on another street which adjoins the premises on such other
street; or
e. Any lot any part of the street line frontage of which is across such other
street from the premises or from a lot referred to in paragraph d of this
subsection.
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions of this section, no building
shall be deemed to be a neighboring building in relation to the premises if its
rear elevation faces the street upon which the building to be erected on the
premises would front.
§ 11-3.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 11-4
AO:248
§ 11-4. DEMOLITION AND REPAIR OF BUILDINGS.
§ 11-4.1. Findings. [Ord. #7/15/74]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3, it is hereby found and declared that
there are or may be in the future the existence, occupation or use of
buildings which are so old, dilapidated, dangerous, unsanitary, a menace
to the health, morals, safety and general welfare and have become so out
of repair to such an extent that they are unfit for human habitation, or
occupancy or use, and are inimical to the general welfare and dangerous
and injurious to the health and safety of the people of the township and that
a public necessity exists for the vacation, removal, repair or demolition of
such building or buildings.
§ 11-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #625-83]
As used in this chapter.
§ 11-4.3. Description. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The public officers defined above or any of them, are hereby designated and
appointed to exercise the powers set forth in this chapter. In the event of
inability to act, then the township committee may by resolution designate
and appoint any person to act in its place and stead.
§ 11-4.4. Petitions and Hearings. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #564-80]
Whenever a petition is filed with a public officer, by an officer in charge of
any department of the township relating to health, fire, building regulations
or activities concerning buildings within the township, or by at least five
residents of the township, charging that any building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use or whenever it appears to the public officer
(on his own motion) or to any of the persons who are or may be designated
to exercise the powers set forth in this chapter that any building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use, the public officer or such designated
person shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such
charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in
interest in such building, a complaint stating the charges in that respect and
containing a notice that a hearing will be held before such public officer, or
his designated agent, at a place therein fixed, not less than seven days nor
a. GOVERNING BODY – Shall mean the township committee of the
Township of Hopewell, Mercer County.
b. Appointment of Public Officers. The township committee shall, by
resolution, appoint seven persons who may be members of the township
boards, committees, or commissions who are designated the public
officers to exercise the powers described herein.
c. Terms of Public Officers. The terms of public officers shall be for one
year.
§ 11-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.4
AO:249
more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and
parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint
with the township clerk and to appear in person or otherwise, and give
testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint. The rules of evidence
prevailing in the courts of law shall not be controlling before such public
officer, or his designated agent.
§ 11-4.5. Findings and Order. [Ord. #7/15/74]
After such notice and hearing, if said public officer or his designated agent
determines that the building under consideration is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use, he shall state in writing his findings of fact
in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served
upon the owner thereof and parties in interest and order:
§ 11-4.6. Remedy Upon Failure to Comply. [Ord. #7/15/74]
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officer, may cause such building to be removed or
demolished, or he may contract for the removal or demolition thereof, after
advertisement for the receipt of bids therefor.
§ 11-4.7. Municipal Lien for Expenses. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The amount of the cost of filing of legal papers, expert witness' fees, search
fees and advertising charges in the course of any proceeding taken under
this section determined in favor of the township aforesaid and such cost of
a. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of said building to be
made by the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set
forth in the order, or at the option of the owner to vacate and remove or
have the said building vacated and closed within the time set forth in
the order; and
b. If the building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health
and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the owner fails to
repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in the
order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish the
building within a reasonable time as specified in the said order of
removal.
c. If the owner thereof shall fail to comply with the order to repair, alter or
improve or, at the option of the owner to vacate and close the building
the public officer (or his designated agent) may cause such building to
be repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and such building to
be repaired, altered or to be vacated and closed; that the public officer
or his designated agent may cause to be posted on the main entrance
and elsewhere on any such building so closed, a placard with the
following words: "THIS BUILDING IS UNFIT FOR HUMAN
HABITATION OR OCCUPANCY OR USE: THE USE OR OCCUPATION
OF THIS BUILDING IS PROHIBITED AND UNLAWFUL."
§ 11-4.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 11-4.7
AO:250
repairs, alterations and improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal
or demolition, if any, or the amount of the balance from the sale of materials
derived from such building or from any contract for removal or demolition
thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon which such
cost was incurred. If the building is removed or demolished by the public
officer, he shall sell the materials of such building or structure.
There shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition
thereof, the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived
from any contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If there
are no such credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of
such credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so
due shall be filed with the township tax assessor or other custodian of the
records of tax liens and a copy thereof shall be forwarded forthwith to the
owner by registered mail. The amount so found to be due shall be collected
in the same manner as other taxes are collected and at the same rate of
interest for nonpayment. If the total of the credits exceed such costs, the
balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court of New Jersey
by the public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed
by such court, and shall be disbursed and paid out according to the order
or judgment of the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by
final order or judgment of such court; provided, however, that nothing in
this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of
the township to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or
abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise.
§ 11-4.8. Contest of Lien. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #564-80]
Any owner or party in interest may within 30 days from the date of the filing
of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court
of New Jersey to contest the reasonableness of the amount or accuracy of
the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 11-4.9. Basis of Findings. [Ord. #7/15/74]
A public officer or his designated agent, may determine that a building is
unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use if he finds that conditions
exist in such building which are dangerous or injurious to the health and
safety of the occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring
buildings or other residents of the township, such conditions may include
the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects
therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities, lack
of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, dilapidation, disrepair,
structural defects, uncleanliness and failure to have included in said
building running water.
§ 11-4.10. Service of Complaint. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #564-80]
Complaints or orders issued by any public officer, or designated agent
pursuant to this section, shall be served upon persons either personally or
§ 11-4.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.10
AO:251
by registered or certified mail, but if the whereabouts of such person is
unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer or his
designated agent in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public
officer, or his agent shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving
of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing
the same once in a newspaper circulating within the municipality. A copy
of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or
order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record with the clerk of the
County of Mercer.
§ 11-4.11. Powers Conferred. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord. #564-80]
The public officer, or his designated agent, may exercise under this section
such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate
the purposes and provisions of the chapter, including but not limited to the
following powers in addition to the others herein granted:
a. To investigate the building conditions in the municipality in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use;
b. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
c. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations and
inspections; provided that such entries shall be made in such manners
to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
d. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and other
employees as may be deemed necessary to carry out the purpose of this
section.
e. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this section to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
f. If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened
collapse of any fire damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the
public officer may, after taking such measures as may be necessary to
make such building temporarily safe, seek a judgment in summary
proceedings for the demolition thereof.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the
power of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise, nor is anything
in this act intended to limit the authority of the enforcing agency or
construction official under the "State Uniform Construction Code Act", P.L.
1976, c.217 (c.52:27D-119 et seq.) or any rules or regulations adopted
thereunder.
§ 11-4.10 HOPEWELL CODE § 11-4.12
AO:252
§ 11-4.12. Remedy of Persons Aggrieved. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord.
#564-80]
If any person is aggrieved by an order issued by any of the foregoing public
officers under this section, he may within 30 days after the posting and
service of such order, bring an action for injunctive relief to restrain and
enjoin the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order and
for any other appropriate relief in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40-48:2.3 et seq.
§ 11-4.13. Exclusiveness of Remedy. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The remedy herein provided shall be exclusive and no persons affected
by the order of any of the aforementioned public officials, or their or his
designated representative shall be entitled to recover any damages for
action taken pursuant thereto, or because of noncompliance by any person
with any order of the aforementioned public officers.
§ 11-4.14. Removal of Placard Prohibited. [Ord. #7/15/74]
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed the
placard referred to in subsections 11-4.5c or 11-4.9 without express written
consent for any of the public officers hereinbefore mentioned.
§ 11-4.15. Violation. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Any owner or lessee in possession, who fails to comply with any order or
notice to vacate and who fails to repair, alter or improve said building in
accordance with any notice or order as provided in this section shall be
guilty of a violation hereof.
§ 11-5. UNCOMPLETED STRUCTURES.
§ 11-5.1. Renewal of Building Permit. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Building permits shall be valid for a period of one year. Thereafter, the same
may be renewed only in the following manner:
a. First Renewal. Subject to the prior approval of the township committee,
the construction official may renew the permit for a term of one year
upon payment of a renewal fee based upon the total estimated cost of
completion and in accordance with section 11-2.4 and section 10-3. The
estimated cost of completion shall be fixed by the construction official.
The township committee may, as a condition of the first renewal, impose
such reasonable restrictions upon the permit as will facilitate prompt
completion of the structure and reduce the deleterious effect of the
uncompleted structure and building activities associated therewith
upon neighboring properties.
b. Second Renewal. Subject to the approval of the township committee the
construction official may renew the permit in the same manner and
§ 11-4.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-5.1
AO:253
§ 11-5.2. Remedy Upon Noncompletion. [Ord. #7/15/74]
In the event the structure is not completed upon expiration of the period
of the second renewal or in the event that the conditions imposed by the
township committee shall not have been followed or fulfilled, the said bond
shall be forfeited forthwith and the construction official is authorized to
receive bids to effect the completion of the structure for occupancy. Any
cost or expense incurred by the township in connection with the completion
of the structure, including costs to enforce the within chapter shall, if in
excess of the amount of the performance guarantee, be due and owing to
the township by the owner or person to whom the second renewal permit
was granted.
§ 11-6. PUBLIC STRUCTURES-SHELTERS.
§ 11-6.1. Provision for Fallout Shelters. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Every officer, board, department or commission of the township charged
with the duty of preparing specifications, or awarding or entering into
contracts for the design or construction of public structures, including
additions to existing structures, shall cause to be incorporated in such a
structure fallout protection for at least its normal anticipated population
sufficient to meet or exceed the minimum space and fallout protection
criteria recommended by the Office of United States Department of
Defense, unless exempted from such shelter requirement.
§ 11-6.2. Exemptions. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The township committee may exempt public structures from this
requirement where it finds that the incorporation of a fallout shelter will
create an additional net cost in the construction of a structure in excess of
1 1/2% of the estimated cost without a shelter so incorporated, or that other
factors exist which make unnecessary or impracticable the incorporation of
fallout shelter in a structure.
§ 11-6.3. Policy. [Ord. #7/15/74]
It shall be the policy of the township that fallout shelters be incorporated in
all public buildings of the township to the fullest extent practicable, in order
to provide protection against radiation for the greatest number of people in
the event of nuclear emergency.
upon similar conditions as are set forth in paragraph a including the
payment of a fee based upon the estimated cost of completion. No
second renewal shall issue however except upon the posting of a
performance guarantee, by the permittee, in an amount sufficient to
cover the total estimated cost of completion and fulfillment of such
conditions as may have been imposed by the township committee. The
performance guarantee shall be subject to the approval of the township
attorney.
§ 11-5.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 11-7
AO:254
§ 11-7. NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS. [Ord. #94-991]
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section shall be to require the clear
display of dwelling and other building numbers from public streets in
order to assist the general public, mail delivery services, and
emergency authorities in identifying any property, in the course of
normal business and in case of emergencies.
b. System of Numbering Established. There is hereby established a
uniform numbering system for numbering all dwellings and other
buildings along the streets within the township.
c. Numbers Assigned. The numbering of dwellings and other buildings on
each street shall begin at the intersection of the center lines of
roadways or as directed by the township assessor.
d. House Numbers for New Buildings. Whenever a house, building or
structure shall be erected or located in the township after the
establishment of the numbering system, it shall be the obligation of the
owner to procure the correct number or numbers as designated by the
township assessor for the property and to immediately post such
number or numbers so assigned to the buildings as provided for in this
section. Any structure erected, repaired, altered or modified after the
effective date of this section, shall have final approval withheld by the
construction official until permanent and proper numbers have been
affixed.
e. Height of Numbers. The numbers shall be a minimum of three inches in
height, clearly visible on the background to which attached and located
in a prominent place on the property to be visible from the street. Such
numbers shall be procured and affixed at the owner's expense.
f. Notification of Assigned Number. Upon notification of assigned number,
any person, now the owner of any interest in a building, or who may
hereafter acquire any such interest, shall comply with the provisions of
this section and take all steps necessary to change to the number so
assigned. In the case of conflict as to the proper number to be assigned
to any building, the township assessor shall determine the number of
such building and this decision shall be final. The owner of any lot upon
which a building is located shall display or cause to be displayed the
number assigned thereto in conformity with the provisions of this
section within 30 days of receipt of the newly assigned number. It shall
be unlawful to use, in any manner, any number inconsistent with this
system and the number so assigned, if such use is continued for a
period of 30 days following notification of a number different than the
one so used.
g. Violation. Any person who shall violate any of the terms or provisions of
this section, shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty contained in
Chapter 3.
§ 11-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-7
AO:255
Chapter 12
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL
§ 12-1. SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.32
§ 12-1.1. Mercer County Soil Conservation District. [Ord. #95-1027]
The Mercer County Soil Conservation District shall be the review and
inspection authority for all designated development projects within the
Township of Hopewell pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and any
regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 12-1.2. New Projects. [Ord. #95-1027]
Any new "applications for development" (as that term is defined in N.J.S.A.
4:24-41) received after the effective date of this section shall be referred
to the Mercer County Soil Conservation District for review, approval and
inspection pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. The Township of Hopewell
will require a bond for all soil erosion and sediment control measures which
may be required, which bond shall be in the form of an escrow guarantee to
ensure installation and completion of the required permanent stabilization
measures.
§ 12-1.3. Ongoing Projects. [Ord. #95-1027]
§ 12-1.4. Inspection Fees. [Ord. #95-1027]
All developers of projects subject to the provisions of this section utilizing a
revolving escrow fund for inspection fees shall post requisite inspection fees
directly with the Mercer County Soil Conservation District in accordance
with its fee schedule.
§ 12-2. FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION.33
a. The township engineer shall retain responsibility for enforcing
implementation of erosion control plans in accordance with Standards
for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control for projects which are under
construction as of the effective date of this section.
b. The Mercer County Soil Conservation District shall assume
responsibility for implementation of all projects for which final approval
(including the soil erosion and sediment control plans) has been
granted as of the effective date of this section.
32.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 7/15/74 and
441.
33.Editor's Note: Prior ordinances include Ord. Nos. 512, 645-83, 746-87, 01-1192. Ord. No.
2016-1635 deleted and replaced Section 2-12 in its entirety.
§ 11-7 HOPEWELL CODE § 12-2.1
AO:256
§ 12-2.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. No. 2016-1635]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Township Committee of the Township of
Hopewell of Mercer County, New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 12-2.2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. No. 2016-1635]
§ 12-2.3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 2016-1635]
It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
a. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Hopewell are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
a. Protect human life and health;
b. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
c. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
f. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
h. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
§ 12-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:257
§ 12-2.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [Ord. No. 2016-1635]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this section includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 12-2.5. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-1635]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this section shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this section its most reasonable application.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Township Administrator or such other
officer who may be appointed is hereby designated to administer this
section by granting or denying development permit application in
accordance with its provisions.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the administrative officer's
interpretation of any provision of this section or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a 1% annual
or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
c. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and,
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 12-2.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 12-2.5
AO:258
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or
AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For Zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a
building in an Area of Special Flood Hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard by means of
piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of
the water, and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base
flood. In an Area of Special Flood Hazard "elevated building" also includes
a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters.
EROSION — The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
§ 12-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.5
AO:259
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without accumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of flood plain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
b.
§ 12-2.5 HOPEWELL CODE § 12-2.5
AO:260
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR Section 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two
or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is [i] built on a single chassis;
[ii] 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
2.
d.
§ 12-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.5
AO:261
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before damage
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this section that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
section.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this section. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
b.
§ 12-2.5 HOPEWELL CODE § 12-2.6
AO:262
§ 12-2.6. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 2016-1635]
a. Lands to Which This Section Applies. This section shall apply to all
areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the Township of
Hopewell Mercer County, New Jersey.
b. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of
special flood hazard for the Township of Hopewell Community No.
345298 are identified and defined on the following documents prepared
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
1. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Mercer
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated July 20, 2016.
2. "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Mercer County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)" as shown on Index and panels 34021C0013F,
34021C0014F, 34021C0016F, 34021C0017F, 34021C0018F,
34021C0019F, 34021C0036F, 34021C0038F, 34021C0079F,
34021C0082F, 34021C0083F, 34021C0084F, 34021C0092F,
34021C0101F, 34021C0102F, 34021C0103F, 34021C0104F,
34021C0106F, 34021C0107F, 34021C0108F, 34021C0109F,
34021C0111F, 34021C0112F, 34021C0113F, 34021C0116F,
34021C0117F, 34021C0126F, 34021C0127F, 34021C0128F whose
effective date is July 20, 2016.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this section. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory documents are
on file at Hopewell Township Municipal Clerk, 201 Washington Crossing-
Pennington Road, Titusville, NJ 08560.
c. Penalties for Noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be
constructed, relocated to, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable
regulations. Violation of the provisions of this section by failure to
comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions
and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this section or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be
subject to the fines and penalties as set forth at Chapter 3, Section 3-1
of this Code, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of
Hopewell from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
d. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This section is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this section and other ordinance,
easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
e. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this section, all
provisions shall be:
§ 12-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.6
AO:263
§ 12-2.7. Administration. [Ord. No. 2016-1635]
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
f. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.
Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may
be increased by man-made or natural causes. This section does not
imply that land outside the area of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
This section shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Hopewell, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
section or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
a. Establishment of a Development Permit. A development permit shall be
obtained before construction or development begins, including
placement of manufactured homes, within any area of special flood
hazard established in subsection 12-2.6b. Application for a
development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the
administrative officer and may include, but not be limited to: plans in
duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the
foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed.
3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in subsection 12-2.9f2; and,
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
b. Designation of the Local Administrator. The administrative officer is
hereby appointed to administer and implement this section by granting
or denying development permit applications in accordance with its
provisions.
§ 12-2.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 12-2.7
AO:264
c. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. Duties of the
administrative officer shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Permit Review.
(a) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this section have been satisfied.
(b) Review all development permits to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal,
State or local governmental agencies from which prior
approval is required.
(c) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the
floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of
subsection 12-2.9g1 are met.
d. Use of other Base Flood and Floodway Data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data have not been provided in accordance with
subsection 12-2.6b, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood
Hazard, the administrative officer shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
Federal, State or other source, in order to administer subsections
12-2.9f1 and 12-2.9f2.
e. Information to be Obtained and Maintained.
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
subsection 12-2.7a3.
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this section.
f. Alteration of Watercourses.
1. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
§ 12-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.7
AO:265
§ 12-2.8. Variance Procedure. [Ord. No. 2016-1635]
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
g. Substantial Damage Review.
1. After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and non-flood causes.
2. Record and maintain the flood and non-flood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of Substantial Damage
Determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section.
3. Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
subsections 12-2.9f1 and 12-2.9f2.
h. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection
12-2.8.
a. Appeal Board.
1. The Mayor and Township Committee shall hear and decide appeals
and requests for variances from the requirements of this section.
2. The Mayor and Township Committee shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by administrative officer in the enforcement or
administration of this section.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor and Township
Committee, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the
Superior Court, as an Action in Lieu of Prerogative Writ.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Mayor and Township
Committee, shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other subsections of this section,
and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
§ 12-2.7 HOPEWELL CODE § 12-2.8
AO:266
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and,
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 12-2.8a4 and the
purposes of this section, the Mayor and Township Committee may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this section.
6. The administrative officer shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
b. Conditions for Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
(a)-(k) in subsection 12-2.8a4 have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
§ 12-2.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.8
AO:267
§ 12-2.9. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction; General
Standards. [Ord. No. 2016-1635]
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in subsection
12-2.8a4, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
a. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
b. Construction Materials and Methods.
§ 12-2.8 HOPEWELL CODE § 12-2.9
AO:268
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
c. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into flood waters;
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
4. For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
d. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and,
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
e. Enclosure Openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
§ 12-2.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.9
AO:269
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior
walls of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
or other covering or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of flood waters.
f. Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base
flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in subsection
12-2.6b or in subsection 12-2.7d, the following standards are required:
1. Residential Construction.
(a) New construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the
lowest floor, including basement together with the attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the base
flood elevation plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14,
Table 2-1, whichever is more restrictive.
(b) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's FIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in feet
plus one foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least three
feet if no depth number is specified). And, require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
2. Nonresidential Construction. In an Area of Special Flood Hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure located in
an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor, including basement
together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities:
(a) Either:
(1) Elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive; and
(2) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's
DFIRM to elevate above the depth number specified in feet
plus one foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least
three feet if no depth number is specified). And, require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures;
(b) Or:
§ 12-2.9 HOPEWELL CODE § 12-2.9
AO:270
(1) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one
foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1,
whichever is more restrictive the structure is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy; and,
(3) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the design and methods of construction are
in accordance with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the applicable provisions of this subsection. Such
certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in
section 12-2.7e2(b).
3. Manufactured Homes.
(a) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
subsection 12-2.9a2.
(b) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(1) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage,
(2) Be constructed to minimize flood damage,
(3) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood damage; and,
(4) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top
of the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation
plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1,
whichever is more restrictive.
g. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
subsection 12-2.6 are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood
waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential,
the following provisions apply:
1. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachment shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
2. If subsection 12-2.9g1 is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements must comply with subsection 12-2.9
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
§ 12-2.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.9
AO:271
§ 12-2.10. Severability. [Ord. No. 2016-1635]
If any subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this section
shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision shall
not affect the remaining portions of the section, which shall remain in full
force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this section are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 12-2.11. Adoption. [Ord. No. 2016-1635]
This section shall be effective upon final publication and shall remain in
force until modified, amended or rescinded by the Township of Hopewell,
Mercer County, New Jersey.
§ 12-3. STREAM CORRIDOR PROTECTION.
§ 12-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. #04-1328, § 2]
Definitions for this section are set forth in Chapter 17, Article X, Section
17-181 and are incorporated herein by reference.
§ 12-3.2. General Provisions. [Ord. #04-1328, § 2]
3. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
0.2 of a foot at any point.
a. Purposes. The purposes of the stream corridor protection provisions
are to:
1. Assure that adequate water supply is available and maintain the
long-term natural equilibrium of the ground and surface waters in
Hopewell Township and in neighboring communities.
2. Improve and maintain the quality of the water supply and sustain
diverse populations of aquatic flora and fauna.
3. Improve the currently impaired streams in the township.
4. Protect significant ecological components of stream corridors such
as floodplains, woodlands, steep slopes and habitats for flora and
fauna.
5. Minimize flood related damage to properties in the township and in
neighboring communities.
6. Complement Federal, State, regional, county and municipal
watershed, flood hazard and stream corridor protection and
management programs.
§ 12-2.9 HOPEWELL CODE § 12-3.2
AO:272
b. Applicability. The stream corridor provisions apply to any land
containing any portion of a stream corridor as defined in Chapter 17,
Article X, Section 17-181. In the event that the requirements of Section
17-115 are not applicable, then the provisions of this chapter shall be
applicable.
c. Activities Permitted in Stream Corridors. Stream corridors shall remain
in their natural state and shall not be developed or disturbed, except for
the following activities:
1. Any activity subject to regulation by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection under the New Jersey Freshwater
Wetlands Protection Act.
2. Reconstruction of a valid nonconforming structure that predates
the adoption of this section in the event of partial destruction by
fire, natural hazards, or other acts of God, provided the
reconstruction does not have a greater footprint or total area than
that of the damaged structure and no change in land use occurs.34
3. Any use or related maintenance thereof that existed prior to the
date of adoption of this section.
4. Any agricultural use or structure existing prior to the date of
adoption of this section, but no new agricultural use or structure,
except for fences, shall be permitted in a stream corridor, subject to
approval by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
5. Existing stormwater management facilities located in stream
corridors are permitted to remain in a stream corridor and may be
expanded or modified in connection with an application for
development in accordance with the requirements of the approving
authority.
6. Surveying or activities for the purpose of establishing or reestablishing
a boundary line or points, which use only hand-held
equipment and do not involve the use of motorized vehicles to
either clear vegetation or extract soil borings. The clearing of
vegetation along the survey line or around the survey points shall
not exceed three feet in width or diameter respectively and shall
not be kept clear or maintained once the survey or delineation is
completed.
d. Prohibited Activities. All activities not specifically permitted by the
provisions of paragraph c above are prohibited. Prohibited activities
include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Alteration of watercourses and stream corridors by development or
disturbance of any type.
34.Editor's Note: This section was adopted December 13, 2004 as Ordinance No. 04-1328.
§ 12-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-3.2
AO:273
§ 12-3.3. Administration. [Ord. #04-1328, § 2]
§ 12-3.4. Application for Stream Corridor Permit/Procedures. [Ord.
#04-1328, § 2]
2. Clearing or cutting of any vegetation, except for removal of dead
vegetation, pruning for reasons of safety and harvesting of
agricultural products.
3. Disposal of brush, debris or any solid or liquid waste.
4. Installation offences and sheds.
a. Stream Corridor Permit. A stream corridor permit shall be required
before any prohibited activity is undertaken within any stream corridor
as defined in Chapter 17, Article X, Section 17-181, provided that if the
approving authority has considered an application for development
involving a stream corridor, a stream corridor permit may not be sought
for five years after the date of completion of the development.
b. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrative Officer. The
administrative officer shall be responsible for the issuance of stream
corridor permits, in accordance with the procedures and standards set
forth in subsections 12-3.4 and 12-3.5 below. The administrative officer
shall consult with the township engineer with regard to engineering
and technical issues.
c. Application for Stream Corridor Permit. Application for a stream
corridor permit to allow prohibited activities to occur within stream
corridors shall be made in accordance with the requirements of
subsection 12-3.4 and subject to the considerations set forth in
subsection 12-3.5.
d. Appeal Procedure. Appeals from determinations made by the
administrative officer relative to the issuance of stream corridor
permits may be made to the zoning board of adjustment in accordance
with the requirements of subsection 12-3.7.
a. Procedure. The following procedures shall govern the issuance of
stream corridor permits:
1. The applicant shall file an application with the administrative
officer to allow prohibited activities to occur within a stream
corridor. Such application shall be on a form prescribed by the
township and shall include a concept sketch drawn to scale
showing the proposed development or disturbance. Based on the
nature of the development or disturbance proposed, and in the
reasonable discretion of the administrative officer and the
township engineer, the applicant may be required to submit, in
addition to the application and the concept sketch, 10 copies of a
true and accurate plot plan, prepared by a qualified and licensed
New Jersey professional, drawn to a scale of not less than one inch
§ 12-3.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 12-3.4
AO:274
equals 50 feet. If required by the administrative officer or the
township engineer in order to make an informed decision, the plot
plan shall exhibit the following:
(a) The exact size, shape, location and elevation of existing and
proposed structures and of any fill, regrading or areas of
disturbance;
(b) Contour lines at intervals of not more than two feet;
(c) The stream corridor for a delineated stream as defined in
Chapter 17, Article X, Section 17-181;
(d) The location of all improvements and disturbance proposed in
the stream corridor; and
(e) The extent of any proposed watercourse alterations.
2. The administrative officer shall review the submission and shall
advise the applicant in writing within 30 days of submission if the
application is incomplete and shall specify the items that are
lacking. If the administrative officer does not notify the applicant
that the application is incomplete, then the application shall be
deemed to be complete.
3. Upon determining the application to be complete, the
administrative officer shall refer the stream corridor permit
application and all accompanying documents relative thereto to the
environmental commission and the township engineer for review
and comment. If necessary, the environmental commission shall
appoint a subcommittee, consisting of less than an effective
majority, in order to facilitate the prompt review of permit
applications without requiring the application to await the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the full commission. The
commission or the subcommittee, jointly with the township
engineer, shall review the application, and after giving the
applicant an opportunity to be heard with respect thereto, shall
provide their joint findings and recommendations in writing to the
administrative officer utilizing the considerations for review set
forth in subsection 12-3.5 below. The commission shall render its
written report within 30 days of referral. Failure to do so without
written consent to an extension of time by the applicant shall be
deemed to constitute a report in favor of issuance of the permit and
without recommendations or conditions.
4. After review of the consideration set forth in subsection 12-3.5
below and the joint recommendations made by the environmental
commission or its subcommittee and the township engineer, the
administrative officer may approve the stream corridor permit with
or without conditions or may deny the stream corridor permit as
deemed necessary to further the purpose of this section. The
administrative officer shall make the final determination as to
§ 12-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-3.4
AO:275
§ 12-3.5. Considerations for Review of Stream Corridor Permits.
[Ord. #04-1328, § 2]
approval with or without conditions or denial of the requested
stream corridor permit. Such final determination shall be
forwarded in writing to the applicant. The administrative officer
shall specify the reasons for the action taken.
5. If the stream corridor permit is approved, the administrative officer
shall issue a permit to the applicant, but such permit shall not
relieve the applicant from complying with other applicable laws
and ordinances.
6. If the administrative officer fails to approve or deny the permit
within 90 days after the date of submission of a complete
application, or within such further time agreed to by the applicant
in writing, the application shall be deemed to be approved.
a. The administrative officer shall be guided by the following
considerations in reviewing applications for stream corridor permits:
1. The standards used to grant a design waiver set forth at N.J.S.A.
40:55D-51 a and b, specifically whether the permit request is
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the
provisions of the section and whether the literal enforcement of the
section is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of
peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.
2. The extent to which all necessary permits have been obtained from
applicable Federal, State or local government agencies having
jurisdiction.
3. The extent to which applicant will mitigate any encroachments into
the stream corridor and rehabilitate any and all degraded or
disturbed areas within the stream corridor and maintain the
integrity of the surrounding habitat.
4. The extent to which the proposed activity, development or
disturbance will measurably increase the danger of flood damage
or negatively impact the ecology of the stream corridor.
b. In the event that the administrative officer grants a stream corridor
permit, the stream corridor permit shall only allow the minimum
encroachment necessary to afford relief.
c. Interpretation of Boundaries. The administrative officer, with the advice
of the township engineer and subcommittee of the environmental
commission, shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the stream corridors, for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between the mapped or proposed mapped
boundaries and actual field conditions.
§ 12-3.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 12-3.6
AO:276
§ 12-3.6. Stream Corridor Averaging. [Ord. #04-1328, § 2]
An applicant may undertake stream corridor averaging, as defined in
Chapter 17, Article X, subsection 17-181. Stream corridor averaging shall
only be permitted along the perimeter of retention basins. Stream corridor
width may be reduced to a minimum of 25 feet for buildings or other
structures or zero feet for dams, pedestrian walkways, walls, and any
associated landscaped areas along the perimeter of a retention basin,
provided, however, that the total length of stream corridor reduction is not
greater than 40% of the length of the perimeter of the retention basin. For
every stream corridor reduced in area along a retention basin, there shall
be an equivalent increase in stream corridor area provided elsewhere along
the perimeter of the retention basin.
§ 12-3.7. Appeal Procedure. [Ord. #04-1328, § 2]
§ 12-4. FOREST MANAGEMENT AND TREE REMOVAL.
a. The zoning board of adjustment shall be designated as the agency to act
as the appeal authority to hear and decide all appeals from the decision
of the administrative officer.
b. Any applicant wishing to appeal the decision of the administrative
officer relative to the issuance of a stream corridor permit, shall file a
notice of appeal with the administrative officer within 20 days of receipt
of the administrative officer's decision, specifying the grounds of such
appeal. The administrative officer shall immediately transmit to the
zoning board of adjustment all the documents constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken.
c. The zoning board of adjustment shall follow the requirements set forth
in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a et seq., relating to
the appeal of the administrative officer's determination. However, the
role of the zoning board of adjustment shall not be derived from the
Municipal Land Use Law but shall be a function assigned to the zoning
board of adjustment by this section as the agency to perform this appeal
function.
d. The zoning board of adjustment shall render a decision no later than
120 days from the date of the notice of appeal. Failure of the board to
render a decision within such 120-day period or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant in writing shall constitute
a decision favorable to the applicant.
e. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the administrative officer may
appeal such decision directly to the Superior Court of New Jersey as
provided by the laws of the State of New Jersey or may appeal the
decision of the zoning board of adjustment, as the case may be.
§ 12-3.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-4.1
AO:277
§ 12-4.1. Intent and Purpose. [Ord. No. 2012-1554; Ord. No.
2016-1642]
Trees are declared to be an important cultural, ecological, scenic and
economic resource. Proper management of this resource will ensure its
maintenance and result in economic returns. Forestry management is
intended to meet the objectives of preserving, protecting, enhancing and
maintaining trees and providing opportunities for the continued use of
forest resources by ensuring management of forest and trees through the
application of sound management practices.
It shall be unlawful to cut down, damage, poison or in any other manner
destroy or cause to be destroyed any trees covered by this subchapter,
except in accordance with the provisions of this section.
§ 12-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2012-1554; Ord. No. 2016-1642]
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — Shall mean the individual appointed
annually by the Township Committee who shall be responsible for the
issuance of tree removal permits, in accordance with the procedures and
standards set forth herein. The Administrative Officer shall consult with
the Municipal Engineer with regard to engineering and technical issues.
The Administrative Officer may consult with a Certified Tree Expert or
Forester under contract with the Township Committee and the costs for said
consultant shall be paid from the Tree Escrow Funds.
CALIPER: ANSI Z60 FOR NURSERY STOCK — Caliper is a type of diameter
measurement used in the nursery industry. The height measurement shall
be taken from ground level for field grown stock and from the soil line
for container grown stock, which should be at or near the top of the root
flare. Caliper measurement of the trunk shall be taken six inches above the
top of root flare up to and including four-inch caliper size. If the caliper
at six inches above the ground exceeds four inches, the caliper should be
measured at 12 inches above the top of root flare. Seldom are tree trunks
perfectly round. The most accurate measurement will result from the use
of a diameter tape. Caliper measurements taken with manual or electronic
"slot" or "pincer" type caliper tools should be the average of the smallest
and largest measurements.
COMMUNITY FORESTRY MANAGEMENT PLAN — Shall mean a plan
developed by a municipality that outlines the goals and objectives for
managing trees on municipal property with the intent of minimizing liability
to the municipality and maximizing the useful life of the tree resource. The
plan is to be approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, Division of Parks and Forestry, New Jersey Forest Service.
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — Shall mean the diameter of a tree
measured 4 1/2 feet above the uphill/highest side.
DRIPLINE — Shall mean the line extending vertically from the exterior edge
of a tree's live crown to the ground.
§ 12-4.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 12-4.2
AO:278
EROSION — Shall mean the detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, ice, wind and gravity.
EXEMPT AREA — Shall mean the lot area as provided in this section for
which tree replacement shall not be required.
FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN — Shall mean a plan for the management
of timbered or forested lands approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, New Jersey Forest Service, or similar State or
Federal agency.
OPEN SPACE — Shall mean any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or
private use and enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open spaces, provided that
such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets
and off-street parking and other improvements that are designated to be
incidental to the natural openness of the land.
SPECIMEN TREE — Shall mean an individual tree that measures 60% or
more of the circumference at breast height of a State Record Tree for that
species.
STATE RECORD TREE — Shall mean the largest tree of each species found
in New Jersey as listed on the NJ State Big Tree Register, available from
the NJDEP Division of Parks & Forestry, State Forest Service, PO Box 404,
Trenton, NJ 08625.
TREE — Shall mean any State Record Tree, Specimen Tree or any other
woody perennial plant greater than 20 feet in height.
TREE ESCROW FUND — Shall mean a fund established by the governing
body for the administration and promotion of tree and shrubbery resource
sustainability projects and practices which may be consistent with the
Community Stewardship Incentive Program as outlined within the New
Jersey Shade Tree and Community Forestry Assistance Act P.L. 1996,
chapter 135.
TREE EXPERT — Shall mean a Forester qualified by the State of New Jersey
and having a minimum of five years' experience working in New Jersey,
a Conservation Officer qualified by the State of New Jersey and having a
minimum of five years' experience working in New Jersey or an arborist
qualified by the State of New Jersey and having a minimum of five years'
experience working in New Jersey.
§ 12-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-4.2
AO:279
TREE PLANTING PLAN — Shall mean a specific plan adopted by Hopewell
Township for the location and placement of trees on public property.
TREE PRESERVATION AND REMOVAL PLAN — Shall mean a specific plan
that contains tree locations and other information required by this section.
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued by the
Administrative Officer.
TREE REPLACEMENT PLAN — Shall mean a specific plan for replacement
of removed trees in accordance with the provision of this subchapter.
§ 12-4.3. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2012-1554 § 4; Ord. No.
2016-1642]
The terms and provisions of this section shall apply as follows:
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to remove trees
above and beyond a combined total of 150 inches of DBH within a 10
year period unless a tree removal permit has first been obtained, (e.g.
combined total of 150 inches of DBH equals 15 trees of 10 inches DBH;
five trees of 30 inches DBH; 10 trees of 15 inches DBH; etc.)
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to remove trees
which are State record trees or specimen trees unless a tree removal
permit has first been obtained.
c. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
following:
1. Any property upon which no trees are located, as confirmed by a
site visit of the Administrative Officer.
2. Any tree less than 10 inches DBH.
3. Any tree or trees removed or cut in accordance with a forest
management plan, provided that such plan is filed with the Tax
Assessor.
4. Any tree or trees removed or cut in accordance with an approved
conservation plan prepared by the Soil Conservation District,
provided that such plan has been filed with the Tax Assessor.
5. Any tree or trees planted and grown for commercial purposes on
property used as a commercial nursery, tree farm, garden center,
Christmas tree plantations or tree orchards.
6. Any tree located within or adjacent to an existing cleared area of an
existing utility right-of-way/easement and required to be removed
as part of a vegetation management plan for an existing utility as
approved by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities. All new utility
construction, whether above or below ground and regardless of
whether located within an existing or new right-of-way/easement,
shall be subject to all requirements of this ordinance.
§ 12-4.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 12-4.3
AO:280
§ 12-4.4. Tree Removal Permits; General. [Ord. No. 2012-1554; Ord.
No. 2016-1642]
7. Clear area as established by the FAA for runway safety.
8. Weather emergencies such as hurricanes, fire, windstorm, ice
storm, flood, freezing temperatures or other disaster.
9. Dead or diseased trees which are a hazard to persons or property.
10. Qualified Right-To-Farm activities.
a. Any person wishing to obtain a tree removal permit shall make
application to the Administrative Officer by filing a written application
which shall include a Tree Preservation and Removal Plan and payment
of application fees as set forth in Chapter 10. No application shall be
considered without the payment of the required fees.
b. Removal of State record trees and specimen trees shall require
approval of the Township Committee with consideration of
recommendations by the Environmental Commission.
c. Where an application as required by this section has been submitted, no
permit shall be issued until an application for a tree removal permit
meeting all of the criteria of this section has been reviewed and
approved by the Administrative Officer.
d. Where an application for a tree removal permit is made in connection
with the construction of a building or other improvement, no building
permits shall be issued until the tree removal permit has been issued.
e. All fees, including outstanding permit fees, inspection fees and tree
escrow fund contributions, shall be paid prior to the issuance of the tree
removal permit.
f. The Administrative Officer shall approve or deny the tree removal
permit within 10 business days after receipt of a completed application
and payment of application fees. An additional 10 business days shall be
added to the review period if the Administrative Officer requests
additional information as may reasonably be required to review a tree
removal permit within the original review period.
g. A tree removal permit shall require the Administrative Officer to
inspect the site from time to time to enforce the permit conditions. An
inspection fee shall be paid as a condition of any tree removal permit in
accordance with Chapter 10, Fees and Permits.
h. The Administrative Officer shall notify the applicant in writing of the
factual basis and criteria for any denial.
i. The final decision of the Administrative Officer may be appealed to the
Township Administrator by filing written notice within 10 days of the
final decision. The Township Administrator shall issue its decision
§ 12-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-4.4
AO:281
§ 12-4.5. Tree Preservation and Removal Plan. [Ord. No. 2012-1554;
Ord. No. 2016-1642]
Tree preservation and removal plans shall contain the following minimum
information. The Administrative Officer reserves the right to request
additional information as may reasonably be required to review a tree
removal permit:
within 60 days after notice of appeal is filed. The Township
Administrator may delegate its appeal responsibilities to the
Environmental Commission. The Township Administrator's decision
may be appealed to the Hopewell Township Committee who shall
render a final decision within 45 days after a public hearing on the
appeal.
a. The name and address of the applicant.
b. The name and address of the owner of the property from which the
trees are to be removed.
c. The street address and lot and block of the property.
d. A certification from the lot owner that the applicant is specifically
authorized to make the application for tree removal.
e. The shape and dimensions of the lot or parcel, including the location of
all existing and proposed easements.
f. Tree removal plans shall consist of a tree location sketch containing at
least the minimum amount of pertinent information to enable the
determination of compliance with the regulations in this subchapter.
g. Tree preservation limits.
h. Limits of all tree protection with appropriate construction details.
i. All State record and specimen trees to be removed. The applicant shall
provide documentation demonstrating that all reasonable efforts have
been made to preserve State record and specimen trees, including, but
not limited to, if feasible, relocation of existing and proposed
infrastructure, roadways and buildings.
j. Tree replacement plan in accordance with this section. A tree
replacement plan may be integrated with landscape plans submitted for
other separate land use approvals.
k. A North arrow.
l. The location of existing and proposed infrastructure, roadways and
buildings, if any.
m. Soils disturbed during any tree removal shall be stabilized in
accordance with the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
in New Jersey.
§ 12-4.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 12-4.6
AO:282
§ 12-4.6. Criteria for Issuance of Permits. [Ord. No. 2012-1554; Ord.
No. 2016-1642]
The tree removal permit shall be approved by the Administrative Officer
following his determination that the following criteria have been met:
§ 12-4.7. Term of Permit. [Ord. No. 2012-1554; Ord. No. 2016-1642]
Approved tree removal permits shall be valid for a period not to exceed 12
calendar months from the date of issuance by the Administrative Officer
and shall be conditioned upon payment of all permit and inspection fees.
An extension may be granted by the Township Administrator for a period
not to exceed three months for good cause shown. All work not completed
within the term of permit or term of extension shall be the subject of a new
application and the payment of new fees.
§ 12-4.8. Display of Permit and Right of Entry. [Ord. No. 2012-1554;
Ord. No. 2016-1642]
a. A tree preservation and removal plan has been provided meeting all of
the criteria in subsection 12-4.5;
b. A tree replacement plan has been provided meeting all of the criteria in
subsection 12-4.9;
c. The Administrative Officer, after consultation with the Municipal
Engineer, has determined that the proposed tree removal will NOT:
1. Result in additional stormwater runoff which will impact adjacent
properties;
2. Create new erosion or will not require a soil erosion and sediment
control plan approval by the Mercer County Soil Conservation
District; or
3. Impair growth or impair development of remaining trees on the
applicant's property or upon adjacent properties;
4. Create unusual dust or other nuisances during tree removal;
5. Cause damage to on or off site utilities including but not limited to
wastewater discharge and treatment systems, water supply and
distribution systems;
6. Result in dangerous or hazardous conditions.
a. The tree removal permit shall be prominently displayed on the site
continuously while trees are being removed or replaced or work done
as authorized by the tree removal permit and for 10 days thereafter.
b. All persons cutting or removing trees, if other than the applicant, shall
carry with him/her authorization from the owner and applicant
authorizing such person to cut or remove trees.
§ 12-4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-4.8
AO:283
§ 12-4.9. Tree Replacement Plan. [Ord. No. 2012-1554; Ord. No.
2016-1642]
Unless deemed an exception by subsection 12-4.3c, trees to be removed
shall be replaced in accordance with a tree replacement plan which shall be
prepared in accordance with the following:
c. In the event that trees are being cut or removed in accordance with a
forest management plan or a soil conservation plan, a copy of said plans
shall be in the possession of the person cutting or removing such trees,
if not the owner of the lot.
d. As a condition for the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall agree
in writing to the entry onto his/her premises by the Administrative
Officer or his designee as necessary to inspect the site in review of the
application for a tree removal permit and to inspect the permitted tree
removal work to effectuate the provisions of this chapter. Failure to
allow such entry shall constitute a violation of the permit and this
chapter.
a. For each tree 10 inches in DBH or greater that is removed, the
applicant shall prepare a replanting plan for other areas on the same
tax lot which is subject to the tree removal.
b. Tree replacement on the subject tax lot to compensate for the tree
removals shall be as follows:
1. Number and size of replacement trees to be used for each tree 10
inches in DBH or larger that is to be removed beyond a combined
total of 150 inches DBH and replacement shall be as follows:
Diameter of
Removed Trees at
Breast Height in
Inches
Number of
Replacement Trees
for Each Tree
Removed
Caliper of
Replacement Trees
Greater than 10
inches up to 16
inches
2 2 — 2 1/2 inches
Greater than 16
inches up to 23
inches
2 3 inches
Greater than 23
inches up to 30
inches
4 3 1/2 — 4 inches
Greater than 30
inches
5 3 1/2 — 4 inches
2. Tree replacement species shall be indigenous to the area and site.
§ 12-4.8 HOPEWELL CODE § 12-4.9
AO:284
3. Trees planted within other existing natural stands of trees on-site
may be spaced five feet to 20 feet on center.
c. Unless otherwise set forth in this section, tree replacement shall follow
the guidelines set forth in the "New Jersey No Net Loss Reforestation
Act," P.L. 1993, c.106 (c:13:1L-14.2).
d. All proposed replacement tree species shall be selected from Trees For
New Jersey Streets as published by the New Jersey Shade Tree
Federation; Street Tree Factsheets, a publication of the Municipal Tree
Restoration Program; and the adopted Hopewell Township Community
Forestry Plan.
e. Tree replacement materials shall be provided in accordance with the
standards set forth in ANSI Z60.1, American Standard for Nursery
Stock.
f. Removal of State record trees or specimen trees requires approval of
the Hopewell Township Committee. Replacement requirements for any
State record tree or specimen tree approved to be removed shall be
established by the governing body.
g. Credits for tree replacement shall be given on a one-to-one basis when
one of the following conditions are proposed on the tree replacement
plan:
1. Preservation of stands of 10 or more trees with a DBH of six inches
or greater within the limit of the disturbance line. Credit will only
be given for native trees located within the stand.
2. Preservation of one acre or more of on-site areas having stands of
trees with a DBH of six inches or greater which are to be left in
natural condition. Preservation shall be provided by a deed of
conservation easement from the lot owner to Hopewell Township
which deed shall be filed with the Mercer County Clerk's Office by
the applicant as a condition of the tree removal permit after
approval by the Township Committee. This credit excludes all
previous dedicated easements.
h. Soils disturbed during tree replacement shall be stabilized in
accordance with the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
in New Jersey.
i. All replacement trees shall be maintained in healthy condition for no
less than two years from the date of planting.
j. When the site in question cannot physically accommodate the total
replacement amount of trees required by this section, as certified by
the applicant and verified by the Administrative Officer, tree
replacement may be accomplished by a contribution of the monetary
value of non-replaced trees to the Township Tree Escrow Fund in an
§ 12-4.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-4.9
AO:285
§ 12-4.10. Tree Protection During Construction. [Ord. No.
2012-1554; Ord. No. 2016-1642]
§ 12-4.11. Tree Replacement Escrow Fund. [Ord. No. 2012-1554;
Ord. No. 2016-1642]
A Tree Escrow Fund shall be established to receive and disburse
replacement tree contributions. The primary purpose of the Tree Escrow
Fund is to provide for the planting and maintenance of trees and shrubs on
public property. The fund will also pay administrative costs to implement the
provisions of this section, including but not limited to fees for processing of
permits, site inspections, consultants, and supervision of tree replacements.
Administrative costs imposed in accordance with this section shall not
exceed 30% of the fund, as determined on an annual basis. Appropriations
from the Tree Fund shall be authorized by the Township Committee in
accordance with a municipal tree planting plan with consideration of
recommendations made by the Environmental Commission. The Tree
Escrow Fund shall be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer.
§ 12-4.12. Guarantees. [Ord. No. 2016-1642]
amount as set forth in Chapter 10, Fees and Permits. Payment shall be
a condition of the tree removal permit.
a. Prior to any tree removal protection shall be installed. Tree protection
shall remain until tree removal is complete.
b. Tree protection shall be provided, as a minimum, in accordance with
the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey.
c. There shall be no wires or attachments to trees being protected.
d. Protection is required for any soil disturbance within the drip line of any
tree not being removed.
e. Any trees damaged during construction must be inspected and treated
if required in accordance with written guidance from a tree expert. If
the damage is unable to be treated as certified by the tree expert the
damaged tree shall be removed and replaced in accordance with this
section.
f. No materials of any kind shall be stored and no construction machinery
shall be placed within the drip line of any tree to be protected.
g. When the tree protection area is adjacent to street rights-of-way and
utility easements, the location said street rights-of-way and utility
easements shall be identified during construction.
a. Performance Guarantee. When a tree replacement plan is proposed as
part of residential construction, compliance with the tree replacement
plan shall be required prior to release of the final certificate of
occupancy. When a tree replacement plan is part of non-residential
§ 12-4.9 HOPEWELL CODE § 12-4.12
AO:286
§ 12-4.13. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2012-1554; Ord. No.
2016-1642]
Chapter 13
UTILITIES
§ 13-1. CITY GAS COMPANY OF NEW JERSEY.
§ 13-1.1. Authorization. [Ord. #7/15/74]
City Gas Company of New Jersey, a public utility corporation of the State
of New Jersey, with principal offices at No. 57 Main Street, Flemington,
New Jersey, its successors and assigns, be, and it hereby is, authorized to
construct, lay, maintain and operate, for so long as gas service is available,
the necessary mains, conductors, pipes and concomitant appurtenances for
the purpose of conveying, storing, supplying and distributing gas for light,
heat, power and other purposes for public and private use and consumption,
along and under all the streets, avenues, parks, parkways, highways or
other public places within the Township of Hopewell in the County of
Mercer and State of New Jersey, as they now exist or may be hereinafter
construction or new utility construction a performance bond
guaranteeing compliance with the tree replacement plan shall be
provided to the Township. The performance guarantee shall be in a
form and in an amount prescribed by the Municipal Land Use Law.
b. Maintenance Guarantee. When a tree replacement plan is proposed as
part of residential construction, the two year maintenance obligation
shall be required as a performance condition of the final certificate of
occupancy. When a tree replacement plan is part of non-residential
construction or new utility construction, a two year maintenance bond
in the amount of 15% of the performance bond shall be provided to the
township. The maintenance guarantee shall be in a form and in an
amount prescribed by the Municipal Land Use Law.
a. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or other legal
entity violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction of such violation be punished by a fine of up to $2,000 for
each violation, in the discretion of the Judge before whom conviction
may be had. Each illegally removed tree shall be considered a separate
violation. Each violation of any of the provisions of this section and each
day the same is violated shall be defined and taken to be a separate and
distinct offense. In addition, the court may order restitution (fine and/or
appraised value, whichever is greater) and/or replacement of the tree
illegally removed.
b. In addition to other remedies, the Tree Specialist or other authorized
official may institute any appropriate legal action to prevent a
continuing violation of the terms of this section.
§ 12-4.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-1.1
AO:287
laid out by the municipal authorities of said township or dedicated to
the municipality by private persons or public agencies. The company, its
successors and assigns, shall have the further right, privilege and franchise
of using any of its mains and pipes in this township for the transmission,
transportation and delivery of gas, to any other municipality in the streets
or public places which it may also have lawful authority to lay or maintain
its mains or pipes for the distribution of gas.
§ 13-1.2. Restoration of Streets After Excavations. [Ord. #7/15/74]
In all cases in which openings or excavations are made for the purposes
aforesaid, City Gas Company of New Jersey shall restore at its own expense
all such streets, avenues, parks, parkways, highways, sidewalks, curbs or
other public places to their pre-existing condition at the commencement of
the said work; said work to be done in a careful, prudent and workmanlike
manner and within such time as shall be best for the proper restoration
thereof. If the company shall refuse or neglect, after 10 days' notice in
writing by the township committee, to restore to its pre-existing condition
any such street, avenue, park, parkway, highway, sidewalk, curb or other
public place after having made such opening, excavation or restoration, the
necessary work may be done by the township and the company shall be
liable for the actual and necessary cost thereof and upon receiving notice of
the cost thereof, shall forthwith pay the same to the township.
§ 13-1.3. Notice to Be Given by Gas Company of Intention to
Excavate. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The City Gas Company of New Jersey shall give notice to the township
committee, or to its duly authorized officials, of its intention to open or
excavate a street or other public place as aforesaid, and shall abide by any
ordinance now existing or hereafter passed, and not inconsistent with the
provisions of this section, by the township regulating the excavation and
opening of streets, roads or highways.
§ 13-1.4. Manner of Operation. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The work of laying or repairing gas mains and/or distribution lines and
laterals shall be done by the company in a careful, prudent and workmanlike
manner and at its own expense.
§ 13-1.5. Township Not Liable. [Ord. #7/15/74]
City Gas Company of New Jersey shall at all times protect and save harmless
the Township of Hopewell from any and all damages or injury to person or
property and from any and all actions, damages, costs or injury to person or
property and from any and all actions, damages, costs or charges which may
be caused by, grow out of, relate to, or result from the company's negligence
in the construction, laying, repairing, inspecting, altering or maintaining of
mains, conductors and pipes and the appurtenances thereto.
§ 13-1.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 13-1.6
AO:288
§ 13-1.6. Performance Bond. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The City Gas Company of New Jersey shall execute and file with the clerk of
the township its bond in satisfactory form guaranteeing its performance of
the conditions of subsections 3-1.2 and 3-1.5, which bond shall be renewed
from time to time as the township committee may require.
§ 13-1.7. Franchise Renewal. [Ord. #7/15/74]
This ordinance is a renewal of a franchise consent heretofore granted to
New Jersey Northern Gas Company, a predecessor in interest of City Gas
Company of New Jersey, by Ordinance Number 25 of the Township of
Hopewell on July 1, 1913.
§ 13-2. PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY; MANDATORY HOOKUP.
§ 13-2.1. Applicability. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The owner of every existing building or structure and the owner of every
building or structure hereafter to be constructed, which may be occupied or
used by human beings, located within 300 feet of any public water supply
main now existing or hereafter constructed by the Hopewell Township
Municipal Utilities Authority, or which main is hereafter constructed by
other persons and acquired by the authority in the township, shall within
30 days after the date on which the service of such main is made available
to such building or structure, by the said authority, connect such building
or structure to the water system under and pursuant to the rules and
regulations of the authority, which rules and regulations shall be filed in
the office of the Hopewell Township Municipal Utilities Authority; provided
however, that this section shall not apply to any building or structure, which
is served by a well which supplies potable water as determined by the
township board of health, and which well is in existence to the date when
public water first becomes available to and is within 300 feet of any such
building or structure.
§ 13-2.2. Owner Fails to Comply; Township to Connect; Costs
Assessed. [Ord. #7/15/74]
If the owner of any building or structure referred to in subsection 13-3.1
shall fail to make any connection required, the township may proceed to
make such connection, or cause the same to be made, and assess the cost
thereof as a lien against such building or structure, pursuant to and in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:63-52 through 40:63-64.
§ 13-3. (RESERVED)35
Chapter 14
35.Editor's Note: Former section 13-3, Public Sewerage Systems; Mandatory Connection,
previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 7/15/74, was repealed
in its entirety by Ordinance No. 94-992.
§ 13-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3
AO:289
SHADE TREE ADVISORY COMMITTEE REGULATIONS
§ 14-1. SPECIFICATIONS FOR PLANTING TREES IN
DEVELOPMENTS AND SUBDIVISIONS. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Shade trees shall be of a type and size and in such location as shall be
approved by and be planted under the supervision and direction of the
shade tree committee of the township. Such trees shall be located five to 10
feet outside the street right-of-way line, but shall not interfere with utilities.
§ 14-2. APPROVED SPECIES AND VARIETIES.
§ 14-2.1. Listing. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The following are approved species and varieties:
Littleleaf European, Linden Tilia cordata
Greenspire Linden, Tilia cordata Greenspire
Red Maple, Acer Rubrum
Scarlet Oak, Quercus coccinea
Pin Oak, Quercus palustris
*Willow Oak, Quercus phellos
Red Oak, Quercus borealis (rubra)
Sugar Maple, Acer saccharum
Bradford Callery Pear, Pyrus calleryana Bradford
Sawtooth Zelkova, Zelkova serrata
Village Green Zelkova, Zelkova serrata Village Green
*Kwanzan Japanese Flowering Cherry, Prunus serrulata Kwanzan
*Chinese Dogwood, Cornus kousa
Russian Olive, Elaeagnus angustifolia
*Sweetgum, Liquidambar styraciflua
*Sourgum, Nyssa sylvatica
Note: (Tilia cordata Greenspire - Cordata is the species name. Greenspire
is the variety)
*Spring Planting Only.
§ 13-3 HOPEWELL CODE § 14-2.2
AO:290
§ 14-2.2. Percentage of Species to Be Used. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Not more than 20% of any one species shall be planted in any subdivision
except that subdivisions requiring less than 10 trees shall not be subject to
this section of the specifications.
§ 14-3. TREE SIZE. [Ord. #7/15/74]
§ 14-4. PLANTING TIME. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Trees under the jurisdiction of the committee shall not be planted between
May 1st and October 15th without specific authorization, in writing, from
the committee.
§ 14-5. SOIL EXCAVATIONS. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The excavation must be not less than 12 inches wider and three inches
deeper than necessary to accommodate the ball of the tree.
§ 14-6. PLANTING. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Trees shall be planted at the same depth as they were in the nursery.
Planting soil shall be composed of one part peat moss and three parts
topsoil thoroughly mixed. Each tree shall be watered during the day of
planting with a minimum of five gallons of water.
§ 14-7. PRUNING. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Trees shall be pruned after planting, or by the nurseryman at the time of
digging, to balance top growth with roots and to preserve their natural
character and shape. Pruning shall be restricted in general to the secondary
branches and soft and sucker growth. The growing tip or leader is not to be
pruned without authorization of the shade tree committee.
§ 14-8. WRAPPING. [Ord. #7/15/74]
All trees shall be wrapped with six ten-inch wide 8-ounce burlap or kraft
tree paper at the time of planting from the ground to the first branches.
a. Except as noted in paragraph b, trees shall be not less than 1 1/2 inch
caliper measured six inches above ground, nor less than 10 feet high.
b. Where utilized, Bradford Callery Pear, Kwanzan Japanese Flowering
Cherry, Chinese Dogwood and Russian Olive shall be not less than one
and one-quarter inch caliper measured six inches above ground, nor
less than eight feet high.
c. All trees shall conform to the American Standard for Nursery Stock as
published by the American Association of Nurserymen. All trees shall
be balled and burlapped, nursery-grown, not "collected stock." Bare
root stock may be planted with permission of the shade tree committee.
§ 14-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-9
AO:291
§ 14-9. MULCHING. [Ord. #7/15/74]
All trees shall be mulched within three days of planting with wood chips,
licorice root, ground corncobs or other suitable mulch material.
§ 14-10. STAKING AND GUYING. [Ord. #7/15/74]
§ 14-11. REMOVAL OF ALL PLANTING DEBRIS. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Removal of debris is required. The property must be left in a neat and
orderly condition in accordance with good and accepted planting practices.
§ 14-12. GUARANTEE. [Ord. #7/15/74]
a. Trees shall be staked with at least one red or white cedar stake the
same day of planting. Stakes shall be eight feet in height and not less
than two inches in smallest diameter. Stakes are to be driven into the
ground to a depth of 12 inches below the bottom of the excavation. This
should be done before setting the tree or, if after setting, in such a
manner as not to injure the roots.
b. Trees shall be guyed to the stakes at a height of about five feet using
No. 10 gauge galvanized steel wire in a piece of rubber hose. The wire
shall be fastened to the stake in such a manner that the wire will not
slip nor come in contact with the tree trunk. Guys broken (but not
deliberately broken through vandalism) within a year of planting shall
be replaced.
a. Trees shall be guaranteed for one year for fall planted and 13 months
for spring planted trees from date of acceptance by the shade tree
committee. The trees are to be alive and in a satisfactory growing
condition as determined by the shade tree committee at the end of the
guarantee period.
b. Replacement will be made according to these same specifications and
during the normal planting period. Replacements shall be subject to the
same guarantee and replacement as the original material. The
replacements shall be made within 60 days following written demand
from the shade tree committee.
c. In case of any questions regarding the conditions and satisfactory
establishment of a rejected plant, the contractor may, if approved by the
committee, allow such a plant to remain through another growing
season at which time the rejected plant, if found to be dead, or in an
unhealthy or badly impaired condition, shall be replaced.
d. Trees proven to be dead or unhealthy through vandalism or physical
damage shall be voided from the contractor's guarantee of
replacement.
§ 14-9 HOPEWELL CODE § 14-13
AO:292
§ 14-13. ACCEPTANCE. [Ord. #7/15/74]
The shade tree committee shall have the right before, during and after
planting to reject all or a part of the trees in the development or subdivision,
if, in the committee's opinion, it is in the best interest of the township
to do so. In the event that the developer or subdivider shall dispute such
rejection, the matter shall be referred to the planning board for its action.
Chapter 15
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 15-1. EXCAVATIONS.
§ 15-1.1. Permit Required. [Ord. #404]
No person shall make any excavation in, or tear up the surface of, or jack
or drill under, any road or street in the township for any purpose whatever
without first obtaining a permit from the superintendent of public works, or
his designee.
§ 15-1.2. Application; Purpose and Location Sketch. [Ord. #404]
Application shall be made in writing for the permit to excavate or tear up
the surface or jack or drill under any township street. The application is
to state the purpose of such excavation and be accompanied by a location
sketch.
§ 15-1.3. Deposit. [Ord. #404; Ord. #589-81]
Before any permit shall be issued, a payment or deposit as provided in
Chapter 10, subsection 10-10.3, shall be made to the superintendent of
public works, or such other person as may from time to time be designated
by resolution of the township committee. All money so paid or deposited
shall be promptly paid to the township treasurer to be by him deposited in
the name of the township and held for the purpose hereinafter provided.
§ 15-1.4. Barricades and Lights. [Ord. #404]
The permittee shall properly guard the excavation by the erection of
suitable barriers by day and lights by night, and the permittee shall be liable
for any neglect to the safeguard of the traveling public. Trenches cut the
full width of the road may only be opened 1/2 of the width at a time.
§ 15-1.5. Restoration of Street. [Ord. #404]
The permittee shall be required to restore the opening in the same condition
existing before such opening as directed by the superintendent of public
works.
§ 14-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.6
AO:293
§ 15-1.6. Tunneling Prohibited. [Ord. #404]
Tunneling shall not be permitted under any circumstances and shall be an
unlawful exercise of the privilege under any such permit and a violation
thereof, but this shall not be construed as preventing jacking or drilling
when proper permits shall have been secured.
§ 15-1.7. Regulations of Permit. [Ord. #404]
Material removed from the opening shall be so placed not to interfere with
street drainage. Not more than 200 feet of trench may be opened at any one
time. All openings must be closed within the time specified in the permit
unless an extension of time is granted.
§ 15-1.8. Deposit to Be Refunded After Restoration of Street. [Ord.
#404; Ord. #589-81]
Upon the completion of the fill and the restoration of the pavement and
its approval by the superintendent of public works, the money paid or
deposited, shall be refunded to the applicant. Should the applicant fail
to properly fill and replace the pavement to the satisfaction of the
superintendent of public works, the township may replace the pavement
and charge the cost thereof against the deposit and upon the completion
thereof pay the surplus, if any, less a reinspection penalty if required.
§ 15-1.9. Openings by Public Utilities; Bond. [Ord. #404]
In case of public utility openings the township committee may accept a bond
from such utility in such form and in such amounts as may be approved.
Each and every opening, however, must be treated separately and shall
require a separate permit. The bond shall be to guarantee proper
restoration of the street on the part of the obligor.
§ 15-1.10. Compliance with Regulations. [Ord. #404]
The permittee shall follow all rules, regulations and ordinances governing
road openings and the permit is given with the distinct understanding that
it shall be binding the same as though these instructions were fully set forth
in the permit.
§ 15-1.11. Approval of Restored Street by Township Committee.
[Ord. #404]
The permittee shall be released from further obligation when the
superintendent of public works shall certify to the township committee that
such restoration has been completed and the township committee shall have
approved the same.
§ 15-1.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 15-1.12
AO:294
§ 15-1.12. Violations. [Ord. #404]
Any person, making any excavation in or tearing up the surface of or jacking
or drilling under any township street without having first secured a permit
as provided herein shall be guilty of violation of this chapter.
Any person, failing to properly guard any excavation as herein provided,
placing materials removed from an excavation so as to interfere with street
draining, opening a trench the full width of any street or more than 200
lineal feet at any one time, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
§ 15-2. DRIVEWAY ENTRANCES AND CURBS.
§ 15-2.1. Permit to Construct Required. [Ord. #404]
No person shall construct a driveway entrance, or cut, alter or remove a
curb, or part thereof, from, to, in or along any public street or right-of-way
in the township without first having obtained a permit to do so pursuant to
the provisions of this section, and then only in accordance with and during
the life of such permit.
§ 15-2.2. Application for Permit. [Ord. #404]
Application for such permit shall be made in writing, and shall be
accompanied by a fee (See Chapter 10), showing the location and details
of such installation, construction, cutting, alteration or removal. Such
application shall be filed with the construction official, and such permit
upon its application by the building inspector shall be valid for a period of
one year from the date of issuance.
§ 15-2.3. Paving of Driveway Entrance. [Ord. #404; Ord. #565-80]
Where necessary to facilitate drainage or to prevent cracking or crumbling
of the adjacent road surface; to prevent stones or dirt washing or carrying
onto the road surface, or otherwise preserve the safety of users of the
road, and reduce maintenance requirements, the construction official shall
require, as a condition of such permit, the paving of the first 20 feet of such
driveway entrance.
§ 15-2.4. Conduit Across Private Driveway; Requirements. [Ord.
#404; Ord. #565-80]
When it becomes necessary to construct a pipe or conduit across a driveway
entrance leading from a public highway, or when it becomes necessary to
install a pipe or conduit in a ditch or fosse adjacent to a public highway,
permission must first be obtained from the public works superintendent.
Such installation shall be laid to the line and grade satisfactory to the
township engineer so proper drainage will be assured.
§ 15-1.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-3
AO:295
§ 15-3. WATER FLOW ONTO STREETS. [Ord. #404; Ord. #97-1076]
No person shall construct any private street, lane, driveway or other means
of egress so that water therefrom will flow onto any public street or highway
or into any public drains without the permission of the township engineer.
All off-street traffic facilities, parking facilities, loading areas, passageways,
driveways, walks, roofs and other similar impervious surfaces as well as all
lands which have been so changed in contour or permeability as to alter or
quicken the natural flow of surface waters shall be so drained as to prevent
damage or hazard to or on abutting properties or public streets.
§ 15-4. MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS.
§ 15-4.1. Responsibilities of Landowner. [Ord. #95-1016, § 1]
The repair and maintenance of sidewalk(s) abutting the land of a residential
or commercial property are the responsibility of the landowner. Whenever
the township engineer becomes aware of and certifies to the municipal
governing body that any sidewalks are in need of construction, repair,
alteration, relaying or maintaining, the expense of said construction,
repairing, altering, relaying or maintaining, shall be borne by the
landowners abutting the improvement.
§ 15-4.2. Notification of Required Improvements. [Ord. #95-1016,
§ 1]
The mayor and committee, upon receipt of the certification set forth in
subsection 15-4.1 hereof, shall determine the necessity of said
improvement, and, if it deems that said improvement is necessary, it shall,
by resolution, cause a notice, in writing to be served upon said abutting
owners and occupants of said lands by personal delivery or certified mail
return receipt requested, requiring the necessary specified work to said
sidewalk to be done by said owner or occupant within a period of not less
than 30 days from the date of service of such notice. Said notice shall
be sent to the record owner at the address shown on the records of the
township tax assessor. All such work shall be done in accordance with plans,
specifications and grades on file in the office of the township engineer.
§ 15-4.3. Service of Notice. [Ord. #95-1016, § 1]
Whenever any said abutting lands are unoccupied and the owner cannot be
found within the municipality, the same may be mailed, postage prepaid, to
his or her post office address, if the same can be ascertained. In the event
that such owner is a nonresident of the municipality or his or her post office
address cannot be ascertained, then the notice may be inserted for four
weeks, once a week, in the official newspaper.
§ 15-3 HOPEWELL CODE § 15-4.4
AO:296
§ 15-4.4. Work Done by Township; Cost to Become Lien. [Ord.
#95-1016, § 1]
In the event that the owner or occupant of such abutting lands shall not
comply with the requirements of said notice, within 45 days of the date
thereof, it shall be lawful for the department of public works of the
municipality, upon filing due proof of service of notice and/or publication of
the aforesaid notice in the office of the township clerk, to cause the work
required to be done and paid for out of municipal funds available for that
purpose.
The cost of such work shall be certified by the township engineer to the
department or person having charge of the collection of assessments in
such municipality. Upon filing said certificate costs, the amount of the cost
of such work shall be and become a lien upon the said abutting lands in
front of which such work was done to the same extent that assessments for
local improvements are liens in the municipality and shall be collected in
the manner provided by law for the collection of such other assessments
and shall bear interest at the same rate.
In addition, thereto, the municipality may commence, in any court having
competent jurisdiction thereof, an action against the owner of said lands to
recover said amount.
§ 15-5. SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
§ 15-5.1. General Requirements. [Ord. #03-1277; Ord. #04-1320,
§ 1]
The owner or tenant of any lands abutting and having frontage on any
street, whether residential or nonresidential, shall remove all snow and ice
from the sidewalks along the frontage of said lands so as to provide for safe
use of said sidewalk within 24 hours after the snow and ice shall have fallen
or have been formed.
§ 15-5.2. Private Streets and Homeowner Associations. [Ord.
#03-1277; Ord. #04-1320, § 1]
The owner of any private street or the homeowner/property owner
association shall remove all snow and ice from all common sidewalks,
common passageways, common driveways, common parking areas and
private streets within 24 hours after the snow and ice shall have fallen
or have been formed. Snow and ice removal shall provide for safe and
unobstructed ingress, egress and use of said amenities/facilities by fire,
police, ambulance, and any other emergency vehicles as well as the
residents that routinely use said amenities/facilities. When the homeowner/
property owner association documents specifically delegate snow and ice
removal for that portion of common sidewalks and common passageways
that traverse the frontage of a specific condominium lot, then snow and
ice removal on those common sidewalks and common passageways shall be
§ 15-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-5.2
AO:297
performed by the assigned party at the assigned location in accordance with
this section.
§ 15-5.2a. Public Streets and Sidewalks. [Ord. #18-1682]
No snow or ice from driveways, parking lots, or privately owned sidewalks
shall be placed in a public street or public sidewalk. Snow shall also not be
piled or mounded in a manner that impedes the view within a sight triangle
of an intersection. Should this occur, the owner on record of said originating
property shall be held responsible and is subject to Enforcement as listed in
subsections 15-5.3 and 15-5.4.
§ 15-5.3. Enforcement. [Ord. #04-1320, § 1]
The provisions of Section 15-5 shall be enforced by any duly authorized
agent or employee at Hopewell Township. Any person found guilty of a
violation of this section shall be liable for a penalty of a maximum of $500.
The township may also take such other actions as it deems necessary to
correct such violation, consistent with subsection 15-5.4.
§ 15-5.4. Removal by Township; Costs to Become Lien. [Ord.
#03-1277; Ord. #04-1320, § 1; Ord. #2018-1682]
If snow or ice is not removed as required by subsections 15-5.1, 15-5.2 and
15-5.2a, it shall be lawful for the department of public works to cause the
work required to be performed and paid for out of municipal funds available
for that purpose. The cost of such work shall be certified by the township
engineer to the department or person having charge of the collection of
assessments in the municipality. Upon filing said certificate of costs, the
amount of the cost of such work shall be and become a lien upon the
abutting lands in front of which such work was done to the same extent that
assessments for local improvements are liens in the municipality and shall
be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of such other
assessments and shall bear interest at the same rate. In addition thereto,
the municipality may commence, in any court having competent jurisdiction
thereof, an action against the owner of said lands to recover said amount.
§ 15-6. COMPLETE STREETS POLICY.
§ 15-6.1. Purpose. [Ord. #14-1600]
All public street projects in the Township of Hopewell, both new
construction and reconstruction, excluding maintenance, shall be planned,
designed and constructed as Complete Streets.
§ 15-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. #14-1600]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless otherwise set
forth:
§ 15-5.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 15-6.2
AO:298
COMPLETE STREETS — Shall mean a street design policy which provides
for the accommodation of travel by pedestrians, bicyclists, public transit
users, and motorists. Complete Streets shall accommodate users of all ages
and abilities.
DESIGN — Shall mean facilities for bicyclists and pedestrians shall follow
industry standard design guidelines such as the New Jersey Roadway
Design Manual; the AASHTO Guide for the Development of Bicycle
Facilities, AASHTO's Guide for the Planning, Design and Operation of
Pedestrian Facilities; the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices;
Americans with Disabilities Act; and others as related. Design
considerations shall include connections for Safe Routes to School, Safe
Routes to Transit, Transit Villages, trail crossings, and areas or population
groups with limited transportation options.
§ 15-6.3. Exceptions. [Ord. #14-1600]
An exception from the establishment of bicycle and pedestrian ways in new
construction and reconstruction projects may be granted by resolution of
the Township Committee if any one of the following conditions are met:
§ 15-6.4. Accommodations During Construction. [Ord. #14-1600]
Accommodations for pedestrian and bicycle traffic shall be made when
closing roads, bridges, or sidewalks for construction projects as outlined by
New Jersey Department of Transportation Policy.
§ 15-6.5. Planning. [Ord. #14-1600]
This Complete Streets Policy shall be reviewed by the Planning Board as
part of each master plan reexamination, update, revision or amendment.
a. Bicyclists and pedestrians are prohibited by law from using the
roadway.
b. Detrimental environmental or social impacts outweigh the need for
these accommodations.
c. The safety or timing of a project is compromised by the inclusion of
Complete Streets design practices.
d. The cost of incorporating new bicycle, pedestrian, and/or public transit
facilities is excessive, defined as greater than 10% of total cost. The
need for and/or probable use of the facility shall be considered in
making the determination as to whether or not an exception should be
approved at this time or held for future consideration.
e. An exemption other than those listed above must be documented with
supporting data and must be approved by the Mayor and Township
Committee. Designs for new facilities which have been granted an
exception shall not preclude future improvements for bicycling and
walking.
§ 15-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-6.5
AO:299
Chapter 16
HEALTH
§ 16-1. ADOPTION OF CODES BY REFERENCE. [Ord. #7/15/74; Ord.
#408]
The township committee and the township board of health have adopted
certain standard codes promulgated by the New Jersey State Department
of Health together with stated amendments thereto as hereafter appears.
Copies of such codes are filed with the township clerk and may be obtained
from the New Jersey State Department of Health. Except to the extent
amended, the full text of the codes are incorporated herein by reference.
Amendments and supplements to these codes such as may be adopted in
the future by the pertinent departments of the State of New Jersey are also
incorporated herein by reference.
§ 16-2. COIN-OPERATED DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT CODE
OF NEW JERSEY. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Permit required.
§ 16-3. STANDARDS FOR INDIVIDUAL SUBSURFACE SEWAGE
DISPOSAL SYSTEMS (1989), N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1 ET SEQ.36 [Ord. #7/
15/74; Ord. #BH:88-2; Ord. #BH:90-2]
§ 16-4. ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMS.
§ 16-4.1. Retail Food Establishments.37 [Ord. #BH:2003-2, § 1; Ord.
#2018-1681]
a. The code known as Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage
Disposal Systems (1989), N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1 et seq., commonly referred
to as "Chapter 199 Regulations," and all amendments or revisions
thereto, is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety.
b. A printed copy in book form of said code adopted by reference is
attached hereto.
c. Three copies of said code will be placed on file in the office of the
secretary of the Hopewell Township Board of Health upon introduction
of the section and will remain on file until final action is taken on said
section, for the use and examination of the public.
36.Editor's Note: Section 16-3, containing subsections 16-3.1-16-3.8, was amended in its
entirety by Ordinance No. BH90-2. Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of
Ordinance Nos. 7/15/74 and BH 88-2.
37.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 7/15/74 and
BH:90-1.
§ 15-6.5 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-4.1
AO:300
a. License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a retail
food establishment, as defined in and governed by Chapter XII, N.J.A.C.
8:24-1 "Sanitation in Retail Food Establishment and Food and Beverage
Vending Machines", provisions of this section, all other State and
Federal regulations, and all revisions thereto, without first having
procured a license from the local Board of Health or without complying
with any or all of the provisions concerning operation and maintenance
of the same as contained in the aforementioned Administrative Code.
1. Changes in owner or operator shall require a new license.
2. Licenses shall be issued annually and expire June 30.
3. Fees shall be determined by size of facility and/or extent of food
service provided.
4. Fees shall be collected according to the schedule established in
Chapter 10 of the Revised General Ordinance of the Township of
Hopewell 1978.
b. Retail food establishment owners and/or managers shall attend
annually a food-handling program offered by the township health
department, another health department, Mercer County Health
Officers Association and/or any other program approved by the State
Department of Health and Senior Services. Proof of attendance must be
provided at time of license renewal.
c. Owner or manager shall offer and/or conduct for all employees an
annual program on the basic principles of proper food handling,
storage, preparation and sanitation methods as defined by State
regulations and/or the FDA Food Code. Training documentation must
be provided at time of license renewal.
d. Menus and floor and equipment plans shall be submitted and reviewed
by the health department in conjunction with any new facilities,
renovations, repair or alteration of all existing facilities and the
issuance of any permits by the municipal construction office for said
construction, renovation, repair or alteration.
1. Changes in owner or operator shall be considered a new facility
and must comply with this provision. Renovations or alterations
may be required.
e. All facilities shall have at a minimum the following sinks: one threecompartment
sink with dual drain boards, a separate pre-scrub/soak
sink, at least one food preparation sink per food preparation area to
prevent cross contamination of raw and cooked foods, one
maintenance/utility sink, hand sink with paddle or foot operation and
soap and towel dispenser located within each food preparation area,
food service line, customer self-service areas/counters and in
dishwasher/manual cleaning areas, and no greater than 15 feet from
any person positioned within the station. The specific number and
§ 16-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-4.1
AO:301
location will be determined by the magnitude of the food services being
provided. Dishwashers when included do not replace the required sinks
necessary for manual wash, rinse and sanitize operations. Chemical
sanitizers or gloves may not be substituted.
f. Potable water reports must be provided to the Hopewell Township
Health Department by the facility operator and/or laboratory on a
quarterly basis or at a frequency determined by the health department
or by the safe drinking water regulations based on population served or
quality issues.
g. All retail establishments shall post hand-washing signs in all toilet
facilities and in areas of food preparation. Signs must provide
information on acceptable hand-washing procedures. Unless provided
by the health department, the department must approve all other signs.
h. Display of Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) Warning Signs. All licensees
under this section who sell alcoholic beverages shall prominently post
on their premises a warning of the dangers to the unborn children of
women who consume alcoholic beverages while pregnant. The nature
and type of warning signs shall be those prepared and distributed by
the Mercer Council on the Alcoholism and Drug Addiction.
i. Management of Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG). Retail food
establishments involved in food preparation activities that generate
FOG, including but not limited to frying, grilling, charbroiling,
rotisserie cooking, or utilization of griddles or woks; shall meet the
following requirements:
1. Facilities Served by Public Sewers.
(a) Internal grease traps shall be completely emptied a minimum
of every 90 days.
(b) Reports shall be furnished to the local health department
detailing the dates of grease trap cleaning, provide the name of
the person who cleaned trap, and how many inches of grease
were removed.
(c) Reports shall be provided annually with license renewal
application.
(d) Reports shall be maintained on premise and shall be made
available for inspection upon request.
2. Facilities Served by Individual Onsite Sewage Disposal System.
(a) External grease traps shall be completely emptied a minimum
of every 180 days by a New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection licensed waste hauler.
(b) At time of pumping, tank shall be visually assessed for amount
of FOG in tank, tank water tightness, and baffle integrity.
§ 16-4.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-4.1
AO:302
§ 16-4.2. Foods and Beverage Vending Machines. [Ord.
#BOH:2003-2, § 1]
Volumes of FOG and tank deficiencies shall be noted on
receipt.
(c) Reports shall be provided annually with license renewal
application.
(d) Reports shall be maintained on premises and shall be made
available for inspection upon request.
3. The Health Officer shall have the authority to modify maintenance
requirements of grease traps. The Health Officer shall report retail
food establishments grease maintenance requirements to the
Hopewell Township Engineer annually.
a. Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate food and
beverage vending machines, whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or any other person, or for any body
corporate, or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise to:
1. Engage in the operation of one or more machines or devices offered
for public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token, or by
other means dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in
bulk or package, without the necessity of replenishing the devices
between each vending operation, without first having applied to
and procured a permit per machine from the board of health of this
municipality so to do, and without complying with any and all of the
provisions of Chapter XII, N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 "Sanitation in Retail Food
Establishment and Food and Beverage Vending Machines."
2. Maintain or permit to be maintained on or in any location in this
municipality, one or more machines or devices offered for public
use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token, or by other
means dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk
or package, without the necessity of replenishing the devices
between each vending operation, without first having applied to
and procured a license for each such machine or device from the
board of health of this municipality or without complying with any
and all of the provisions of Chapter XII, N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 "Sanitation
in Retail Food Establishment and Food and Beverage Vending
Machines."
b. Permit Fee Per Machine. See Chapter 10. Fees and Permits.
c. Application for and Issuance of Permits. Application for and issuance of
the permits referred to in subsection 16-4.2a shall be made in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter XII, N.J.A.C.
8:24-1 "Sanitation in Retail Food Establishment and Food and Beverage
Vending Machines." Such permits are not transferable.
§ 16-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-4.2
AO:303
§ 16-4.3. Child/Adult Day Care Centers. [Ord. #BOH:2003-2, § 1]
d. Interstate Commerce. No provision of this section shall be applied so as
to impose any unlawful burden on either interstate commerce or any
activity of the State or Federal government.
a. License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a child
care/adult day care center as defined in and governed by Chapter 122,
Manual of Requirements for Child Care Centers, N.J.A.C. 10:122
without first having procured a retail food license from the local board
of health or without complying with any or all of the provisions
concerning operation and maintenance of the same as contained in the
aforementioned Administrative Code, provisions of this section, all
other State and Federal regulations, and all revisions thereto. N.J.A.C.
10:122 requires all centers to provide some level of food service.
Therefore, they must also comply with Chapter XII, N.J.A.C. 8:24-1
"Sanitation in Retail Food Establishment and Food and Beverage
Vending Machines."
1. Changes in owner or operator shall require a new license.
2. Licenses shall be issued annually and expire June 30.
3. Fees shall be determined by size of facility and/or extent of food
service provided.
4. Fees shall be collected according to the schedule established in
subsection 10-5.3, Retail Food Establishment of the Revised
General Ordinance of the Township of Hopewell 1978.
b. Retail food establishment owners and/or managers shall attend
annually a food-handling program offered by the township health
department, another health department, Mercer County Health
Officers Association and/or any other program approved by the State
Department of Health and Senior Services. Proof of attendance must be
provided at time of license renewal.
c. Owner or manager shall offer and/or conduct for all employees an
annual program on the basic principles of proper food handling,
storage, preparation and sanitation methods as defined by State
regulations and/or the FDA Food Code. Training documentation must
be provided at time of license renewal.
d. Menu and floor and equipment plans shall be submitted and reviewed
by the health department in conjunction with any new facilities,
renovations, repair or alteration of all existing facilities and the
issuance of any permits by the municipal construction office for said
construction, renovation, repair or alteration.
1. Changes in owner or operator shall be considered a new facility
and must comply with this provision. Renovations or alterations
may be required.
§ 16-4.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-4.3
AO:304
§ 16-4.4. Public Recreational Bathing. [Ord. #BOH:2003-2, § 1]
e. All facilities shall have at a minimum one of each of the following sinks;
three-compartment sink with dual drain board, a separate pre-scrub/
soak sink, food preparation sink, maintenance/utility sink, and a hand
sink located in each food preparation area, food service line, customer
self-service areas/counters and in dishwasher/manual cleaning areas.
The specific number and location will be determined by the magnitude
of the food services being provided. Dishwashers when included do not
replace the required sinks necessary for manual wash, rinse and
sanitize operations. Chemical sanitizers or gloves may not be
substituted.
f. Potable water reports must be provided to the Hopewell Township
Health Department by the facility operator and/or laboratory on a
quarterly basis or at a frequency determined by the health department
or by the safe drinking water regulations based on population served or
quality issues.
g. Septic tank and grease tank pump out and maintenance reports must
be submitted annually with the license renewal.
h. All centers shall post hand-washing signs in all toilet facilities and in
areas of food preparation. Signs must provide information on
acceptable hand-washing procedures. Unless provided by the health
department, the department must approve all other signs.
a. License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a public
recreational bathing facility as defined in and governed by Chapter IX,
"Public Recreational Bathing" of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code,
N.J.A.C. 8:26-1, provisions of this section, all other State and Federal
regulations, and all revisions thereto, without first having procured a
license from the local board of health or without complying with any or
all of the provisions concerning operation and maintenance of the same
as contained in the aforementioned Administrative Code.
1. Changes in owner or operator shall require a new license.
2. Licenses shall be issued annually and expire June 30.
3. Fees shall be collected according to the schedule established in
subsection 10-5.4, Miscellaneous Licenses and Permits of the
Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Hopewell 1978.
b. In the event a food service facility is part of the operation or a separate
concession, a retail food license must also be secured and all provisions
of subsection 16-4.1, Retail Food Establishments, of this section must
be met.
c. Potable water reports must be provided to the Hopewell Township
Health Department by the facility operator and/or laboratory on a
quarterly basis or at a frequency determined by the health department
§ 16-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-4.4
AO:305
§ 16-4.5. Health and Fitness Recreational Establishments.
or by the safe drinking water regulations based on population served or
quality issues.
d. Septic tank and grease tank pump out and maintenance reports must
be submitted annually with the license renewal.
a. License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
health and fitness recreational facility not specifically covered by
subsection 16-4.4, Public Recreational Bathing of this section as a
recreational bathing facility without first having procured a license
from the local board of health and without complying with all of the
provisions of this section and Subchapter 6 "General Sanitation and
Maintenance" of N.J.A.C. 8:26-6 concerning construction and
maintenance of the facilities as contained in the aforementioned
Administrative Code.
1. Changes in owner or operator shall require a new license.
2. Licenses shall be issued annually and expire June 30.
3. Fees shall be collected according to the schedule established in
subsection 10-5.4, Miscellaneous Licenses and Permits of the
Revised General Ordinance of the Township of Hopewell 1978.
b. In the event a food service facility is part of the operation or a separate
concession, a retail food license must also be secured and all provisions
of subsection 16-4.1, Retail Food Establishments of this section must be
met.
c. Potable water reports must be provided to the Hopewell Township
Health Department by the facility operator and/or laboratory on a
quarterly basis or at a frequency determined by the health department
or by the safe drinking water regulations based on population served or
quality issues.
d. Septic tank and grease tank pump out and maintenance reports must
be submitted annually with the license renewal.
e. Floor and equipment plans for all new facilities and/or the renovation,
repair or alteration of all existing facilities shall be submitted and
reviewed by the health department prior to issuance of any permits by
the municipal construction office for said construction, renovation,
repair or alteration.
f. Hand sinks shall also be located in all locker areas, bathrooms and
within any workout rooms or aerobic areas as determined by the health
department.
g. At least one water fountain shall be provided with a cold-water
extended fill faucet for filling bottles as determined by the health
department.
§ 16-4.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-4.6
AO:306
§ 16-4.6. Youth Camps. [Ord. #BOH:2003-2, § 1]
The New Jersey Youth Camp Safety Standards, N.J.A.C. 8:25.1 et seq.,
May 4, 1998, and any amendments or revisions thereto shall govern youth
camps.
§ 16-4.7. Public Campgrounds. [Ord. #BOH:2003-2, § 1]
The New Jersey State Sanitary Code, Chapter XI, Public Campgrounds,
N.J.A.C. 8:22-1 et seq., July 10, 1996, and any amendments or revisions
thereto shall govern public campgrounds.
§ 16-4.8. Massage and Bodywork Establishments. [Ord.
#2018-1681]
See also Section 16-16.
a. In the event a food service facility is part of the operation or a separate
concession, a retail food license must also be secured and all provisions
of subsection 16-4.1, Retail Food Establishments of this section must be
met.
a. In the event a food service facility is part of the operation or a separate
concession, a retail food license must also be secured and all provisions
of subsection 16-4.1, Retail Food Establishments of this section must be
met.
a. License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a
Massage and Body Work Therapy Establishment, as defined in and
governed by N.J.S.A. 45:11, provisions of this section, all other State
and Federal regulations, and all revisions thereto, without first having
procured a license from the local Board of Health or without complying
with any or all of the provisions concerning operation and maintenance
of the same as contained in the aforementioned regulations.
1. Changes in owner or operator shall require a new license.
2. Licenses shall be issued annually and expire June 30.
3. Fees shall be collected according to the schedule established in
Chapter 10 of the Revised General Ordinance of the Township of
Hopewell 1978.
b. Plan Review. The following documentation shall be submitted for review
by the health department in conjunction with any new Massage and
Body Work facilities:
1. A detailed floor plan showing all floors of the facility locating the
following:
(a) Waiting Areas.
(b) Restrooms.
§ 16-4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-4.8
AO:307
(c) Changing Rooms.
(d) Massage Rooms/Treatment Areas.
(e) Entrances & Exits.
(f) Storage Areas.
(g) Plumbing Layout.
2. Finish materials plan for all floors, walls and ceilings.
3. Licensed Professional Engineer's certification of septic system size
and function for proposed business (if applicable).
4. Well water analysis report from a New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection certified laboratory for all New Jersey
Private Well Test Act (N.J.A.C. 7:9E) parameters (if applicable).
c. Minimum Facility Requirements. Each massage and bodywork therapy
establishment shall meet the following requirements at all times during
operation:
1. All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas
and floors shall be constructed of material with surfaces which are
smooth, non-absorbent, and which may be readily disinfected.
2. A public restroom shall be available to clients and employees
during all business hours.
3. Water closets and lavatories shall be in conformance with the
regulations set forth in the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:23.
4. If bathing, dressing and locker facilities are provided for the
patrons and male and female patrons are served simultaneously,
separate bathing, dressing, locker and massage room facilities
shall be provided.
5. The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting nondisposable
instruments and materials used in administering
massages. Such non-disposable instruments and materials shall be
disinfected after use on each patron.
6. Adequate hand washing facilities shall be conveniently located to
each treatment area to maintain clean hands and arms of all
employees before, after and during treatments. Each individual
massage and body work room or station shall be provided with
hand wash sink, towels and waste receptacle with self-closing lid.
7. Hand sinks shall be provided with hot and cold water capable of
delivering running water under pressure at a temperature of
90-110° F.
§ 16-4.8 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-4.8
AO:308
§ 16-4.9. (Reserved)
§ 16-4.10. General Provisions. [Ord. #BOH:2003-2; Ord.
#2018-1681]
d. Operating Requirements. Each massage and body work therapy
establishment shall operate in compliance with N.J.A.C. 13:37A-1.1 et
seq., commonly known as "New Jersey Board of Massage and Bodywork
Therapy."
a. Enforcement. Whenever the health officer or his/her designee
reasonably believes a violation of this section exists, he/she may issue a
summons after discovery of the violation. The complaint shall be
written and shall state with reasonable particularity the nature of the
violation, including reference to the article and section violated.
The health officer or his/her designee charged with enforcement of this
section after giving proper identification may inspect any matter, thing,
premises, place, person, record, vehicle, incident or event as necessary.
b. Suspension or Revocation of License. Any license issued under the
terms and provisions of this section may be suspended or revoked by
the board of health of this township for the violation by the licensee of
any provisions of this section.
Grounds for revocation shall include but not be limited to:
1. A licensee being issued three evaluations of conditionally
satisfactory as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24-9.11 within a twelve-month
period.
2. A licensee being issued two or more summonses within a twelvemonth
period for similar violations of State law or local ordinances
and found guilty of the offense on two or more incidents.
3. A licensee failing to adhere to an order (as defined by N.J.A.C.
8:24-9.6) issued by the health department requiring the
establishment to be closed in order to protect the public health.
4. A licensee failing to adhere to an order (as defined by N.J.A.C.
8:24-9.6) issued by the health department requiring any employee
of the retail food establishment suspected of being ill or infected
with a disease, or suspected of being a carrier of a disease, which
may be transmitted through food, to leave the establishment and
refrain from returning to work in or about such establishment until
permission is granted by the health department.
5. A licensee failing to adhere to an order to embargo in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 24 any food, drug, device or cosmetic.
6. A licensee selling or providing tobacco or alcohol to any person in
violation of State law or local ordinance.
§ 16-4.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-4.10
AO:309
7. Whenever it shall appear that the business, trade, calling,
profession or occupation of the person to whom such license was
issued is conducted in a disorderly or improper manner or in
violation of any law of the United States, the State of New Jersey or
any ordinance of this municipality.
c. Hearing. A license issued under the terms and provisions of this section
shall not be revoked, cancelled or suspended until the board of health
thereon shall have had a hearing. Written notice of the time and place of
such hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three business
days prior to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also
contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking,
canceling or suspending such license. Notice shall be given either by
personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or be deposited in
the United States Post Office in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid,
addressed to such person to be notified at the business address
appearing on said license. At the hearing before the board of health the
person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer and may
thereafter be heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation by
the board of health, the complaint may be dismissed, or if the board of
health concludes that the charges have been sustained and
substantiated, it may revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by the
licensee. If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder
thereof nor any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be
entitled to another license to carry on the same business within the city
unless the application for such license shall be approved by the board of
health.
d. Applicability. No provision of this section shall be applied so as to
impose any unlawful burden on either interstate commerce or any
activity of the State or Federal Government.
e. Severability. If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this
section is declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or inoperative, in
whole or in part by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
determination shall be deemed not to invalidate the remaining
chapters, sections, subsections or paragraphs of this section.
f. Application. This section shall be liberally construed for the protection
of the health, safety and welfare of the people of Hopewell Township.
g. Penalty.
1. Penalties for violation of this section shall be as provided in
Chapter 3 Law Enforcement Regulations of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Hopewell and payable to the
treasury of the municipality.
2. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a
violation of any provision of this section continues shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 16-4.10 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-5
AO:310
§ 16-5. DROUGHT EMERGENCY AND WATER CONSERVATION.
§ 16-5.1. Criteria to Declare Emergency. [Ord. #11-1539]
Whenever Hopewell Township finds, based upon the following criteria, that
drought conditions exist within the township, the township committee shall
declare that a drought emergency exists and that a water conservation
program be initiated.
A drought emergency shall be found to exist if two or more of the conditions
of State and National drought information systems, as noted below, have
occurred.
§ 16-5.2. Water Conservation Restriction. [Ord. #11-1539]
Upon declaring a drought emergency the Township Committee shall
establish water conservation restrictions considering the nature and extent
of the water emergency. Such measures shall be based upon the National
Integrated Drought Information System:
1. Precipitation during the preceding 60 days is two inches or more below
normal precipitation;
2. Water levels in township waterways streams are less than the seven
day-2 year low flow as calculated by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS).
In ponds or lakes water levels are two feet or more below normal
elevations;
3. Administrative actions taken by the Delaware River Basin Commission
in relation to stream flows in the Delaware River;
4. Declaration of a water emergency by the Governor;
5. Declaration of a water emergency by adjoining municipality or
municipalities;
6. Designation by the New Jersey Department of Environmental of a
drought watch or drought warning condition; or
7. The inclusion of the Township region within an area designated as
abnormally dry or drier on the National Integrated Drought Information
System monitored weekly at: http://www.drought.gov/portal/server.pt/
community/drought.gov/202
8. Water levels equal to or greater than two feet below the Historical Daily
Median as defined by U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) for an observation
well located within the Township or adjoining municipality and
monitored by the USGS.
a. DO: Abnormally dry.
§ 16-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-5.2
AO:311
§ 16-5.3. Notice. [Ord. #11-1539]
Reasonable attempts shall be made to notify citizens and residents of the
township of the existence of a drought emergency, the water conservation
restrictions imposed, and the penalties for violations.
Topping of swimming pools, by no more than two inches of depth, is
acceptable but no pool filling with water from homeowner wells. It is
acceptable to fill pools with water provided by Fire Departments.
b. D1: Moderate drought.
Watering limited to once per week for established (i.e., > 2 years old)
lawns, landscaped areas and woody vegetation (e.g. shrubs and trees)
No car washing except at commercial car washing facilities
Watering limited to odd or even days for new (< two years old) lawns,
landscaped areas and woody vegetation
No pool filling is acceptable; topping off (less than two inches depth)
permitted
c. D2: Severe drought.
No watering of established lawns, landscaped areas and woody
vegetation
Watering limited to once per week for new plantings
No car washing
No pool filling or topping off
d. D3: Extreme drought.
In addition to prior restrictions,
All outdoor water use prohibited
Indoor use for laundry and dishwashing limited to every other day
e. D4: Exceptional drought.
Same restrictions as for D3
Water conservation restrictions shall be effective immediately upon publication
and shall continue in effect for 90 days, or such lesser time period as may be
specified, unless extended or repealed by resolution of the township committee.
Any water conservation restrictions imposed pursuant to this section shall
apply equally to both users on privately owned wells and users served by a
public utility.
Nothing in this subsection shall be read so as to prohibit, restrict or limit water
usage where a bona fide health emergency exists.
§ 16-5.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-5.4
AO:312
§ 16-5.4. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. #11-1539]
§ 16-6. WELLS, WELL TESTS, AND WATER SUPPLIES.38
§ 16-6.1. Purpose. [Ord. #03-1299, § 1]
The purpose of this section is to assure that adequate water supply is
available without adverse effect on others and to maintain the long-term
natural equilibrium of the ground and surface waters of Hopewell Township.
§ 16-6.2. Applicability. [Ord. 03-1299, § 1]
The provisions of this section are applicable to all new, altered and
replacement supply wells, wells on existing lots, and wells installed or to
be partially or totally used for nonessential use. Residential subdivision
applications creating more than one new lot and all site plan applications
must satisfy the requirements of section 17-149 et seq. of Hopewell
Township's Municipal Land Use and Development Ordinance. In the event
that the requirements of section 17-149 are not applicable or are waived,
then the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable.
a. Water conservation restrictions shall be enforced during a drought
emergency by the local authorized official who shall be one of the
following individuals; the zoning officer, the health officer or designee,
township police or the township engineer. The local authorized official
is hereby empowered to write summons for the violation of the water
conservation restrictions imposed pursuant to this section.
b. Whenever the local authorized official determines that a violation of the
water conservation restrictions has occurred on particular property,
regardless of the source of the water, the authorized official shall first
issue a notice of violation to the property owner. The initial violation
shall require a written warning which shall include an explanation of
the drought emergency and penalties for violation. Subsequent
violations during the same drought emergency shall be cause to issue a
summons.
c. After a warning for a first offense any person or business that thereafter
violates the water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this section
shall be subject to the penalty provisions as set forth in Chapter 3 Law
Enforcement Regulations of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Hopewell and payable to the treasury of the municipality.
d. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation
of any provision of this section continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
38.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. BH:86-1,
BH:87-1, BH:87-2, BH:88-2 and BH:2001-2. See also section 16-17 for regulations
pertaining to testing and reporting requirements for wells prior to transfer of property,
changes in use and/or changes in tenancy.
§ 16-5.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-6.3
AO:313
§ 16-6.3. Prohibition. [Ord. #03-1299, § 1]
Based on the limited groundwater resources within Hopewell Township
as outlined in M2 Associates March 2, 2001 report entitled "Evaluation
of Groundwater Resources of Hopewell Township, Mercer County, New
Jersey", no wells shall be permitted to be connected to a permanent
irrigation system except if that system is used entirely for commercial
agricultural purposes. In addition, no wells can be used for the filling of
swimming pools.
§ 16-6.4. Exemption. [Ord. #03-1299, § 1]
A replacement well as defined herein is exempt from the requirements
of section 16-6 provided that the existing well is decommissioned in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:9D-3 et seq. and there have been no changes to
the floor space within the existing residence. A new well located more than
20 feet from an existing well is not deemed a replacement well. If classified
as a commercial farm by the Mercer County Agricultural Development
Board, the applicant may apply for an exemption from all or part of the
requirements of this chapter from the board of health, which shall consider
the farm status of the operation and its potential impacts on water
resources in rendering a decision.
§ 16-6.5. Definitions. [Ord. #03-1299, § 1]
ABANDONED WELL — Shall mean any well which is not in use, has been
illegally installed or improperly constructed, has been improperly
maintained or is damaged, has not been maintained in a condition that
ensures that the subsurface or percolation water of the State are protected
from contamination, has been replaced by another well or connection to
a public supply, is contaminated, is nonproductive, or no longer serves its
intended use pursuant to the State Act.
ABANDONMENT OR DECOMMISSIONING OF A WELL — Shall mean the
permanent closure or sealing of a well in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:9D-3 et
seq.
ALTER — Shall mean to enlarge, deepen or replace any portion of an
existing water supply system. The terms "alteration" and "altered" shall be
construed accordingly.
APPLICANT — Shall mean a developer or property owner submitting an
application for development or permit to install or use a well.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the application form
and all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance, or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
APPLICATION FOR WELL PERMIT — Shall mean the application form and
all accompanying documentation required by the township for approval to
§ 16-6.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-6.5
AO:314
locate, construct or alter a water supply in accordance with subsection
16-6.6a of this section and as authorized by N.J.A.C. 7:10-12.40.
AQUIFER — Shall mean the rock or sediment in a formation, group of
formations, or part of a formation, which is saturated and sufficiently
permeable to transmit economic quantities of water to wells and springs.
BUILDING LOT — Shall mean a designated parcel, tract or area of land
established by plat or otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed
or built upon as a unit and for which the water supply is obtained from a
private on-site well.
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — Shall mean a source and
distribution system for potable water subject to the requirements of N.J.S.A.
58:12A-1.1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 7:10-1.1 et seq.
CONE OF DEPRESSION — Shall mean the area around a pumping well in
which the head in the aquifer has been lowered.
DEVELOPER — Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot
or of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DRAWDOWN — Shall mean the lowering of the water table of an unconfined
aquifer or the potentiometric surface of a confined aquifer caused by
pumping of groundwater from wells. Drawdown is determined by
subtracting the depth to water from the static water level (determined prior
to the start of pumping).
FRACTURE TRACE — Shall mean the surface representation of a fracture
zone.
GROUNDWATER — Shall mean the water in the saturated zone that is
under a pressure equal to or greater than atmospheric pressure.
GROUNDWATER MINING — Shall mean the practice of withdrawing
groundwater at rates in excess of natural recharge.
HEAD — Shall mean the height above a datum plane of a column of water. In
a groundwater system, it is composed of elevation head and pressure head.
IRRIGATION SYSTEM — Shall mean equipment including but not limited
to pumps, piping, and sprinkler heads used to distribute water to grasses,
landscape materials, and other vegetation.
LOCAL AGENCY — Shall mean the board of health, which is the municipal
agency responsible for review and approval of an application for well
operation.
LOCAL ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Shall mean the township health
officer or other technical representative of the township as may be
designated by the Hopewell Township Board of Health.
NJDEP — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 16-6.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-6.5
AO:315
NONESSENTIAL USE — Shall mean a partial or total use, other than as
water for a residence, including irrigation or filling of swimming pools,
provided that a construction permit is required.
NONESSENTIAL WELL — Shall mean a well installed or used partially or
totally for a purpose other than serving as the source of water for the
residence.
OBSERVATION WELL — Shall mean a nonpumping well used to observe the
elevation of the water table or the potentiometric surface. Also known as
monitoring well.
PLOT PLAN — Shall be a map prepared by a New Jersey licensed
professional engineer, based upon a plan of survey and identifying all
existing and proposed septic systems and wells within 200 feet of the
proposed well(s) in addition to requirements of N.J.A.C. 13:40-5.1 and
subsection 16-12.6 of the Hopewell Township Sewage Disposal System
Code.
PRIVATE OR NONPUBLIC WELL — Shall mean any water system/well that
provides potable water solely to a property or structure intended as a
single-family residence.
PUBLIC WELL — Shall mean any water system/well(s) that provides potable
water to any property or structure that is not served by a private or
nonpublic well and is not intended to serve a single-family residence.
PUMPING TEST — Shall mean a test made by pumping a well for a period
of time and observing the change in water level in the aquifer.
PUMPING TEST, CONSTANT RATE — Shall mean a pumping test during
which the discharge rate from the pumping well is maintained at a constant
rate for the duration of the test.
RECOVERY — Shall mean the rate at which the water level in a well rises
after the pump has been shut off. Recovery is the inverse of drawdown.
REPAIR — Shall mean the restoring or modifying of a well to improve its
operation.
REPLACEMENT WELL — Shall mean a well installed for the sole purpose of
replacing an existing private well that no longer meets the demands of the
existing residence provided there are no alterations to the residence and
the new well is installed within 20 feet of the existing well.
SPECIFIC CAPACITY — Shall mean an expression of the productivity of a
well, obtained by dividing the pumping rate by the drawdown level and
described on the basis of the number of hours pumping prior to
measurement of drawdown. The value will generally decrease with
increased time of pumping.
STATIC WATER LEVEL — Shall mean the depth to water in the well prior to
the commencement of pumping.
STORAGE COEFFICIENT — Shall mean the volume of water an aquifer
releases from or takes into storage per unit surface area of the aquifer per
§ 16-6.5 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-6.5
AO:316
unit change in head. It equals the product of specific storage and aquifer
thickness. Also known as storativity.
TRANSMISSIVITY — Shall mean the rate at which water of a prevailing
density and viscosity is transmitted through a unit width of an aquifer
or confining bed under a unit hydraulic gradient. Transmissivity equals
hydraulic conductivity times aquifer thickness.
USEPA — Shall mean the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
WELL INTERFERENCE — Shall mean the result of two or more pumping
wells, the drawdown cones of which intercept. At a given location, the total
well interference is the sum of the drawdowns due to each individual well.
Additional definitions included in section 17-149 Water Supply and Analysis
Requirements are also applicable.
§ 16-6.6. Permits. [Ord. #03-1299, § 1]
a. Well Permits. No person shall locate, construct, repair, deepen,
abandon, decommission or alter any well, or utilize an existing well for
any nonessential use, without first receiving a well permit from the
board of health. All abandoned wells must be decommissioned in
accordance with the procedure set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:9D, "Well
construction; maintenance and sealing of abandoned wells, Subchapter
3.1 General requirements and procedures for the decommissioning of
wells." Inspections shall be scheduled and performed by the board of
health as part of the permit requirements. Emergency activity due to
"no water" may proceed without inspection and prior to the issuance of
a permit in order to restore water to a property. However, the board of
health must be notified of the activity as soon as possible but no later
than the next business day. Applicant shall post all appropriate fees for
the applicable permit, including fees for nonessential use and
nonessential wells as specified in Chapter 10.
b. Construction Permits. No construction permit for a new home or other
structure shall be issued unless the well intended to serve the home(s)
or structure(s) has been drilled, tested and certified by the applicant's
engineer or well driller as complying with State standards for the
construction of public noncommunity and nonpublic water systems
(N.J.A.C. 7:10-12.1 et seq.), subsections 16-6.6, 16-6.7 and 16-6.8 of this
section, and approved by the local enforcement officer.
c. Pump Replacement Permits. No well pumps shall be replaced without
first securing a well pump replacement permit. All buried wells shall be
extended in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:10-12.20 Wellhead
requirements. Emergency pump replacements due to "no water" may
proceed without inspection and prior to the issuance of a permit in
order to restore water to a property. However, the board of health must
be notified of the activity as soon as possible but no later than the next
business day.
§ 16-6.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-6.6
AO:317
§ 16-6.7. Drilling and Location Requirements.
§ 16-6.8. Aquifer Testing Requirements. [Ord. #03-1299, § 1]
All observation wells shall be tested for bacteriological quality prior to and
post monitoring. The health department and the property owner of any
existing residential well used as an observation well shall be notified of any
unacceptable results immediately by the laboratory. Certified copies of the
test results shall be submitted to the local enforcement officer.
d. Reports on the repair, replacement or abandonment of all wells and well
pumps shall be submitted no later than 30 days upon completion of
permitted activity.
e. Well Use Certificate of Compliance. No person shall begin operation of
a well until the local agency has reviewed the report of the local
enforcement officer and issues a well use certificate of compliance.
a. Construction Criteria. All wells shall conform to the standards for the
construction of nonpublic and noncommunity wells as promulgated by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, N.J.A.C.
7:10-12.1 et seq., with the following amendments:
1. A minimum of 50 feet of well casing shall be provided for all wells.
2. Hydrofracturing of the geologic formation to increase yields prior
to aquifer testing is prohibited.
b. Location Requirements.
1. No wells shall be located within 100 feet of any other existing or
proposed well or within 10 feet of an existing or proposed lot line.
2. No existing well shall be built over by any realty improvement that
would inhibit access to the well for any repair, replacement or
decommissioning.
c. Permits Required. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or the
applicant or well driller to obtain a permit prior to drilling.
d. Well Disinfection. All existing wells that are monitored, and all new
wells shall be disinfected in accordance with the standards of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
a. New or Altered Wells, Including Residential Subdivisions Creating One
New Lot.
1. A three-part aquifer test will be conducted with the first part
evaluating the peak demand, the second part determining the
constant head yield and the third part determining the rate of
recovery.
§ 16-6.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-6.8
AO:318
2. The first two parts of the aquifer test will be conducted in
accordance with the procedures outlined in the 1986 New Jersey
Geological Survey (NJGS) Groundwater Report Series No. 1 "Two-
Part Pump Test for Evaluating the Water Supply Capabilities of
Domestic Wells".
3. The Peak Demand Evaluation will be conducted in accordance with
the following:
(a) Daily Demand equals 200 gallons multiplied by the number of
bedrooms.
(b) Peak Load equals 50% of the Daily Demand.
(c) Peak Rate equals three gallons per minute multiplied by the
number of bathrooms.
(d) Peak Time equals Peak Load divided by Peak Rate.
(e) The well will be pumped at a rate equal to the Peak Rate for a
minimum duration equal to the Peak Time.
(f) The depth to water will be measured prior to the start of
pumping to determine the Static Water Level.
(g) Depth to water measurements will be made at minimum
intervals of five minutes during the Peak Demand Evaluation.
Drawdown will be calculated by subtracting each
measurement from the Static Water Level.
(h) The water level must be measured at the conclusion of the
Peak Demand Evaluation and the Total Drawdown recorded.
(i) The well is deemed to have satisfied the Peak Demand
Evaluation if it can be pumped for the Peak Time at the Peak
Rate. If the well is incapable of yielding the Peak Rate for the
Peak Time, a well use permit will not be issued.
(j) A well that does not satisfy the requirements of the Peak
Demand Evaluation must be altered to increase storage or
decommissioned, in accordance with appropriate NJDEP
regulations.
4. The Constant Head Yield Evaluation will be conducted in
accordance with the following:
(a) Immediately upon completion of the Peak Demand Evaluation
and without cessation of pumping, the pumping rate must be
reduced within the well until drawdown within the well can be
maintained at a constant head. A constant head condition
exists if the drawdown within the well does not change more
than a 0.5 foot per hour.
§ 16-6.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-6.8
AO:319
(b) The depth to water must be measured in one-minute intervals
until a constant head is maintained continuously for a
minimum duration of 10 minutes. The Constant Head equals
the depth to water within the well at the conclusion of the tenminute
interval.
(c) Once a Constant Head is determined, the pumping rate must
be measured to determine the Constant Head Yield.
(d) The Constant Head Yield Evaluation commences upon
determination of the Constant Head and Constant Head Yield.
During the Constant Head Yield Evaluation, the well must
continue to be pumped at a rate that maintains drawdown
within the well within a 0.5 foot of Constant Head determined
prior to the start of the Constant Head Yield Evaluation.
(e) The depth to water and the pumping rate must be recorded
every five minutes upon commencement of the Constant Head
Yield Evaluation.
(f) If the pumping rate fluctuates more than 10% or the drawdown
changes more than a 0.5 foot, the Constant Head Yield
Evaluation must be restarted and the new Constant Head and
Constant Head Yield must be maintained continuously for 10
minutes prior to recommencement.
(g) The duration of the Constant Head Yield Evaluation will equal
to the lesser time duration of the following: i) the volume of
water removed from the aquifer equals 50% of the Daily
Demand; or ii) two hours.
(h) At the conclusion of the constant Head Yield Evaluation, the
drawdown and pumping rate must be recorded.
(i) The well is deemed to have satisfied the Constant Head Yield
Evaluation if the Constant Head Yield multiplied by 1440
minutes per day exceeds twice the Daily Demand.
(j) A well that does not satisfy the requirements of the Constant
Head Yield Evaluation must be altered to increase the yield or
decommissioned in accordance with appropriate NJDEP
regulations.
5. Recovery Rate Evaluation.
(a) Immediately upon completion of the Constant Head Yield
Evaluation, the pump is shut down and the Recovery Rate
Evaluation commences.
(b) Water levels are measured at a minimum interval of one minute
during the first 10 minutes of the Recovery Rate Evaluation
and then at five minute intervals for the next 50 minutes and
§ 16-6.8 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-6.8
AO:320
then at 10 minute intervals until the conclusion of the Recovery
Rate Evaluation.
(c) Residual Drawdown is calculated by subtracting the Recovery
Rate Evaluation depth to water measurements from the static
water level measurement made prior to the start of the Peak
Demand Evaluation.
(d) The duration of the Recovery Rate Evaluation will equal to the
lesser time duration of the following: i) the water level in the
well recovers 80% of the drawdown determined at the
conclusion of the Constant Head Yield Evaluation; or ii) four
hours.
(e) The well is deemed to have satisfied the Recovery Rate
Evaluation if Residual Drawdown after four hours of recovery
is less than 20% of total drawdown.
(f) A well that does not satisfy the requirements of the Recovery
Rate Evaluation must be altered to increase the yield or
decommissioned in accordance with appropriate NJDEP
regulations.
b. Nonessential Wells and Nonessential Usage of Wells.
1. Prior to conducting an aquifer test, the applicant shall submit the
design of such aquifer test and qualifications of the persons and
firm who will be performing the test, to the local enforcement
officer.
2. The design of the aquifer test shall be developed using the
applicable guidance from "Guidelines for Preparing Hydrogeologic
Reports for Water Allocation Permit Application with an Appendix
on Aquifer-Test Analysis Procedures" NJGS GSR 29 (1992 or most
recent edition) or successor document.
3. Phases. The aquifer test will be conducted in three phases, which
are the background phase, the pumping phase, and the recovery
phase.
(a) The first phase will involve the collection of background water
levels prior to the start of the test. The second phase will
involve the pumping of water from the well and the monitoring
of water-level drawdown in the observation and pumping wells.
The third phase will involve the recovery of water levels in the
observation and pumping wells after the pump has been shut
down. This third phase of the test should be, at a minimum, the
same length as the pumping phase.
(b) The aquifer test (all three phases) shall not be conducted
during precipitation event or events in which total
precipitation exceeds or equals one-half of an inch.
§ 16-6.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-6.8
AO:321
Precipitation must be recorded with a National Weather
Service-acceptable rain gauge on site during all phases of
testing, and measurements for each day must be included in
the hydrogeologic report. If precipitation occurs during the
test, the applicant should provide precipitation amounts and
sufficient data to show that the precipitation did not recharge
the aquifer during the test and adversely impact the testing
results. If precipitation amounts exceeding one-half of an inch
are recorded, the test must be repeated.
(c) The pump must be installed in the pumping well at least 48
hours prior to the start of the background phase.
(d) Prior to starting the background phase, water levels in the test
well and observation wells must be permitted to stabilize for a
minimum of three days after all drilling activities are complete.
(e) During the background phase, water levels must be collected
at a minimum once per hour for the twenty-four-hour period
prior to the start of pumping. It is the applicant's responsibility
to collect sufficient data to determine background conditions
and to ensure that antecedent influences can be fully
characterized. Barometer measurements and additional waterlevel
measurements can be made by the applicant to evaluate
the change in water levels resulting from barometric pressure
changes and/or influences from off-site pumping.
(f) On the day of the pumping phase, water levels shall be
collected from all wells to determine static water levels prior to
the start of pumping. Water levels in wells on neighboring
properties should be allowed to stabilize at or near static water
level prior to the start of pumping. For any observation well
which has been pumped within the 24 hours preceding the
test, two depth to water measurements at least one hour apart
shall be collected to show that the well has fully recovered
prior to the start of pumping.
(g) When the pump is started, the flow rate shall be adjusted
immediately to a uniform pumping rate as required for a
constant-rate test and in accordance with the approved aquifer
test plan. The flow rate shall not vary more than 10%
throughout the test. If the flow rate fluctuates more than 10%,
the test may be deemed invalid and the applicant required to
repeat the notification and testing process.
(h) Water-level measurements during the pumping phase of the
test shall be collected in accordance with Table 1. This same
schedule shall be followed for the recovery phase of testing
upon shut down of the pump in the test well.
§ 16-6.8 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-6.8
AO:322
Table 1: Minimum Frequency of Water-Level Measurements in Wells During Pumping
and Recovery Phases of Aquifer Test
Time Since Pumping
Began or Stopped Test Well Observation Wells
0 to 5 minutes 0.5 minutes 0.5 minutes
5 to 10 minutes 1 minute 1 minute
10 to 30 minutes 2 minutes 2 minutes
30 to 60 minutes 5 minutes 5 minutes
60 to 120 minutes 10 minutes 10 minutes
2 to 24 hours 30 minutes 30 minutes
4. Rate and Duration. The minimum pumping rate will equal 120% of
the maximum anticipated use rate. The minimum duration of the
pumping phase will be 24 hours. The minimum duration of the
recovery phase will be 24 hours.
5. If the demand exceeds 100,000 gallons per day, a New Jersey Water
Allocation Permit must be obtained from the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
6. The pumping rate will be measured by equipping the discharge
pipe with an orifice/manometer apparatus and calibrated flow
meter to instantaneously measure flow rate and determine total
volume pumped from the well.
7. The discharge shall be directed so that it leaves the site without
infiltrating to the aquifer. Any and all permits required by the
NJDEP for the discharge of water must be obtained prior to starting
the test.
8. Observation Wells.
(a) The number of observation wells required per aquifer test will
depend on the maximum daily demand. Observation wells must
be located in such a manner that will yield the most accurate
information concerning the aquifer.
(b) Observation wells should be completed to similar depths as the
pumping well.
(c) Observation wells must be located parallel and perpendicular
to strike of the primary regional fractures and those
intersected by the tested well. Additional observation wells
should be located to evaluate potential secondary fractures
and impacts to adjacent properties.
(d) A fracture trace analysis showing the location and orientation
of fractures beneath the site must be included with the aquifer
test plan. This same analysis with additional information
§ 16-6.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-6.8
AO:323
regarding septic system locations must be included in the
hydrogeologic report. This fracture trace analysis must be
used to identify all observation wells on the site and should
be used to identify neighboring property owner wells to be
monitored during the test.
(e) One observation well should be located within 200 feet but no
more than 500 feet of the pumping well. If required, a second
observation well must be within 1,000 feet of the pumping
well.
(f) The observation wells and pumping well must have a geologic
log describing the depth and types of soils and rocks
encountered and the depth and yields of all waterbearing
fractures. Furthermore, the logs must include static water
level measurements and total yield estimates for each well.
(g) Table 2 lists the number of observation wells required for
anticipated maximum daily demand.
Table 2: Aquifer Test Requirements for Nonessential
and Nonessential Usage Wells
Average Demand
(gallons per day) No. of Observation Wells
0 to 800 3
800 to 1,999 3 (minimum of 1 new well)
2,000 to 9,999 3 (minimum of 2 new wells)
10,000 to 99,999 6 (minimum of 2 new wells)
100,000 or more Obtain NJDEP Water Allocation
Permit
9. Evaluation of Results.
(a) Precipitation. A test conducted during a period in which 0.5 of
an inch or more of precipitation are recorded at or near the site
must be repeated.
(b) If the pumping rate does not exceed 120% of the maximum
daily demand or cannot be maintained for a minimum of 24
hours, the aquifer beneath the site will be deemed insufficient
to meet the proposed demands and the applicant must reduce
site demands.
(c) If the pumping rate varies by more than 10% of the average
flow rate, the entire test shall be repeated.
(d) If the pump shuts down during the pumping phase, the entire
test must be repeated.
§ 16-6.8 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-6.8
AO:324
(e) If water levels in the pumping and/or observation wells exceed
the measurement capacity of the devices used for measuring
changes in water levels, and measurements are not recorded
with other devices in accordance with the schedule listed in
Table 1,39 the test must be repeated.
(f) If the pumping data indicate a change in aquifer transmissivity
as a result of fracture dewatering, all analyses of the potential
radius of influence and impacts to neighbors, streams, and
wetlands must be conducted using the lowered aquifer
transmissivity. If this lowered transmissivity indicates that the
anticipated demand cannot be supported by the aquifer
beneath the site, the applicant must reduce the site demand.
(g) For purposes of evaluating water-level recovery, the recovery
phase duration will be equal to the pumping phase duration.
For example, if the pumping phase is 24 hours in duration,
water levels 24 hours after the pump has been turned off will
be compared to the pre-pumping static water level to assess
recovery rates and residual drawdown.
(h) If residual drawdown in the pumping well or any observation
wells exceeds 10% but is less than 20% of the total drawdown
at the end of the recovery phase, the applicant must show
through standard/recognized aquifer test analytical
procedures and calculations that the well or wells are capable
of full recovery. If full recovery cannot be shown or
groundwater mining/dewatering has occurred, the applicant
must reduce site demands.
(i) If residual drawdown in the pumping well or any observation
well exceeds 20% of the total drawdown at the end of the
recovery phase, the aquifer will be deemed insufficient to meet
the proposed site demands and the applicant must reduce site
demands.
(j) If the drawdown is measured to be more than one foot at any
existing adjacent property well or along the property boundary,
the applicant's hydrogeologist must evaluate long-term
potential impacts to adjacent properties based on the actual
condition of wells in that zone or along that portion of the site
boundary.
(k) If a drawdown of five feet or more is noted in any existing
adjacent property well, or is projected at any property
boundary, then the aquifer will be deemed to have insufficient
transmissivity to support the proposed site demands and the
applicant must reduce demand to ensure that drawdown will
not exceed five feet at any site boundaries.
39.Editor's Note: Table 1 may be found in paragraph b3 of this subsection.
§ 16-6.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-6.8
AO:325
§ 16-6.9. Water Quality Evaluation. [Ord. #03-1299, § 1]
§ 16-6.10. Property Owner Notification for Nonessential Wells and
Nonessential Uses. [Ord. #03-1299, § 1]
(l) If drawdown is projected to exceed 10 feet in any adjacent
wells after 30 days of continuous pumping assuming no
recharge, then the aquifer will be deemed insufficient to meet
the applicant's demands and the demands must be reduced to
ensure that well use during a drought will not adversely impact
neighboring wells.
(m) If drawdown is measured or projected to induce leakage from
streams or wetlands partially or entirely dewatered, then the
demand must be reduced to prevent adverse impacts to
streamflow or wetlands.
10. Additional Testing. Any test that must be repeated, restarted, or
reconducted at a reduced demand must satisfy all the requirements
of this section including but not limited to renotification of all
property owners within 500 feet and resubmission of an aquifer
test plan for local enforcement officer approval prior to
implementation of the test.
a. Groundwater samples must be collected from all newly constructed or
altered wells.
b. The samples must be collected in accordance with the NJDEP Field
Procedures Manual.
c. At a minimum, the samples shall be analyzed by a NJDEP certified
laboratory for iron, manganese nitrate, total coliform, fecal coliform,
hardness, Gross Alpha Particle Activity, arsenic, copper, and lead. The
samples shall also be analyzed for volatile organic compounds for which
the USEPA or NJDEP has determined maximum contaminant levels
using USEPA Method 524.2.
d. Field measurements of pH, conductivity, and total dissolved solids shall
be made with calibrated instruments.
e. If site conditions indicate potential historic use of pollutants, such as
heavy metals, pesticides, herbicides, and/or other volatile or
semivolatile organic compounds at or near the site, these analyses must
be conducted.
f. Based on past historical operations at the site or at nearby properties,
the local enforcement officer may require additional analyses of
groundwater to assess potential future and current impacts.
g. The results of the water sample analyses will be used to assess water
quality.
§ 16-6.8 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-6.10
AO:326
a. Notice Requirements for Nonessential Wells and Nonessential Uses.
1. Owners of existing wells on lots located within 500 feet of the
subdivision/site plan boundary shall be given an opportunity to
have their wells monitored during the aquifer test.
2. Such opportunity shall be given by the applicant by notice via
certified mail and shall give the time and place of the aquifer test.
3. A notice acceptable to Hopewell Township is included in Appendix
A.40 This notice may be modified with approval of the township
attorney and the local enforcement officer. If the application is
pending before a board, the board with jurisdiction must also
approve the change.
4. The notice shall indicate that such existing well may be monitored
if agreed to by the well owner provided the well is readily
accessible.
5. Such notice shall indicate that the existing well owner must
respond within seven days and the applicant's responsibility is to
monitor up to three wells on properties within 500 feet of the
subdivision boundaries.
6. The applicant shall provide a certificate of insurance for itself and
all contractors utilized and pay all costs associated with the
monitoring of any existing residential well.
7. Prior to monitoring, all buried wells must be raised to a minimum of
12 inches above grade to allow access and retrofitted with pitless
well adapters etc. per N.J.A.C. 7:1012.20 well head requirements.
8. All wells shall be chlorinated each time they are opened for service
or monitoring, unless the owner specifically waives the
requirement of chlorination in writing. Bottled water shall be
provided to the homeowners during the monitoring period and
while the chlorine is detected above the acceptable limits of
chlorination in the public water standards.
9. The costs of extending, restoring or replacing a well damaged as a
result of testing shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
10. The applicant shall indemnify and hold the township and its
consultants and representatives harmless from any liability in
connection with these testing requirements.
b. Response.
1. If the owner of the lot within 500 feet of the subdivision boundaries
decides to participate by agreeing to have their existing well
40.Editor's Note: Appendix A, referred to herein, may be found in the office of the board of
health.
§ 16-6.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-6.10
AO:327
§ 16-6.11. Reporting Requirements. [Ord. #03-1299, § 1]
monitored, they shall notify the applicant by certified mail or other
traceable delivery, with postage or costs prepaid by the applicant.
2. Such response shall be provided within seven days of receipt of the
certified notice from the applicant.
3. If the applicant receives no response within the time provided, the
response shall be deemed to be negative.
4. All reasonable efforts must be made to protect the potability of
water from the monitored well.
c. Selection of Wells for Monitoring.
1. In the case when more than three property owners within 500 feet
of the subdivision boundaries decide to participate and to have
their existing wells monitored, only the three closest properties
need to be monitored.
2. However, if any of the property owners requesting monitoring have
wells completed to a depth less than 100 feet, these wells must also
be monitored in addition to the three other wells.
3. A map depicting the location of all wells to be monitored and a list
of all property owners within 500 feet of the subdivision boundary
that requested monitoring is to be submitted to the local
enforcement officer for review and approval prior to implementing
the test.
4. The observation wells on neighboring properties should be selected
to assess if the cone of depression from the pumping well will
extend beyond the property boundary in any direction.
5. The local enforcement officer reserves the right to retain a
professional hydrogeologist to review the proposed monitoring
locations and to make recommendations to revise the locations to
be monitored.
a. New or Altered Supply Wells.
1. The lot owner's well driller or engineer shall certify and furnish to
the local enforcement officer the following information:
(a) Addendum to well permit application showing the exact well
location.
(b) Date drilled.
(c) Casing diameters.
(d) Yield in gpm as defined above.
§ 16-6.10 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-6.11
AO:328
(e) Geologic formation or rock type based upon maps and field
observation.
(f) Depth.
(g) Depth of casing (fifty-foot minimum required).
(h) Static water level (the elevation or depth of water in well prior
to pumping or after pumping as measured from top of casing).
(i) Pumping level (in feet).
(j) Hours pumped.
(k) Drawdown in feet.
(l) Peak-demand yield.
(m) Constant-head yield.
(n) Recovery rate.
(o) Recovery time.
(p) Depth to bedrock.
(q) Elevation at ground surface.
(r) Pump type and specifications.
(s) Observation methods and measurement details.
2. If in the judgment of the local enforcement officer, there is reason
to believe that the purpose of this section may in any way be
contravened by the proposed withdrawal, additional test pumping
may be required by the enforcement officer.
3. Unless it can be demonstrated by the lot owner's engineer that
yields are above the required rate of discharge for the system and
there is no detrimental effect on surrounding wells, law irrigation
systems are prohibited. Increased storage may be recommended.
b. Reporting Requirements for Nonessential Wells and Nonessential Uses.
1. An application shall include a report by a qualified hydrogeologist
on the aquifer conditions beneath the site and demonstrate that
adequate water supply is available without adverse effect on
neighboring wells and other resources, including but not limited to
wetlands and streams. A qualified hydrogeologist shall be an
individual who has received a minimum of a bachelor's degree in
geology at an accredited institution or has completed an equivalent
of 30 semester hours of geological education while obtaining a
bachelor's or master's degree in a related field of engineering or
science at an accredited institution. Such a person must also
demonstrate five years of professional work experience in the
§ 16-6.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-6.11
AO:329
practice of applying geologic principles to interpretation of
groundwater conditions. The individual should provide a resume
or curriculum vitae to document education and experience
requirements. The report shall cover or include site specifics on the
following:
(a) The report shall document the design and implementation of
the aquifer test.
(b) The report shall include all water level data collected during
the aquifer test.
(c) The report must include supporting data and calculations used
to determine the average daily and peak-day demands as well
as the average annual demands.
(d) The report must include calculations of aquifer characteristics
such as transmissivity and storage coefficient, calculations of
the cone of influence, potential impacts to adjacent well
owners, and the long-term sustained yield for the wells.
(e) All water level measurements obtained during the aquifer test
shall be included with the report in electronic format
acceptable to the township.
(f) The report shall include a detailed hydrogeologic description
of the aquifers encountered beneath the site and adjacent
properties.
(g) The report must include a detailed evaluation of the water
supply demand for an average and peak day and this demand
should be supported with information on anticipated
population, expected unit density, and size of units.
(h) An inventory of all wells within 1,000 feet of the proposed site
boundaries should be appended. This inventory should be
submitted in electronic format acceptable to the township.
(i) Figures depicting site geology, topography, water level
elevations, groundwater flow, and development plans shall be
included.
(j) In addition, all water quality sampling data shall be tabulated
and summarized in the report. Only one copy of the laboratory
report is necessary for filing with the township.
(k) The report should include a detailed evaluation of potential
impacts from subsurface sewage disposal systems on
groundwater quality. A site plan depicting well, septic leach
field, and fracture trace locations at a minimum scale of one
inch equals 200 feet should be included. For any and all
locations where a fracture or set of fractures intersects one or
more wells and/or septic leach fields, a detailed assessment of
§ 16-6.11 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-6.11
AO:330
§ 16-7. PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE CODE OF HOPEWELL
TOWNSHIP. [Ord. #BOH-2008-1, § I]
The purpose of this section is to protect and promote the public health
through the control, abatement and prevention of nuisances of a public
health concern. Alleged infractions of the provisions and standards set
forth will be investigated by an enforcing official in each case presented.
Wherever there is a question as to the significance of an alleged infraction
or the factual existence of an alleged infraction, the prudent judgment of
the health officer or other enforcing official will prevail in the determination
of a violation.
OCCUPANT — Shall be defined as specified in the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq.; Regulations for the Maintenance
of Hotels and Multiple Dwellings, N.J.A.C. 5:10-1 et seq.; Regulations
Governing Rooming and Boarding Houses, N.J.A.C. 5:27-1 et seq.; New
Jersey State Housing Code, N.J.A.C. 5:28-1 et seq., as may be the case.
OWNER — Shall be defined as specified in the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq.; Regulations for the Maintenance
of Hotels and Multiple Dwellings, N.J.A.C. 5:10-1 et seq.; Regulations
Governing Rooming and Boarding Houses, N.J.A.C. 5:27-1 et seq.; New
Jersey State Housing Code, N.J.A.C. 5:28-1 et seq.; New Jersey Uniform Fire
Code N.J.A.C. 5:70 et seq., as may be the case.
treatment technologies should be included. The treatment
technologies should provide adequate assurances that any and
all groundwater pumped from the wells will satisfy Federal
and New Jersey Drinking Water Standards and will not be
adversely impacted by the septic leach field discharges.
(l) The hydrogeologic report shall include the name and license
number of the well driller and pump installer. The report
should include the names of the persons and firm responsible
for collecting the water level measurements. In addition, the
report should include copies of the completed NJDEP Well
Records.
c. On receipt of the report specified above, the local enforcement officer
shall review the report and make comments and/or recommendations
regarding the well application to the appropriate municipal agency.
d. The local agency shall not approve a well use application unless the
applicant's report, the local enforcement officer's report and its own
analysis support a conclusion that the applicant's plans for water supply
will not unreasonably contravene the purposes of this section. The
agency may disapprove an applicant's water supply plans giving its
reasons, or may require additional surveys or tests before approving
the application, or the local agency may approve the application and
issue a well use permit when it is satisfied that the requirements of this
section have been met.
§ 16-6.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-7
AO:331
PERSON — Shall mean and include an individual, firm, corporation,
association, society, partnership, and their agents or employees.
PREMISES — Shall mean a house or building, together with its land and
outbuilding.
PUBLIC HEALTH CONCERN — Shall mean any matters, conditions or
things that cause worry, solicitude, or anxiety for the health, safety and
welfare of the public due to their dangerous or unsanitary nature.
PUBLIC RESTROOM — Shall mean a room equipped with toilet facilities
inarguably intended for public use in all public facilities and in
establishments where commercial activity takes place.
RESIDENT — Shall mean any person occupying or maintaining a place of
residence within the township.
RESIDENTIAL USE — Shall mean a dwelling unit, such as a home,
condominium, trailer or a multifamily dwelling of two or more units.
RODENTS — Shall mean those rodents that have public health significance
for disease transmission, property damage such as mice, rats, bats and
other burrowing rodents etc.
SOLID WASTE — Shall mean any trash, garbage, junk, rubbish, refuse,
litter, debris and other materials that when dumped, deposited,
accumulated or abandoned create conditions of public health concern. This
term shall include any animal or vegetable waste solids resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of foods; discarded material
such as; glass, wood, yard debris, grass/brush clippings, stone, concrete,
plastic, ashes, cloth, rags, paper, metal, tires, street cleanings, dead
animals, manure, appliances, furniture, equipment, automobiles, solid
market wastes, construction materials, industrial wastes, chemical wastes,
recyclable materials and containers, and all discarded appliances.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Hopewell, County of Mercer, and
State of New Jersey.
USABLE MATERIALS — Properly stored are nonperishable materials stored
for new construction or other items intended to be used within 30 days and
are stored off the ground and maintained in such a matter that they do not
provide habitat for insects or rodents.
WATER DRAINAGE AND ACCUMULATION — Shall mean the runoff,
discharge or drainage of water from any premises or building which results
in the accumulation of stagnant water. This subsection shall not apply
to water retention areas and/or reservoirs approved by the municipal
engineer.
WEEDS — Shall mean the growth, existence or presence of any noxious
weeds of any height or the growth, existence or presence of any other
weeds or plant growth in excess of 10 inches. Weeds shall be defined as all
grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided,
however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers, landscaped areas
and gardens.
§ 16-7 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-7.2
AO:332
§ 16-7.2. Nuisances Defined and Prohibited. [Ord. #BOH-2008-1,
§ I; Ord. #BOH-2013-1 § 1]
a. Any matter, thing, condition or act which after investigation by the
health officer or other enforcing official is deemed to be injurious,
detrimental or a menace to the public health or environment or is
deemed to be an annoyance or interfere with the comfort or well-being
of the inhabitants of the township is hereby declared to be a nuisance
and shall include but not be limited to the following.
1. Pollution or the existence of a condition or discharge or release
which causes or threatens pollution of any surface water or
subsurface water of the township.
2. The escape or entrance into open air/outdoor environment from
any stack, vent, chimney, process or from any fire of such quantities
and duration of smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, mists, or gases
that tend to be injurious to human health or welfare, animal or
plant life or property, or would unreasonably interfere with the
enjoyment of life or property throughout the township.
3. The growth, existence or presence of ragweed, of 10 inches in
height or greater, or in such a quantity so as to cause damage or
injury to adjacent properties or be a public health concern, on any
plot of land, lot, highway, street, sidewalk, right-of-way or any other
public or private place within 200 feet of an occupied dwelling.
4. The growth, existence or presence of poison ivy, of 10 inches in
height or greater, or in such a quantity so as to cause damage or
injury to adjacent properties or be a public health concern, within
20 feet of an adjoining property line of an occupied residential or
commercial property, sidewalk or right-of-way.
5. The growth, existence or presence of any weeds or noxious weeds,
of 10 inches in height or greater, or in such a quantity so as to
cause damage or injury to adjacent properties or be a public health
concern, on any approved residential or commercial property with
the exception of approved State, County or local designated
conservation areas or other restricted use areas. Subdivision lots
approved but not issued final certificate of occupancy are included.
6. All residential and commercial lawn areas are to be maintained and
mowed and may not to exceed 10 inches in height. Areas allowed to
return to natural conditions must be approved by the Health
Department per subsection 16-7.3 of this section.
7. The existence or presence of dead trees or limbs on any land within
50 feet of an adjoining dwelling or within 20 feet of an adjoining
residential property line which will cause damage to adjoining
property or structures.
8. Any dead or dying tree that harbors insects or rodents.
§ 16-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-7.2
AO:333
9. The presence on any plot of land, highway, street, right-of-way or
any other public or private place of any solid waste, but excluding
usable materials properly stored. The practice of composting shall
not fall within the meaning of this subsection, provided that such
compost pile, mound or area is maintained on one's own private
property and is properly maintained so as not to present offensive
odors, the breeding or harborage of flies or other insects, rodents,
vermin or any other public health nuisance.
10. Depositing, dumping, accumulating, maintaining or otherwise
allowing any matter or thing which serves as food for insects or
rodents and to which they may have access or which serves or
constitutes a breeding place or harborage for insects, rodents or
pigeons of a public health significance in or on any land premises,
building or other place.
11. The existence or presence of any accumulation of solid waste which
may attract insects, rodents or other vermin and to which insects,
rodents or other vermin may have access, or in which they may
breed or dwell.
12. The existence or presence of any water or other liquid in which
mosquito eggs, larvae or pupae exist or of any condition which
allows water to lie, pond, stand or otherwise accumulate so as to
provide a breeding environment for mosquitoes. The meaning of
this subsection shall not apply to ponds where fish are adequately
maintained so as to preclude the breeding of mosquitoes. This
section shall not apply to fountains or swimming pools which
maintain adequate circulation to preclude the breeding of
mosquitoes.
13. The keeping of any animal or animals in such a manner as to cause
or present a source of foulness, odors or breeding of insects,
rodents or other vermin.
14. The existence or maintenance of any condition which may
reasonably constitute a safety hazard, an attractive nuisance or
otherwise present a threat to the safety and well-being of the
inhabitants of the township or of the public at large, including but
not limited to the following:
(a) Any vacant building which is not adequately sealed, boarded
up or otherwise secured so as to preclude the entry of
inquisitive minors or others. (See also Section 11-4 of the
Hopewell Township Revised General Ordinance and the New
Jersey Fire Code.)
(b) Any excavation, depression, hole, shaft, abandoned or unused
well which is of such depth or dimension so as to present a
hazard in terms of one falling into or being entrapped therein
and which has not been adequately fenced or sealed so as to
prevent injury or harm.
§ 16-7.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-7.2
AO:334
§ 16-7.3. Return of Land to its Natural Condition Due to Larger
Residential Lot Zoning. [Ord. #BOH-2008-1, § I]
(c) Any discarded refrigerator, cabinet, automobile or other piece
of equipment, machinery, device or material which may offer or
present an enclosure and a hazardous attraction to children or
others which has not been properly sealed or discarded.
(d) Any dead or dying trees or limbs in such proximity to a
dwelling, building, street, sidewalk, pathway, right-of-way,
thoroughfare, driveway, park, playground or other frequented
area where the falling of the tree or part thereof would
endanger life, threaten injury or damage property.
15. The willful abandonment of any domestic animal within the
boundaries of the township.
16. Accumulation and storage of solid waste on any private or
commercial property unless properly contained or stacked for
disposal not to exceed 14 days.
17. Placement of solid wastes at curb for more than five days prior to
scheduled pick up date. All items must be removed after the fifth
day if not collected due to weather or the fault of the hauler.
Nonpayment of contractor for these services is not an acceptable
reason for allowing items to remain.
18. Any sidewalk, walkways, driveway, parking spaces or similar area
containing cracks, pothole, or other defect which creates a
hazardous condition or which is obstructed by plant growth or
other natural or artificial barrier.
19. The discharge from sump pumps from any premises or building
which results in the accumulation of ice or stagnant water on
public roadways or onto an adjoining property without permission
of adjoining property owner or township.
20. Public restroom shall be kept in good repair; all surfaces of
fixtures, walls and floors are cleaned on a regular schedule and
must be provided with running hot and cold water of adequate
pressure per plumbing code. A supply of toilet paper, soap and
hand drying supplies or equipment shall be provided at all times.
Hand washing signs shall be posted.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to commit, maintain or
allow any nuisance, as declared and described in this section.
a. Whenever cultivated farmland is no longer actively farmed and
considered for development or conversion to preserved open space
there is a tendency to allow these lands to convert back or to go
unmowed, to the extent that they are creating a public health nuisance
with such condition including wildlife harborage and nuisance weeds
§ 16-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-7.3
AO:335
§ 16-7.4. Housing Standards of Habitability. [Ord.#BOH-2008-1, § I]
§ 16-7.5. Inspection of Premises for Violations; Denial of Entry;
Warrant. [Ord. #BOH-2008-1, § I]
§ 16-7.6. Abatement of Nuisances. [Ord.#BOH-2008-1, § I]
problems for both adjoining residential lot owners and farmers.
Therefore, these lands are to be stabilized with appropriate vegetation,
pre-emergent weed control or mowed.
b. In residential large lot subdivisions, of two acres or greater, the owner,
tenant or occupant of lands may make an application to the health
department to allow land to revert back to its natural condition, but in
such a manner that will not allow for the establishment of noxious
weeds or rodent harborage. Reforesting with one and one-half to two
inch diameter or larger assorted pines and hardwood trees is
recommended. Wildflower areas are to be maintained and mowed
annually.
c. The application will require submission of a survey of the subject land.
d. The plan must be consistent with recommendation of the horticulturist
from Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension of Mercer County.
a. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building to allow occupancy as
a residence which is not in compliance the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq.; Regulations for the
Maintenance of Hotels and Multiple Dwellings, N.J.A.C. 5:10-1 et seq.;
Regulations Governing Rooming and Boarding Houses, N.J.A.C. 5:27-1
et seq.; New Jersey State Housing Code, N.J.A.C. 5:28-1 et seq., as may
be the case. (See also Section 11-4 Demolition and Repair of Buildings).
b. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building to allow occupancy as
a business, commercial or industrial establishment which is not in
compliance with the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C.
5:23-1 et seq. and or where the New Jersey Department of Labor and
Industry or the United States Occupational Safety and Health Act
provides otherwise.
a. All places and premises in this township shall be subject to inspection
by the health officer or other enforcing official if that official has reason
to believe that any subsection of this section is being violated.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct, delay, resist or
prevent the board of health or other enforcing official upon
presentation of identification from having full access to any place or
premises upon which a violation of this Code is believed to exist. In the
event that entry to any place or premises is denied by any owner or
tenant, the enforcing official shall obtain the appropriate warrant for
entry through the municipal court.
§ 16-7.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-7.6
AO:336
§ 16-7.7. Recovery of Costs by Township. [Ord. #BOH-2008-1, § I;
Ord. #BOH 2013-1 § 2]
Whenever the owner, tenant or occupant notified has not complied with
the notice as specified and the nuisance has not been abated or removed
under the direction of the health officer or other enforcing official, any
cost or expense incurred for abating or removing or causing to be abated
or removed the nuisance or condition, may be recovered in the following
manner:
a. Whenever a nuisance is declared by subsection 16-7.2 of this section is
found on any plot of land, lot, right-of-way or any other premises or
place, a violation shall be given to the owner, in writing, to remove or
abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein but not
less than five days from the date of service thereof. Notice to the owner,
or the violation and time to abate, shall be deemed complete as of the
date of the violation notice if served personally on the property owner.
Notice to the owner, of the violation and the time to abate, shall be
deemed complete three days after the date on the violation notice, if
served by regular first class mail, or posted at or on the subject
premises.
If the owner resides out of state or cannot be notified speedily, such
notices shall be left at the place or premises with the tenant or occupant
or posted on the premises, and such action shall be considered proper
notification to owner, tenant or occupant. Notice to the owner, tenant
or occupant, of the violation and the time to abate, shall be deemed
complete as of the date of the violation notice, if served personally on
the tenant or occupant. Notice, of the violation and the time to abate,
shall be deemed complete three days after the date on the violation
notice, if served by regular first class mail, or posted at or on the
subject premises.
b. Whenever a nuisance as declared by subsection 16-7.2 of this section is
found on any public property or on any highway or any other public
premises or place, notice in writing shall be given to the person in
charge to remove or abate the same within such time as shall be
specified therein.
c. The cost of abatement shall be borne by the property owner.
d. If such person fails to comply with such notice within the time specified
therein, the health officer or other enforcing official may remove, abate
or cause the clean up of the nuisance in the manner as hereinafter
provided.
a. Such costs and expenses shall be certified to the tax collector and shall
become a municipal lien against the premises upon which the nuisance
or condition was located;
§ 16-7.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-7.7
AO:337
§ 16-7.8. Enforcement. [Ord.#BOH-2008-1, § I]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the health officer or
other enforcing officials as defined herein. Enforcement shall be in the
municipal court having jurisdiction over proceedings to enforce and collect
any penalty imposed because of a violation of any provision of this
ordinance. The proceedings shall be summary and in accordance with the
Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A: 58-1 et seq.). Process shall be in the
nature of a summons or warrant and shall be issued by those authorized by
the local board of health.
§ 16-7.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #BOH-2008-1, § I
§ 16-8. TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES AND SELF-SERVICE
DISPLAYS.
§ 16-8.1. Prohibition of Cigarette Vending Machines. [Ord.
#BH-98-1, § 1]
In view of the indiscriminate sales of cigarettes to minors by automatic
vending machines, all cigarette and tobacco product vending machines
are hereby prohibited in the Township of Hopewell except where vending
machines are controlled by an electronic locking device controlled directly
by and within sight of the owner or owner's agent in establishments licensed
for the onsite consumption of alcohol beverages.
§ 16-8.2. Prohibition of Cigarette and Tobacco Product Self-Service
Displays. [Ord. #BH-98-1, § 2]
Self-service cigarette or tobacco product displays are prohibited and it shall
be unlawful to offer for sale or to sell cigarettes or tobacco products from a
self-service display in the Township of Hopewell.
b. Where it is not possible or practical to proceed under paragraph a the
cost or expense shall be recovered in an action at law in any court of
competent jurisdiction;
c. Regardless of how costs are actually recovered, they shall be in addition
to and shall not affect the imposition of any penalties for the violation of
this chapter.
a. Penalties for violation of this section shall be as provided in Chapter 3
Law Enforcement Regulations of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Hopewell and payable to the treasury of the municipality.
b. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation
of any provision of this section continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 16-7.7 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-8.3
AO:338
§ 16-8.3. Removal of Tobacco Vending Machines and Self-Service
Cigarette and Tobacco Product Displays. [Ord. #BH-98-1, § 3]
All tobacco vending machines and self-service cigarette and tobacco
product displays made unlawful by the terms of this section shall be
removed within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this section.
§ 16-8.4. Definitions.
a. BAR, TAVERN, PUB OR SIMILAR ESTABLISHMENT – Shall mean any
place licensed by the State of New Jersey to primarily sell at retail beer,
wine, mixed spirit drink and spirits for consumption on the premises.
b. BOARD OF HEALTH – Shall mean the Township of Hopewell Board of
Health, and may be referred to herein this section as the "Board".
c. HEALTH DEPARTMENT – Shall mean the Township of Hopewell Health
Department, and may be referred to herein this section as the
"department".
d. HEALTH OFFICER – Shall mean the administrative officer of the
Township of Hopewell Health Department, and/or his or her authorized
representatives.
e. MINOR – Shall mean any person less than 18 years of age.
f. PERSON – Shall mean an individual, partnership, cooperative,
association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee,
assignee, or any other legal entity.
g. SELF-SERVICE CIGARETTE OR TOBACCO PRODUCT DISPLAY – Shall
mean any shelving or storing of cigarettes and tobacco products in an
area of the establishment to which customers have access and/or in a
location where a customer could reach the cigarettes or tobacco
products and take same without the assistance of an employee of the
establishment.
h. TOBACCO OR TOBACCO PRODUCT – Shall mean any product made
from the tobacco plant for the purpose of smoking, chewing, inhaling
and other personal use including cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe
tobacco, snuff and cigarette in any form.
i. TOBACCO RETAILER OR RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT – Shall mean any
person or entity that operates a store, stand, booth, concession, or
place at which sales of tobacco are made to purchasers for consumption
or use. It shall also mean a person or entity that owns, operates or uses
a vending machine and/or a vending machine location.
j. VENDING MACHINE – Shall mean any automated, self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses cigarette or other tobacco products.
§ 16-8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-8.4
AO:339
§ 16-8.5. Enforcement. [Ord. #BH-98-1, § 5]
§ 16-8.6. Severability. [Ord. #BH-98-1, § 6]
§ 16-8.7. Penalties. [Ord.#BH-98-1, § 7]
k. VENDING MACHINE LOCATION – Shall mean the room, enclosure,
space or area where a tobacco vending machine is installed and
operated.
a. Whenever the health officer, or his/her designee, reasonably believes
there exists a violation of this section, he/she may issue a summons and
complaint not later than 90 days after discovery of the alleged violation.
The complaint shall be written and shall state with reasonable
particularity the nature of the violation, including reference to the
article and section of this section alleged to have been violated. The
complaint shall be delivered by the police or sent by certified mail to the
alleged violator.
The health officer, or his/her designee, or any other designee charged
with enforcement of this ordinance after giving proper identification,
may inspect any matter, thing, premise, place, person, record, vehicle,
incident or event as necessary.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the health officer, or his designee, who may
request the assistance of the Township of Hopewell Police Department,
or other police agency or peace officer when necessary to execute his or
her official duty in a manner prescribed by law.
c. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this section. All
complaints must be in written form and notarized and submitted to the
Hearth Department. Complainant may be required to appear in person
if subpoena sent by the court.
a. If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this section is
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or inoperative, in whole or in
part by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall be
deemed not to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections
or paragraphs of this section.
b. This section shall be liberally construed for the protection of the health,
safety, and welfare of the people of Township of Hopewell.
a. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person
violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a penalty of $250 for a first offense, $500 for a second
offense, and $1,000 for a third and each subsequent violation.
Complaint shall be made in the municipal court of the Township of
Hopewell or before such other judicial officer having authority under
the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 16-8.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-8.7
AO:340
§ 16-8A. SMOKE FREE SCHOOL ZONE.
§ 16-8A.1. Creation of a Smoke Free School Zone. [Ord. #BH-98-2,
§ 1]
§ 16-8A.2. Enforcement. [Ord. #BH-98-2, § 2]
b. The Township of Hopewell Board of Health may suspend the retail food
establishment license of any tobacco retailer convicted of violation of
this section, for a period of not more than three days, pursuant to the
authority of the board of health to license and regulate food
establishments as provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-31(c).
a. It shall be unlawful for students enrolled in elementary and secondary
educational institutions to use or possess in plain public view a
cigarette or any other tobacco products within the public right of way
area and on any public properties within a radius of 1,000 feet of any
elementary or secondary educational institution when classes or other
student activities are in session and one hour before and one hour after
such activities.
b. Appropriate signs shall be posted at the perimeter of the 1,000-foot
radius indicating the existence of a Drug Free School Zone in
accordance with state regulations and a Smoke Free School Zone in
accordance with local ordinance. Maps shall be on file at the municipal
clerk's office.
c. Within 30 days of adoption of this section each school facility within the
community shall adopt or amend its tobacco use policy incorporating
the prohibition by youth of tobacco and tobacco products within the
1,000-foot Tobacco Free Zone. Written copies of the school tobacco use
policy shall be provided to the health department.
d. Enforcement by the school's administration shall be consistent with the
section and school's tobacco use policy.
a. Whenever the health officer or his or her designee, reasonably believes
there exists a violation of this section, he/she will advise the school
administration to take action according to the school's tobacco use
policy.
b. If action is not taken by the school administration to discipline students
within 30 days of the report by the health official, the health officer or
designee may issue a complaint and or summons against the student
not later than 30 days after reporting of the alleged violation. The
complaint shall be written and shall state the nature of the violation,
including reference to the article and subsection of this section alleged
to have been violated. The complaint shall be delivered by the police or
sent by certified mail to the alleged violator.
§ 16-8.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-8A.2
AO:341
§ 16-8A.3. Severability. [Ord. #BH-98-2, § 3]
§ 16-8A.4. Penalties. [Ord. #BH-98-2, § 4]
§ 16-9. DUMPING.
c. The health officer, or his/her designee, or any other person charged
with enforcement of this section, after given proper identification, may
investigate any matter, thing, incident, or event, as necessary.
d. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the health officer, or any other person
charged with enforcement of this section, who may request the
assistance of the Township of Hopewell Police Department or other
police agency when necessary to execute his or her official duty in a
manner prescribed by law.
e. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this section to the
appropriate school administration and if not resolved to the health
officer. Complaints MUST be written and notarized.
a. If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this section is
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in
part by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion of this section
shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative,
remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall be
deemed to invalidate the remaining chapter, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this section.
b. This section shall be liberally construed for the protection of the health,
safety, and welfare of the people of Hopewell Township.
a. Penalties for violations shall be in accordance with the school's adopted
tobacco policy.
b. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any student
violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a civil penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $100 for
each offense.
c. Complaints shall be made in the Municipal Court of the Township of
Hopewell or before such other judicial officer having authority under
the laws of the State of New Jersey.
d. Any student found in violation of this section shall also be required to
attend a smoking cessation course free of charge as available through
the school system or the Township Health Department.
§ 16-8A.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-9.1
AO:342
§ 16-9.1. Prohibited on Public Streets or Premises. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No garbage, ashes, cans, refuse, offal, vegetable and other decaying
material, trash or junk shall be dumped or deposited on any of the streets
or other public grounds or premises within the township.
§ 16-9.2. Prohibited on Private Property Unless Consent of Owner
Obtained. [Ord. #7/15/74]
No garbage, ashes, cans, refuse, offal, vegetable and other decaying
material, trash or junk shall be dumped or deposited on any private
property within the township without the consent of the owner.
§ 16-9.3. Restrictions. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to authorize the creation of a
quasi-public or private dump or landfill nor to authorize the creation of a
nuisance.
§ 16-10. PENALTY.
§ 16-10.1. Maximum Penalty. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Any person violating any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by the
board of health of the township shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty
of not less than $5, nor more than $500 for each offense. Complaint shall
be made in the municipal court of the township or before another judicial
officer having authority under the laws of the State of New Jersey. The court
shall have the power to impose the other and additional penalties provided
by N.J.S.A. 26:3-77 and N.J.S.A. 26:3-78.
§ 16-10.2. Separate Violations. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by the board of health exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 16-10.3. Application. [Ord. #7/15/74]
Maximum penalties stated herein are not intended to fix an appropriate
penalty for each violation. A lesser penalty, a minimal penalty, or no penalty
at all may be appropriate for a particular case or a particular violation.
§ 16-10.4. Collection of Fees and Penalties. [Ord. #7/15/74; New]
All fees and penalties collected under any provision of any chapter adopted
by the board of health shall be paid to the township treasurer.
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to limit the Township of
Hopewell or anyone acting in its behalf from enforcing such other or
§ 16-9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-10.4
AO:343
additional penalties or remedies as may be provided by law or by any
ordinance.
§ 16-11. (RESERVED)41
§ 16-12. INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL CODE OF HOPEWELL
TOWNSHIP.42 [Ord. #BH:2000-1, § 1]
§ 16-12.1. Definitions. [Ord. #BH:79-2, § I; Ord. #BH:92-1, §§ 1 - 3;
Ord. #BH:2000-1, § 2]
As used in this section, the following shall have the meanings indicated:
a. Purpose. Due to the environmental characteristics of Hopewell
Township, the board of health developed this ordinance in 1978 to
address the widespread use of onsite sewage disposal systems and
water supply wells. Onsite sewage disposal systems may constitute a
potential source of pollution of ground and surface waters, resulting in
contamination of potable water supplies, foul odors, nuisance problems
and may pose other hazards to public health. It is determined to be in
the interest of public health, safety and welfare to develop an ordinance
to provide site specific requirements in the conducting of soil testing,
specifying lot area, restricting system locations and providing
additional design and installation requirements for onsite sewage
disposal systems in Hopewell Township. These requirements are in
addition to N.J.A.C. 7:9A (Adopted by reference as Ordinance 16-3 on
7-16-1990).
a. AEROBIC OR AERATION WASTE TREATMENT SYSTEM – Shall mean
any individual sewage treatment system which contains or
incorporates, as part of the treatment process, a manner of introducing
air and oxygen into the sewage held in such systems so as to provide
aerobic biochemical stabilization during a detention period and prior to
its discharge to any subsurface absorption area.
b. OWNER – Shall mean any person, individual, partnership, corporation
or other type of business association who shall either own, reside upon,
lease or operate any premises upon which is located any aerobic or
aeration waste treatment system.
c. BEDROOM – Shall mean any room within a dwelling that might
reasonably be used as a sleeping room including, but not limited to,
rooms designated as a den, office, or study.
41.Editor's Note: Former section 16-11, Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey (1961), previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No.
BH:79-2 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. BOH:2003-2. For regulations
pertaining to food and beverage vending machines see subsection 16-4.2.
42.Editor's Note: See also section 16-17 for regulations pertaining to testing and reporting
requirements prior to transfer of property, changes in use and/or change in tenancy.
§ 16-10.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-12.1
AO:344
§ 16-12.2. Alternative Onsite Sewage System Standards. [Ord.
#BH:79-2, § I; Ord. #BH:79-3, § II; Ord. #BH:92-1, §§ 1-4; Ord.
#BH:2000-1, § 2]
d. INSTALLER – Shall mean any person who installs or is in the business of
installing or excavating for a household sewage disposal system or part
thereof and is licensed by the board of health.
a. Aerobic Sewage Treatment Systems. If an individual subsurface
disposal system design is submitted for approval and the design
contains or has as a principal operating part thereof an aerobic or
aeration type waste treatment system, the board of health may approve
such design, but only under the terms and conditions as contained in
this subsection and N.J.A.C. 7-9A.
1. Aerobic sewage treatment tanks shall not be approved unless the
tank has been found by the administrative authority to be in
conformance with the National Sanitation Foundation Standard No.
40, dated November 13, 1970 as amended. Aerobic sewage
treatment tanks tested and approved by the National Sanitation
Foundation (N.S.F.) need only bear the N.S.F. seal as proof of
complete testing procedures and results. Manufacturers, retailers,
or other persons seeking approval of such tanks under this section
shall either submit sufficient proof of possession of the N.S.F. seal
or shall submit to the board of health for its approval two certified
copies of complete testing procedures and results conducted by a
testing agency that shall have received the prior approval of the
board of health certifying that the tank(s), by model number,
conforms with the National Sanitation Foundation Standard No. 40,
as amended.
2. Every aerobic sewage treatment tank shall be equipped with a
visual and audible alarm system which shall be designed to respond
to any electrical or mechanical failure or malfunction of the tank or
any component thereof.
3. The total holding capacity of an aeration tank shall be a minimum
of 1,000 gallons. The aeration compartment shall have a minimum
holding capacity of 500 gallons or 200 gallons for the first bedroom
and 150 gallons for each additional bedroom whichever is larger.
4. The shape and design of the tank inlet and outlet arrangements,
compartmentation, baffling, and air application shall be designed
so as to (a) allow for intimate mixing of the applied oxygen; (b)
prevent excessive short-circuiting of flow; (c) prevent the
deposition of solids in any portion of the compartment; and (d)
prevent excessive accumulation of foam anywhere in the system.
5. The method of aeration shall be accomplished by mechanical
aeration, diffused air, or a combination of these. The air may be
applied continuously or intermittently and shall maintain aerobic
§ 16-12.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-12.2
AO:345
conditions in the aeration and settling compartments at all times.
On all systems where the operation is intermittent, the cycling
mechanism is to be sealed or devised so that the cycle cannot be
altered by the owner.
6. The standards for construction and installation of septic tanks,
distribution boxes, connecting pipe and disposal fields will be as
presented in the Individual Sewage Disposal Code of New Jersey,
N.J.A.C. 7:9A.
7. Maintenance and operation.
(a) Service and inspection for certain individual waste treatment
systems. No approval or permit shall be issued for the
construction, alteration, modification, installation or utilization
of any individual sewage treatment system, which shall contain
or have as a principal operating part thereof an aerobic or
aeration waste treatment unit of a type approved by the board
of health, unless, as a condition of such approval and the
issuance of such permit, the owner of the premises shall at all
times keep in force and effect an annual service and inspection
contract or policy in a form acceptable to the board with an
individual or company licensed by the board of health for
installation, inspection, service and maintenance of the aerobic
or aeration waste treatment system.
(b) Provisions applicable to existing systems. The provisions of
subsection 16-12.2a7(a) regarding the annual service and
inspection contract or policy shall also apply to owners of any
existing or previously constructed, altered, modified or
installed individual sewage treatment system, which contains
or has as a principal operating part thereof such an aerobic or
aeration waste treatment unit.
8. Term and expiration of contract; renewal date.
(a) All such service and inspection contracts or policies shall run
from April 1 of each year through March 31 of each year. Any
contracts or policies issued after April 1 of each year may be
issued on a pro rata basis for the unexpired period of such year.
Copies of new or renewal contracts or policies shall be filed
with the board of health prior to March 15 of each year.
(b) Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to limit the terms of
the service and inspection contracts or policies to one year, but
all such contracts or policies shall expire on March 31 of the
last year provided therein.
9. Inspections, filing of results. All service and inspection contracts
shall provide that such aerobic or aeration waste treatment units
shall be inspected within the first 10 days of operation and not less
than once every three months pursuant to the initial operation.
§ 16-12.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-12.2
AO:346
Copies of the results of the inspections acceptable by the board
of health, shall be filed with the board by the licensed person or
company conducting the inspection within 10 days thereof.
10. Qualifications and regulation of issuer of contract. The board of
health reserves the right to inquire into the qualifications of
aerobic and aeration waste treatment installer or any issuer of the
service and inspection contracts or policies and will license or
regulate the individuals or companies or as may otherwise be
provided by law.
b. Holding Tanks.
1. The board of health shall allow holding tanks for use only in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:9a-3.4c and 3.12. The use of holding
tanks shall be allowed only after a detailed written analysis has
been submitted to the board of health analyzing other possible
methods of disposal and reasons why they are not acceptable.
Holding tank systems designed to accommodate flows greater than
2,000 gallons per day must be reviewed and approved by NJDEP.
2. The tank shall be a closed, sealed unit and shall be of reinforced
concrete or other N.S.F. approved material. The tank shall have
only one inlet. Accommodations for pumping the holding tanks
shall be designed to prevent spillage and control odor.
3. Capacity. In no case shall the holding tank be less than 5,000
gallons. The minimum capacity of the tank shall be for a two-week
period based upon acceptable engineering criteria. Overflow
holding tanks on repairs or alterations may be initially allowed at
less than the required design rates above.
4. The tank shall be equipped with both visible and audio alarm
systems indicating high water levels. The tank shall also have a
gauge indicating liquid level. The alarm system shall be connected
to a solenoid valve, which will close the water supply to the
dwelling or structure when the alarm system is activated. Aeration
may be required.
5. Contract for removal of wastes. Prior to the issuance of a permit to
install a holding tank the applicant shall submit, to the board, a
contract with an approved contractor to dispose of the wastes from
the holding tank and a contract from an approved disposal site
operator authorizing the contractor to dispose of the wastes for the
same period of time as the contract. The annual contract shall
indicate the proposed disposal area of the wastes, length of time
that the contract is in effect, the time interval between removal of
wastes, and the name of the contractor.
6. The annual service and inspection contract or policy shall also
apply to owners of any existing or previously constructed, altered,
§ 16-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-12.2
AO:347
§ 16-12.3. Lot Area Requirements.43 [Ord. #BH:2000-1, § 2; Ord.
#BH:2004-1, § 1; Ord. #2018-1683]
modified or installed individual sewage treatment system, which
contains a holding tank.
c. Deed Notification, Advisory of Alternative System. When any residential
or commercial property is provided with a holding tank, aerobic waste
water treatment system or any other alternative waste water system
approved by NJDEP as part of the on-site waste water disposal plan, the
deed for the property shall be amended and filed with the county clerk.
It must indicate the utilization of either component and include
whatever requirements may have been imposed by the board of health
or NJDEP on the owner. This shall be done to alert all future owners.
The amendment must clearly state that this provision cannot be
removed without the written authorization of the health department.
a. In addition to meeting the requirements for minimum lot size set forth
in the land use and development ordinance in effect at the time of
approval, lot area required for on-site sewage disposal systems and
water supply wells shall meet the net square footage or acreage
requirements as indicated in Table One. Net lot acreage for on-site
sewage disposal systems and water supply wells shall consist of that
portion of the property where the realty improvements, including the
buildings and any accessory structures and the well and sewage
disposal systems are located. Minimum lot acreage must be contiguous
acreage which does not contain any utility or conservation easements,
and which is located outside of any watercourses, wetlands, wetlands
buffers, State open waters, or areas of steep slopes (see N.J.A.C.
7:9A-4.4 Slopes, which defines slopes as follows "(a) The disposal field
or seepage pit shall not be located in an area where the slope is greater
than 25%. (b) Where the slope is greater than 10%, no disposal field or
seepage pit shall be placed less than 50 feet upslope of any bedrock
outcrop where signs of ground water seepage can be detected. (c)
Modification of slopes by regrading shall meet the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-10.3(b)"). Further, any areas of land restricted against
development by State, Federal or local approvals shall be excluded from
the net lot area necessary for on-site sewage disposal systems and
water supply wells. Minimum net lot area for various types of disposal
systems is set forth in Table One below.
Table One: On-site Individual Systems Lot Area & Design
Criteria
Type of Disposal System Design Minimum Net Lot Area
Conventional 1 acre (40,000 square feet)
Conventional/Soil Replacement 1 acre (40,000 square feet)
43.Editor's Note: Prior sources contained in subsections 16-12.3 — 16-12.5 include portions
of Ordinance Nos. BH:79-3 and BH:88-1.
§ 16-12.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-12.3
AO:348
§ 16-12.4. Engineering Data Design. [Ord. #BH:79-3, § VI; Ord.
#BH:83-2, § 1; Ord. #BH:88-1, § 4; Ord. #BH:92-1, § 6; Ord.
#BH:2000-1, § 2; Ord. #BH:2002-2, § 1]
In order for the board of health to properly review individual disposal
systems, the engineer preparing the disposal plan shall submit or include
the minimum as follows:
Table One: On-site Individual Systems Lot Area & Design
Criteria
Type of Disposal System Design Minimum Net Lot Area
Water Conservation System with DEP
Approval and/or Grey/Black Water
Systems
2 acres (80,000 square
feet)
Mounded Systems, Mounded Soil
Replacement, Mounded Fill Enclosed
(Shallow Groundwater and/or Bedrock)
2 acres (80,000 square
feet)
Innovative Designs Meeting Individual
NJDEP Approval
5 acres (220,000 square
feet)
b. Requirements for Preexisting Undersized Lots:
1. Preexisting lots with less than the minimum lot area defined in
subsection 16-12.3a shall meet all other applicable health
ordinance requirements pertaining to septic and wells and include
the following:
(a) New wells shall incorporate a minimum of 100 feet of steel
casing meeting requirement of N.J.A.C. 7:9D (Well
Construction and Maintenance; Sealing of abandoned wells).
(b) Individual subsurface sewage disposal system design shall
incorporate the use of advanced treatment unit (ATU).
2. Applicant must present proof that additional land is not available
for purchase at fair market value to increase net lot area. Adjoining
lots under common ownership or family ownership are to be
considered as one parcel and must be consolidated.
c. Potable Water Supply. In areas within or close to an area of known
microbiological or chemical contamination of ground water, the board
of health may require an alternative water supply or public water if an
on-site safe water supply cannot be assured.
a. Disposal and Tank Design Sizing Requirements.
1. All systems disposal field design must incorporate a 25% increase
over the State disposal system design rate.
§ 16-12.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-12.4
AO:349
2. Depth of disposal system shall be excavated to depth of deepest soil
test used to determine zone of disposal.
3. Septic tanks shall provide 250 gallons additional volume more than
State design or contain two compartments.
4. When garbage disposals are installed or proposed, two septic tanks
in series are required in addition to an additional 25% increase in
the disposal field size per subsection 16-12.4a1.
5. When sewage ejectors are required to lift sewage up to the septic
tank, a multiple compartment septic tank system having a capacity
of 50% greater than that required in subsection 16-12.4a3 above
shall be installed. Alternatively, an additional two-compartment
tank may be installed to accept the effluent solely from the sewage
ejector prior to connecting into the septic pump tank or disposal
field.
b. Design Submittal Requirements.
1. Lot elevations in the disposal area showing proposed elevation of
disposal trenches or beds, septic tank or distribution box, bottom
elevations, ground elevations, proposed and existing in one foot
contours.
2. Provide proposed lot grading in the disposal area. A minimum
design slope of 5:1 shall be required for mounded or built up
systems.
3. Proposed means to control surface, driveway, and sump pump
discharge, basement drains and road runoff from entering disposal
area. Swales, berms and/or lawn inlets must be considered in
directing surface water away from mound and conventional
systems. All drain pipes, swales or water diversions must not
adversely impact adjoining properties, waterways or wetlands or
cause standing water. Connection into storm water system and/or
drainage basins may be required and must be also approved by the
township engineer and shown on the site grading plan.
4. Average seasonal high water table as related directly to lot
elevations.
5. Soil log and soil classifications to a depth of 10 feet or to bedrock
when encountered, but a minimum of six feet below original grade
and eight feet below the level of infiltration. All soil profile pits and
corresponding soil logs, both acceptable and unacceptable, within
100 feet of the proposed disposal field must be shown.
6. Cross-sections of the proposed bed showing changes in grade
across the beds and shallow and deep inspection ports and
distribution line locations, etc.
§ 16-12.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-12.4
AO:350
§ 16-12.5. Soil Test and Site Evaluation Data. [Ord. #BH:79-3, § VII;
Ord. #BH:88-1, § 5; Ord. #BH:92-1, §§ 7, 8; Ord. #BH:2000-1, § 2]
7. Location of soil log and percolation tests and other approved soil
tests (acceptable and unacceptable). All complete, incomplete with
explanation, and unacceptable. All acceptable soil logs shall be
marked with a durable permanent marker four feet in height and
accurately located. PVC pipe is not acceptable.
8. Location of existing wells and septic fields on adjacent lots within
200 feet of proposed or existing wells and septic fields on lot in
question.
9. Location of streams, stream corridors, water courses, steep slopes,
fresh water wetlands and associated buffers and all other
conservation easements or flood plains within 100 feet of disposal
system.
10. Submit an as-built drawing of the installed system with the
engineer's certification that the installed system complies with the
approved design. (Certificate of Compliance with Section B
completed).
11. All designs and as-built drawings shall be submitted on 8.5 inches
by 11 inches or 14 inches size sheets only.
12. (Reserved)
13. All septic tanks (new and repaired or replaced) shall be provided
with cast iron locking manholes raised to grade to facilitate
pumping and inspections.
14. Water meters with remote reading units shall be installed in all
nonresidential properties.
a. General. It shall be the requirement that each lot to be approved for
subdivision, site plan or dwelling construction have two acceptable
adjoining areas within 50 feet of each other for the construction of a
primary and reserve area for onsite sewage systems. Primary and
reserve soil tests and profile pits are required in both areas. All soil
testing must be witnessed by a representative of the board of health.
b. Requirements.
1. Each proposed lot shall have a minimum of two acceptable soil
profile pits, series of soil permeability tests or basin flood tests
performed in the proposed primary disposal area as required by the
administrative authority, either in the field or after a review of the
submitted soil test data. The soil profile pits shall be conducted as
specified in N.J.A.C. 7:9A.
2. Soil tests shall be conducted within the layer of soil or rock fracture
zone as determined from the recorded profile pit soil log. Tests
§ 16-12.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-12.5
AO:351
§ 16-12.6. Location of Systems. [Ord. #BH:80-3; Ord. #BH:88-1, § 6;
Ord. #BH:92-1, § 9; Ord. #BH:2000-1, § 2]
All individual sewage disposal systems referred to herein shall be located
entirely within the limits of a single tax lot, upon which the improvements
being serviced by said system shall be located. If more than one tax lot is
used, a consolidation is required.
§ 16-12.7. Permits. [Ord. #BH:92-1, § 10; Ord. #BH:2000-1, § 2]
shall be conducted at the depth at which seepage is encountered or
where doubt exists regarding the presence or the type of a limiting
zone and/or permeability. Testing shall be conducted at various
depths (not less than 24 inches vertical separation) to demonstrate
a suitable zone of disposal of 48 inches above massive bedrock/
refusal as recorded in soil logs. A minimum of four feet to an
impervious zone is required.
3. An additional set or series of soil permeability tests or basin flood
tests and a minimum of two profile pits are required meeting the
same criteria as those conducted for the primary disposal systems
in a reserve area for future sewage system installations.
4. Multiple soil evaluation testing requirements in areas of severe to
moderate severe soils. If more than five unacceptable soil tests or
profile pits are recorded within 50 feet of the proposed disposal
areas a duplicate soil profile pit or soil permeability test, pit bail or
basin flood must be conducted for each passing log or test and not
less than 25 feet from the passing test or log.
a. Soil profile pits and soil tests shall be a minimum of 30 feet from any
property line, conservation areas and all other environmental
easements for conventional system built below original grade. Soil
profile pits, logs and soil tests for all systems required to be built above
existing grade shall be located a minimum of 50 feet to lot lines, water
courses, conservation areas and all other environmental easements. In
both cases, additional distance for required grading and/or
environmentally sensitive concerns such as the height of mounds and
associated swales or berms, excessively coarse soils or fractured
bedrock and high water tables, etc., may still be required by the health
department.
b. Soil logs and tests shall be a minimum of 50 feet to the uppermost
elevation of easement boundary, water courses, flood plains, detention
basins, wetlands, etc. If fast perc rates (less than 15 min./inch), or K
Values greater than 20 inches per hour, high water table or coarse soil
types are encountered, this distance must be increased to 100 feet.
a. Applications for onsite sewage disposal systems shall be made to the
board of health on the approved township application form. (Paper size
of 8.5 inches by either 11 inches or 14 inches)
§ 16-12.5 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-12.7
AO:352
§ 16-12.8. Onsite Waste Water Data Collection. [Ord.#BH:2000-1,
§ III]
§ 16-12.9. Prior Existing Tests and Permits. [Ord. #BH:2000-1, § IV;
Ord. #2001-1, § 1]
b. Application fees shall be as submitted in accordance with those
specified in Chapter 10.
c. Permits shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of issue.
Two one-year extensions may be granted by the board of health.
d. Permits are not automatically transferable upon sale of the property.
The new property owner may reapply for a transfer of the original
permit without any changes. The transferred permit would run for the
remaining period of the original permit and if necessary the applicant
would also be entitled to receive both one-year extensions if not already
exhausted.
e. A transfer fee and/or a request for a one-year extension fee shall be paid
as specified in Chapter 10.
f. Resubmission of a new or revised sewage disposal system design by an
applicant after the original permit has been issued and/or after the
original permit has expired will be considered a "new" application and
the application fee will be as specified in Chapter 10.
a. When permits are issued for new onsite sewage disposal systems or
alterations of disposal systems on existing developed lots, the health
department shall enter the property into the Hopewell Township onsite
waste water disposal database. Upon receipt of the certificate of
compliance and as-built drawing, care and maintenance manual of
onsite septic and well water systems informational packet will be sent
to the owner, with additional reminders every three years thereafter.
a. Properties with existing soil tests and soil profile pits conducted prior to
September 7,2000, may be utilized until December 31, 2003 for the
purpose of securing permits for the construction of an onsite sewage
disposal system, provided such tests and soil profile pits were
conducted in accordance with the requirements of subsection 16-12.5,
Soil Test Data, and subsection 16-12.6, Locations of Systems, that were
in effect immediately prior to the adoption of Ordinance #2000-1 on
September 7, 2000. In designing an onsite sewage disposal system, in
accordance with the provisions of this section, the engineer preparing
the sewage disposal plan must address and meet the Engineering Data
Design criteria that are in effect following the adoption of Ordinance
No. 2000-1 on September 7, 2000, as set forth in subsection 16-12.4,
Engineering Design Criteria. Permits issued pursuant to the provisions
of this section shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of
their issuance. Revisions or changes to the design constitute a new
application and must meet the requirements in place at that time.
§ 16-12.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-12.10
AO:353
§ 16-12.10. Effective Date. [Ord. #BH:2000-1, § V]
This ordinance shall take effect upon final adoption and publication in
accordance with law.
§ 16-13. STORAGE TANK REMOVAL AND ABANDONMENT.
§ 16-13.1. Purpose. [Ord. #BH:2002-1, § 1; Ord. #BH:2002-4]
Storage tanks containing home heating oil, gasoline and other hazardous
substances, products or chemicals whether located underground,
aboveground or in the basement can rust and leak over time, posing a
number of environmental and health risks. In the event of a leak or
discharge in which oil or other product comes into contact with the soil or
ground water, the State of New Jersey requires homeowners to take prompt
action to minimize those risks.
§ 16-13.2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section:
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES — Shall mean motor fuels and those elements
and compounds, including petroleum products which are liquid at standard
conditions of temperature and pressure, which are defined as hazardous
substances by the DEP and shall include the list of hazardous wastes
defined adopted by the USEPA (for full definitions see N.J.S.A. 58:10A-22e).
TANK CAPACITY — Shall mean the manufacturer's nominal tank size, when
referring to a single tank. When referring to multiple tanks storing
hazardous substances used for the same purpose at the same site within one
of the following two categories: motor fuel and heating oil, the aggregate of
the nominal sizes will be used to determine capacity.
UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK — Shall mean any one or combination
of tanks, including appurtenant pipes, lines, fixtures, and other related
equipment, used to contain an accumulation of hazardous substances, the
volume of which, including the volume of the appurtenant pipes, lines,
fixtures and other related equipment, is 10% or more below the ground, per
N.J.S.A. 58:10A-22p. N.J.S.A. 58:10A-22p provides that certain tanks shall
not be included in the definitions of "underground storage tanks".
For the purpose of this section, the following tanks shall be considered
"storage tanks" pursuant to N.J.S.A. 58:10A-22p(1), (2), (3) and (9):
Farm or residential tanks of 1,100 gallons or less capacity used for
storing motor fuel for noncommercial purposes;
a.
Tanks used to store heating oil for on-site consumption in a
nonresidential building with a capacity of 2,000 gallons or less;
b.
Tanks used to store heating oil for on-site consumption in a residential
building;
c.
§ 16-12.10 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-13.2
AO:354
UNREGULATED HEATING OIL TANKS — Shall mean any one or
combination of tanks, including appurtenant pipes, lines, fixtures, and other
related equipment, used to contain an accumulation of heating oil for onsite
consumption in a residential building, or those tanks with a capacity
of 2,000 gallons or less used to store heating oil for on-site consumption
in a nonresidential building, the volume of which, including the volume of
the appurtenant pipes, lines, fixtures and other related equipment is 10% or
more below the ground.
§ 16-13.3. Permit Requirements. [Ord. #BH:2002-1, § 1; Ord.
#BH:2002-4]
Tanks situated in an underground area, including but not limited to
basements, cellars, mines, drift shafts, or tunnels, if storage tanks are
situated upon or above the surface of the floor, or storage tanks located
below the surface of the ground which are equipped with secondary
containment and are unmoved so as to allow visual inspection of the
exterior of the tank.
d.
a. Whenever the removal or abandonment of a storage tank is proposed,
at a residential or nonresidential property, the owner or agent for the
owner shall first secure a permit from the township's municipal
construction office (MCO). Application for permit and fees for permit
are submitted to the MCO.
b. The procedures for removal or abandonment of storage tank(s)
pursuant to Department of Community Affairs Bulletin 95-1B and all
future bulletins, are established by the municipal construction official
(hereafter referred to as MCO). Procedures shall be based on
recommendations and standards as prescribed by the American
Petroleum Institute (API), recommended practice 1604, "Removal and
Disposal of Used Underground Petroleum Storage Tanks" and the
Underground Storage Tank Technical Standards, Sec. 280.70 et seq.
published by the Bureau of National Affairs, Inc., the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.11B and any other
guidelines or requirements issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP) or other State agency as specified
by State regulation.
c. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan as described in
paragraph d. If available, any preliminary potable water supply samples
and any preliminary groundwater or soil samples taken on-site by the
owner or removal contractor as required in paragraph f should be
submitted.
d. Prior to the removal or abandonment of any storage tank, a scaled site
plan shall be prepared and submitted with the application by the
property owner or contractor. The site plan may be hand drawn, taken
from a survey or septic system as-built drawing, showing the property
boundaries, watercourses, the location of all structures, on-site wells
§ 16-13.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-13.3
AO:355
§ 16-13.4. Storage Tank Abandonment. [Ord. #BH:2002-1, § 1; Ord.
#BH:2002-4]
§ 16-13.5. Storage Tank Removal. [Ord. #BH:2002-1, § 1; Ord.
#BH:2002-4]
and septic systems and the location of the storage tank(s) to be
removed.
e. If contamination is detected or if suspected prior to applying for the
permit, a potable well water sample from the on-site potable water
supply for those chemicals associated with the stored products shall be
included with the application. At a minimum, a limited organic analysis
shall be ordered and conducted by a certified laboratory using EPA
method 524.2. Laboratory personnel shall collect the sample. The
health department as a prior approval will review the results. If a well
water sample confirms that the well water is chemically contaminated,
the health department shall notify surrounding properties in a timely
manner and according to the department's protocol and assessment of
the specific location, and geology of the area.
f. If the storage tank is to be abandoned in place, soil samples and
groundwater samples, as required in subsection 16-13.4a must be
provided with the application, confirming that the storage tank has not
caused contamination of the soils or groundwater as defined by the
NJDEP.
a. In the event a storage tank cannot be removed and must be abandoned
in place, a New Jersey licensed tank contractor or New Jersey licensed
testing laboratory shall provide a written report following NJDEP
methods or guidelines for tank abandonment and cleanup procedures
indicating that the storage tank has not caused contamination of the
soils or groundwater. This determination shall be based on soil samples
taken from the bottom most elevation at both ends of the storage tank
with one additional sample for each 500 gallons in excess of 500
gallons. This must be completed and test results submitted with the
permit application prior to any work commencing to abandon the
storage tank.
b. Storage tank must be completely cleaned of product and filled with an
approved material pursuant to DCA Bulletin 95-1B and all future
bulletins.
c. All associated piping must be purged and may be abandoned in place as
noted on the plan or removed.
a. Inspection of the excavation is required if the storage tank is being
removed. The excavation must remain open until visually inspected for
signs of leakage.
§ 16-13.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-13.5
AO:356
§ 16-13.6. Inspections. [Ord. #BH:2001-2, § 1; Ord. #BH:2002-4]
§ 16-13.7. Final Certificate of Approval. [Ord. #BH:2002-1, § 1; Ord.
#BH:2002-1, § 1]
§ 16-14. NOISE CONTROL FOR STATIONARY SOURCES.
§ 16-14.1. Definitions. [Ord. #623-83]
All terminology used in this section, not defined below, shall be in
conformance with applicable publications of the American National
Standards Institute (A.N.S.I.).
ABATEMENT ORDER — Shall mean an order issued by an authorized officer
to cease and desist or reduce the noise level.
1. If the excavation is open and unattended or open overnight, the
excavation must be protected by a forty-eight-inch high fence
enclosure. The enclosure must be maintained until the excavation
is back filled.
b. The storage tank must be visually inspected on site for signs of leakage
prior to removal from site.
c. NJDEP must be notified if leakage and contamination are detected or
suspected.
d. If contamination is detected, soil samples are required at time of
removal and after remediation is completed.
e. If contamination is detected, a potable water sample(s) is required from
the on-site well and from adjoining wells.
f. All waste products must be removed from the storage tank; the
excavation and any used absorbent materials must be disposed of as
hazardous waste or regulated wastes according to NJDEP
requirements, guidelines and regulations. A receipt is required for the
storage tank, any contaminated soil and all waste products.
g. All associated piping must be purged and may be abandoned in place as
noted on the plan or removed.
a. Twenty-four hours' notice is to be provided for the MCO and/or health
department.
a. If no contamination is found, a certification will be issued upon removal
of the storage tank, filling of the excavation, regrading and completion
of installation of new storage tank, if proposed.
b. If contamination is discovered, the final certification will be issued after
compliance with the requirements in subsections 16-13.4 and 16-13.5
are met and a "No further action letter" is provided by the NJDEP.
§ 16-13.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-14.1
AO:357
COMMERCIAL AREA — Shall mean any facility or property used for the
purchase or utilization of goods, services, or land or its facilities, including
but not limited to commercial dining establishments, vehicle operations,
retail services, wholesale services, banks and office buildings, recreation
and entertainment, community services, public services, other commercial
services.
CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean any site preparation, assembly, erection,
substantial repair, alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition, for
structures, utilities or similar property.
DBA — Shall mean the abbreviation designating both the unit of measured
sound level, the decibel, and the mode of measurement that uses the Aweighting
of a sound level meter.
DECIBEL (DB) — Shall mean the practical unit of measurement for sound
pressure level; the number of decibels of a measured sound is equal to
20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure
of the measured sound to the sound pressure of a standard sound (20
micropascals); abbreviated dB.
EMERGENCY — Shall mean any occurrence or set of circumstances
involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which
demands immediate action.
EMERGENCY WORK OR ACTION — Shall mean any work or action
performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma
or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency.
INDUSTRIAL AREA — Shall mean any facility or property used for the
following: (a) storage, warehouse or distribution; (b) property used for the
production and fabrication of durable and nondurable man-made goods; and
(c) activities carried out on the property.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean any vehicle which is propelled or drawn on
land by a motor, such as, but not limited to, passenger cars, motorcycles,
trucks, truck-trailers, semi-trailers, campers, go-carts, snowmobiles,
amphibious craft on land, dune buggies, or racing vehicles.
NOISE — Shall mean any sounds of such level and duration as to be or tend
to be injurious to human health or welfare, or which would unreasonably
interfere with the enjoyment of life or property.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — Shall mean any employee of the Hopewell
Township Health Department and/or Police Department trained in the
measurement of sound in accordance with subsection 16-13.2a and
appointed by the township administration.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Shall mean any sound which may endanger or
injure the safety or health of humans or animals, or disturbs a reasonable
person of normal sensitivities, or may endanger or injure personal or real
property.
PERSON — Shall mean any corporation, company, association, society, firm,
partnership, and joint stock company as well as individuals, and shall also
§ 16-14.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-14.1
AO:358
include the State and all its political subdivisions and any agencies or
instrumentalities thereof.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Shall mean an imaginary line along the ground
surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned
by one person from that owned by another person, but not including
intrabuilding real property divisions.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — Shall mean residential property; property used for
human habitation including but not limited to the following: (a) commercial
living accommodations, commercial property used for human habitation; (b)
recreational and entertainment property used for human habitation; and (c)
community service property used for human habitation.
SOUND LEVEL — Shall mean the sound pressure level measured in
decibels with a sound level meter set for A-weighting; sound level is
expressed in dBA.
SOUND LEVEL METER — Shall mean an instrument for the measurement
of sound levels conforming to A.N.S.I. Type I or II Standards.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — Shall mean the level of a sound measured in
dB units with a sound level meter which has a uniform ("flat") response over
the band of frequencies measured.
WEEKDAYS — Shall mean any day Monday through Friday which is not a
legal holiday.
§ 16-14.2. Qualifications of the Noise Control Officer. [Ord.
#623-83]
§ 16-14.3. Maximum Permissible Sound Level. [Ord. #623-83]
a. Qualifications of Noise Control Officer. Persons shall be considered
qualified to be noise control officers and to make noise measurements
who have satisfactorily completed any of the following:
1. "Community Noise - A Short Course" offered by the Department of
Environmental Science of Cook College, Rutgers, the State
University; or
2. A program of tutoring and on-the-job training offered by the Office
of Noise Control to its employees; or
3. Education or experience or a combination thereof certified by the
department as equivalent to the provisions of paragraphs 1 or 2
above.
b. Test Methods and Procedures. Measurements must be taken according
to procedures specified by N.J.A.C. 7:29B.
a. Residential, Commercial, Industrial. No person shall cause, suffer,
allow, or permit the operation of any source of sound in such a manner
as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in Table I
§ 16-14.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-14.3
AO:359
§ 16-14.4. Abatement Orders. [Ord. #623-83]
§ 16-14.5. Notice of Violations. [Ord. #623-83]
Violation of any provision of this section shall be cause for a notice of
violation to be issued by the noise control officer according to procedures
set forth in this section.
when measured at the real property line of the receiver except during
time of emergency or emergency-related occurrence as determined by
the noise control officer.
Table I: Maximum Permissible Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use Category
Receiving Land Use Category
Residential Commercial Industrial
Sound Source
Land Use
Category 7 a.m. – 10 p.m. 10 p.m. – 7 a.m. All Time All Time
Residential 55 50 65 75
Commercial 65 50 65 75
Industrial 65 50 65 75
b. Exemptions.
1. Domestic power tools, lawn mowers, and similar equipment when
operated with a muffler between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. on weekends and holidays.
2. Sound from church bells and church chimes.
3. Agricultural activities including animal noises and use of
equipment as long as equipment noise is not related to owner's
failure to maintain equipment in a reasonable state of operation
and repair.
4. Burglar alarms. Exterior sounding on any premises or motor
vehicle as long as such alarm shall automatically terminate its
operation within 15 minutes of activation.
5. Stationary emergency signaling devices. Control of noise from
stationary emergency signaling devices shall be in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:29-13 which provisions are incorporated
herein by reference.
a. Procedure. The noise control officer responsible for enforcement of any
provision of this section may issue an order requiring abatement of any
source of sound alleged to be in violation of this section within a
reasonable time period not to exceed 30 days and according to
guidelines which the noise control officer may prescribe.
§ 16-14.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-15
AO:360
§ 16-15. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. #BH:83-1, § 1]
If for any reason any part or section of this chapter shall be declared to be
unconstitutional by the courts, the remaining sections thereof shall remain
in full force and effect.
§ 16-16. BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 16-16.1. Licensing of Body Art Establishments. [Ord. #BH:2002-3,
§ 1]
§ 16-16.2. Enforcement. [Ord. #BH:2002-3, § 2]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
operating an establishment where body art procedures are performed
without first obtaining a license from the Hopewell Township Board of
Health.
b. Body art establishment licenses shall be issued on an annual basis each
January upon payment of a minimum annual license fee of $250 or as
may be established in Chapter 10 of the General Ordinances of the
Township of Hopewell and upon satisfactory compliance with the New
Jersey State Sanitary Code.
c. Facility locations with on-site sewage system must provide at time of
license renewal an annual report of septic system maintenance,
satisfactory operation and pumping history during the past year.
Evidence of a failing or malfunctioning sewage system would be cause
for the immediate closure of said facility until the violation is abated to
the satisfaction of the board.
d. Facilities served by an on-site well water system shall be classified as a
public water system per section 16-6. Laboratory reports for bacterial
water quality shall be provided to the health department during each
quarter. Other water quality tests may be required as determined by the
health department. Evidence of a failing of water quality test would be
cause for the immediate closure of said facility until the well failure
violation is abated to the satisfaction of the board.
e. Medical waste generated at the facility shall be stored and disposed of
properly and according to State regulation.
a. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be grounds for
enforcement action by the Hopewell Township Board of Health. Such
penalty action may include a summons being issued in municipal court,
or suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of the body art establishment
license issued by the Hopewell Township Board of Health.
b. Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a penalty. Said penalty shall include a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense, unless otherwise provided
§ 16-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-16.2
AO:361
§ 16-17. TESTING AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR WELLS
AND SEPTIC SYSTEMS PRIOR TO TRANSFER OF PROPERTY.
§ 16-17.1. Definitions. [Ord. #BH: 2002-3, § 1; Ord. #BOH-2008-2,
§ I]
As used in this section, words and terms shall mean as follows:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Hopewell Township
Board of Health.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE — Shall mean a licensed health officer,
registered environmental health specialist or professional engineer
appointed by the administrative authority to represent it.
POINT OF ENTRY TREATMENT (POET) — Systems means a device by
which drinking water is treated at the point of entry into a building for the
purpose of reducing contaminates in the drinking water prior to its entering
the building distribution system.
POTABLE WATER — Shall mean drinking water for human consumption.
PRIVATE-NONPUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — Shall mean any Hopewell
Township on-site well water system that provides water solely to a property
or structure intended as a single-family residence. Herein referred to as a
private well water system.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — Shall mean any Hopewell Township on-site
well water system that provides potable water to any property or structure
that is not served by a private or nonpublic well and is not recorded as a
single-family residence. Public well as defined here is broader than N.J.A.C.
7:10-1.3 which defines a public well as having 15 service connections or
regularly serves at least 25 individuals daily for at least 60 days in any
calendar year.
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Also referred to as a septic
system, shall comply with the Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage
Disposal Systems (N.J.A.C. 7:9A et seq.), NJPDES Rules for septic systems
over 2000 gpd and any more stringent requirements previously adopted, or
which will be adopted, by the Board of Health of the Township of Hopewell.
TRANSFER OF PROPERTY — Shall mean whenever a change of ownership,
change of use or tenancy of any real property within Hopewell Township
occurs.
§ 16-17.2. General. [Ord. #BH: 2003-1, § 2; Ord. #BOH-2008-2, § I]
The requirements of this section shall pertain to all on-site public and
private well water systems and to all subsurface sewage disposal systems
in Hopewell Township, whether the property served is used for residential,
commercial, agricultural or industrial purposes. The requirements of this
by law. Each day that the violation exists is considered a separate
offense.
§ 16-16.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-17.2
AO:362
section are in addition to and not in lieu of any applicable Federal and
State laws and regulations. In the event that any present or future Federal
or State law or regulation imposes standards more stringent than the
requirements of this section, the more stringent standards shall govern.
§ 16-17.3. On-Site Well Water Systems. [Ord. #BH: 2003-1, § 2; Ord.
#BOH-2008-2, § I; Ord. #10-1503, § 3]
There shall be no transfer of real property, change in the use or change in
tenancy of a property which utilizes an on-site public or private well water
system for its potable water supply until the administrative authority or
its authorized representative shall have issued a Letter of Review stating
that the water system complies or does not comply with water quality
standards specified by the NJ Safe Drinking Water Act N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1
et seq. and implementing rules N.J.A.C. 7:10 and the Private Well Testing
Act Regulations N.J.A.C. 7:9E and any other parameters as specified by the
health officer based on known contamination in this area.
a. Submittal Requirements. The property owner, purchaser, tenant or
authorized agent for either party shall submit:
1. A completed application at least 10 business days prior to transfer
of properties, occupancy or changes in use or change in tenancy
which should include the name and address of all persons owning,
purchasing or leasing the property upon which the well is located.
The application is available from the Township's Board of Health.
2. A check made payable to Hopewell Township as specified in
Chapter 10, Fees. Section 10-5, Health and subsection 10-5.2,
Water.
3. A laboratory report provided by NJDEP certified laboratory for
testing under the Safe Drinking Water Act. A chain of custody form
shall accompany all reports indicating the laboratory took the
sample. All sample collection, testing and analysis shall be in
accordance with the criteria and procedures established by NJDEP
regulations.
4. All reports of testing shall include the Block and Lot numbers,
street address for the property, the reason for the sample, i.e., sale
or rental, the name of the laboratory representative who physically
collected the sample from the well, the date and time the water
sample was collected, the specific point of collection of the water
sample, the date and time the sample was analyzed by the
laboratory.
5. The laboratory must indicate if the water exceeds any maximum
contaminate level (MCL) or action levels for any parameters for
which standards have been established by The Private Well Testing
Act Regulations N.J.A.C. 7:9E and The Safe Drinking Water Act
Regulations or by the administrative authority.
§ 16-17.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-17.3
AO:363
6. For changes in tenancy, the following tests shall be conducted for
each new tenant/lease signing. However, they may be conducted
according to the periods specified as noted. These may be kept on
file with the health department and resubmitted whenever there is
a change in tenancy as long as the tests were conducted and are
still within the time frames noted.
Annually Total Coliform bacteria
Tri-Annually
Nitrates
Volatile Organics (EPA method 524.2 or
latest version) Lead Arsenic Gross Alpha
Cadmium
As recommended Other parameters as specified by the health
officer based on known contamination in this
area and for which maximum contamination
limits (MCL), action levels or practical
quantitative limits (PQL) are known.
b. Remediation.
1. In the event that a laboratory analysis of a water sample collected
from any well reveals the presence of any contaminant exceeding
the maximum contamination levels as referred to in this
subsection, the administrative authority and the person ordering
the sample shall be notified by the laboratory within 24 hours of
obtaining the test results in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:18-4.6 and
5.6 and the Private Well Testing Act Regulation N.J.A.C. 7:9E-4.1.
2. The cost of all testing required by the administrative authority or
by this section shall be borne solely by the purchaser/owner of the
property in question and not by the administrative authority.
3. Whole house water POET system must be installed to correct or
reduce contaminants as defined by the N.J.A.C. 7:10 Subchapter 5,
State Primary Drinking Water Regulations or by the administrative
authority. The system installed must comply with standards as
defined by N.J.A.C. 7:10 Subchapter 12, standards for the
Construction of Public Non-Community Water Systems and Non-
Public Water Systems and/or as determined by the administrative
authority and per the Minimum Requirements for Water Treatment
Systems.
The Board of Health shall conduct an annual review of the
Minimum Requirements for Water Treatment Systems document
to ensure compliance with current state rules and regulations. All
businesses or property owners affected by this section shall take all
steps necessary to ensure compliance with this document. Copies
of the "Minimum Requirements for Water Treatment Systems"* can
be obtained from the board of health. This document is adopted by
reference.44
§ 16-17.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-17.3
AO:364
§ 16-17.4. On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems. [Ord. #BH:2003-1, § 4;
Ord. #BOH-2008-02, § I; Ord. #10-1503, § 3]
4. Where required by State regulations, a plumbing permit and/or
electrical permits must be obtained from the township's
construction office.
5. Remediation may be completed after the closing as negotiated
between buyer and seller.
6. Post-treatment test results are to be provided to the health
department.
7. When treatment systems are installed to remediate primary
contaminants, a notice shall be placed in the deed to alert future
purchasers of treatment methods and maintenance requirements.
8. A copy of the executed deed shall be provided to the health
department.
a. Submittal Requirements. The property owner, purchaser, leaser or
authorized agent for either party shall submit:
1. A completed application at least 10 business days prior to transfer
of properties, occupancy or changes in use. The application is
available from the township board of health.
2. A check made payable to Hopewell Township as specified in
Chapter 10, Fees, Section 10-5, Health and subsection 10-5.1,
Sewerage.
3. A report by an independent inspection company indicating that the
inspection of the septic system was conducted meeting minimum
standards for the inspection of subsurface sewage disposal systems
as prescribed by the administrative authority and/or the DEP.
The township has established "Minimum Requirements for the
Inspection of Septic Systems Needed for the Sale, Transfer or
Lease of Properties in Hopewell Township,"45 This document shall
serve as guidance for conducting septic inspections. The board of
health shall conduct an annual review of this document to ensure
compliance with current State rules and regulations. All businesses
or property owners affected by this section shall take all steps
necessary to ensure compliance with this document. Copies of
the "Minimum Requirements for the Inspection of Septic Systems
Needed for the Sale, Transfer or Lease of Properties in Hopewell
44.Editor's Note: The Minimum Requirements for Water Treatment Systems referred to
herein is included as an attachment to this chapter as Exhibit A.
45.Editor's Note: The Minimum Requirements for Inspection of Septic Systems Needed for
Sale, Transfer or Lease of Properties in Hopewell Township referred to herein is included
as an attachment to this chapter as Exhibit B.
§ 16-17.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-17.4
AO:365
Township" can be obtained from the board of health. This document
is adopted by reference.
The report must describe in sufficient detail the basis for the
decision that the septic system is in satisfactory condition, is not
operating at its design capacity, is not satisfactory and/or appears
to be malfunctioning or is in need of repairs or alterations so
as to be brought into conformance with the standards of N.J.A.C.
7:9A-3.4.
Additionally, the report must indicate or certify that the system as
designed and/or installed complies with the provisions of N.J.A.C.
7:9A-3.3 "Existing Systems," with regards to use, expansion or
change in use.
4. If the report cites evidence of a malfunction, unsatisfactory
condition, or needs repair, a plan to correct must be provided to the
health department.
5. If at the time of the inspection it is reported that the existing
tank(s) is not in compliance with N.J.A.C. 7:9A-8.2 "Septic tanks,"
for example it is not watertight, undersized, irregular in design, or
is not easily accessible through a large diameter cleanout extended
to grade with locking lid as required by N.J.A.C. 7:9A then the
tank(s) shall be replaced and or provided with an extension to
grade with manhole(s) and cleanouts as may be required to comply
with current requirements.
(a) The tank(s) shall be replaced and/or provided with an
extension to grade with manhole(s) and cleanouts as required
to comply with current requirements.
(b) An effluent filter shall be required when tank(s) is replaced.
6. Upon review of the information submitted to the administrative
authority or its authorized representative, one of the following
documents will be issued within five business days of receipt of the
completed application:
(a) A Letter of Review will be issued by the health department
indicating that the septic system inspector certifies in their
report that the results of the inspection supports the
satisfactory operation of the system.
(b) Notice issued that additional information or data must be
supplied.
(c) Notice issued that the basis of the report, or its methods or
conclusions, are rejected.
(d) Notice issued that the system is in need of upgrade, repair or
replacement and that a copy of the sales agreement needs to
be provided. Specifically it should specify who is responsible
§ 16-17.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-17.4
AO:366
§ 16-17.5. Validity. [Ord. #BH:2003-1, § 5; Ord. #BOH-2008-02, § I]
All letters of review issued by the administrative authority or its authorized
agent shall be valid for a maximum of 12 months.
The issuance of a Letter of Review shall not imply any municipal warranty,
nor shall it infer that the reports submitted on the results of any water tests
or septic inspection is accurate, nor that the contractor or agent hired by
the owner, buyer or seller is qualified, nor that the administrative authority
warranties or certifies the quality of work done by the contractor, inspector,
engineer or agent.
§ 16-17.6. Certain Sources of Potable Water Are Prohibited. [Ord.
#BH:2003-1, § 6; Ord. #BOH-2008-02, § I]
Except for households connected to an approved public community water
supply the source of potable water for a public or private on-site water
system shall be solely from wells. The use of springs, cisterns or surface
waters shall not be accepted as a source of potable water. No crossconnection
between a public water supply and a nonpublic water supply
shall be permitted. All abandoned wells located must be sealed and
decommissioned in accordance to NJDEP regulation.
§ 16-17.7. Hearings. [Ord. #BH:2003-1, § 7; Ord. #BOH-2008-2, § I]
If the administrative authority, as required by this section, does not issue
a Letter of Review, a hearing with the administrative authority shall be
held within 15 days after the applicant makes a written request. The
administrative authority shall take action accordingly within 15 days after
the date of such hearing.
§ 16-17.8. Right of Entry. [Ord. #BH:2003-1, § 8; Ord.
#BOH-2008-02, § I]
The administrative authority has this authority under the Public Health
Nuisance Code and other State statutes and regulations with regards to
for this work and when it is to be completed. Remediation does
not need to occur before closing, as long as it is provided for in
contract.
b. Rental Properties and Changes in Tenancy. Inspections shall be
conducted and submitted each time a property is leased. At a minimum
the tank must be pumped and a visual inspection of the disposal field is
required. Changes in use or occupants must be noted in the report.
Determination of wastewater generation for the proposed tenant must
be provided and verified that it is within the design volume for the
system. Inspection reports conducted within six months of the lease or
sale may be used if more than one unit is included in the building and if
all other design and occupancy conditions remain constant.
§ 16-17.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-17.8
AO:367
occupancies, rental properties, wells and septic systems, which are not in
compliance with these rules.
§ 16-17.9. Violations. [Ord. #BH:2003-1, § 9; Ord. #BOH-2008-02,
§ I]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $200 for
each offense and an additional penalty of $25 for each day of continuance
of the violation after notice of the violation shall have been given to such
person or persons, firm or corporation by the administrative authority, to
be collected and enforced by summary proceedings for the collection of
penalties pursuant to the New Jersey Penalty Enforcement Law. Such notice
shall be given by (1) serving a copy thereof on the property owner as shown
on the current tax map or his agent in charge of the property, or (2) mailing
a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his address as
shown on the said tax map.
Chapter 17
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT
§ 16-17.8 HOPEWELL CODE § 16-17.9
AO:368
ARTICLE I
PURPOSE, ADMINISTRATION, OFFICIAL MAP, PERMIT
PROCEDURES
§ 17-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. #528]
The intent and purpose of this chapter is:
§ 17-2. ORDINANCES. [Ord. #528; Ord. #94-982]
a. To guide the appropriate use of development of all land in Hopewell
Township in a manner which will promote the public health, safety,
morals, and general welfare;
b. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters;
c. To provide adequate light, air and open space;
d. To ensure that the development of individual municipalities does not
conflict with the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the county and the State as a whole;
e. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well being of persons,
neighborhoods, communities and regions and preservation of the
environment;
f. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds
by the coordination of public development with land use policies;
g. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements in order to meet the needs of all New
Jersey citizens;
h. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight;
i. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements;
j. To promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural
resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the
environment through improper use of land;
k. To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the
cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land.
§ 17-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-2
AO:369
§ 17-3. MASTER PLAN. [Ord. #528]
a. Changes in Zoning. The township committee may amend or adopt the
zoning ordinance as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62.
b. Referral to Planning Board of Proposed Development Regulations. Prior
to the adoption of a zoning ordinance or any other development
regulation or any revision or amendment thereto, the township
committee shall refer the proposal to the planning board, as provided in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26.
c. Notice of Hearing on Ordinance.
1. Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the
clerk of an adjoining municipality of all hearings on the adoption,
revision or amendment of a development regulation involving
property situated within 200 feet of such adjoining municipality at
least 10 days prior to the date of any such hearing.
2. Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the
county planning board of all hearings on the adoption, revision or
amendment of any development regulation at least 10 days prior to
the date of the hearing. Any notice provided hereunder shall
include a copy of the proposed development regulation, or any
proposed revision or amendment thereto, as the case may be.
3. Notice of hearings to be held pursuant to this section shall state the
date, time and place of the hearing and the nature of the matters to
be considered. Any notice by certified mail pursuant to this section
shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
d. Filing of Ordinances. The zoning, subdivision, site plan review
ordinances or any revision or amendment thereto shall not take effect
until a copy thereof shall be filed with the Mercer County Planning
Board.
e. Filing of Development Regulations. Copies of all development
regulations and any revisions or amendments thereto shall be filed and
maintained in the office of the township clerk.
f. Administrative Officer. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-3, the planning
coordinator is hereby designated as the administrative officer. The
planning coordinator may also serve as planning board secretary.
a. The planning board may prepare and, after a public hearing, adopt or
amend a master plan, or component parts thereof, to guide the use of
lands within the township in a manner which protects public health and
safety and promotes the general welfare, as provided in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-28.
b. Notice Concerning Master Plan. The planning board shall give notice of
each hearing on the master plan as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55-13.
§ 17-2 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-3
AO:370
§ 17-4. OFFICIAL MAP.46 [Ord. #528; Ord. #95-1010]
The township committee may, by ordinance, adopt an official map as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
§ 17-5. ISSUANCE OF PERMITS FOR BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES
PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES; EXCEPTIONS. [Ord. #528]
§ 17-6. BUILDING LOT TO ABUT STREET; EXCEPTIONS. [Ord.
#528]
c. Notice of Adoption. The planning board shall give notice of adoption,
revision or amendment of the master plan as provided in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-13.
d. Periodic Re-examination of Master Plan and other Development
Regulations. The planning board shall undertake, at least every six
years, a general re-examination of the master plan and development
regulations and shall prepare a report thereon, as provided in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-89.
a. Notice of Action on Official Map. Such notices shall be given as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-15.
b. Change or Addition to Official Map. The approval by the township of
provisions affecting the official map shall be subject to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-33.
a. For the purpose of preserving the integrity of the official map, if any, no
permit shall be issued for any building or structure in the bed of any
street or public drainage way, flood control basin or public area
reserved pursuant to section 17-100 as shown on the official map, or
shown on a plat filed before adoption of the official map, if any, except
as herein provided.
b. Whenever one or more parcels of land, upon which is located the bed of
such a mapped street or public drainage way, flood control basin or
public area reserved pursuant to section 17-100 cannot yield a
reasonable return to the owner unless a building permit is granted, the
board of adjustment may, in a specific case, by an affirmative vote of a
majority of the full authorized membership of the board, direct the
issuance of a permit for a building or structure in the bed of such
mapped street or public drainage way or flood control basin or public
area reserved pursuant to section 17-100 which will as little as
practicable increase the cost of opening such street, or tend to cause a
minimum change of the official map, if any, and the board shall impose
reasonable requirements as a condition of granting the permit so as to
promote the health, morals, safety and general welfare of the public.
46.Editor's Note: For the official zoning map see section 17-138, Zoning Districts and
Appendix B which is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 17-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-6
AO:371
§ 17-7. CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM. [Ord. #528]
§ 17-8. through § 17-12. (RESERVED)
a. No permit for the erection of any building or structure shall be issued
unless the lot abuts a street giving access to such proposed building or
structure. Such street shall have been duly placed on the official map, if
any, or shall be (1) an existing State, county or municipal street or
highway, or (2) a street shown upon a plat approved by the planning
board, or (3) a street on a plat duly filed in the office of the county
recording officer prior to the passage of an ordinance which required
prior approval of plats by the planning board or other authorized body.
Before any such permit shall be issued, such street shall have been
certified to be suitably improved to include underground utilities and
base course at a minimum, and the remaining improvements shall have
been assured by means of a performance guarantee, in accordance with
standards and specifications for road improvements approved by the
township committee as adequate in respect to the public health, safety
and general welfare of the special circumstance of the particular street.
b. Where the enforcement of this section would entail practical difficulty
or unnecessary hardship, or where the circumstances of the case do not
require the building or structure to be related to a street the board of
adjustment may, upon application or appeal, vary the application of this
section and direct the issuance of a permit subject to conditions that
will provide adequate access for firefighting equipment, ambulances
and other emergency vehicles necessary for the protection of health
and safety and that will protect any future street layout shown on the
official map, if any, or on a general circulation plan element of the
master plan.
a. The township committee may authorize the planning board to prepare a
program of municipal capital improvement projects as provided in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-29.
b. Notice of Action. Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be
made to the Mercer County
Planning Board of the adoption, revision or amendment of the
township's capital improvement program including a copy thereof, not
more than 30 days after the date of such adoption, revision or
amendment. Any notice by certified mail shall be deemed complete
upon mailing.
c. Review of Capital Projects. Public agencies shall refer proposed capital
projects to the planning board for review and recommendations, as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31.
§ 17-6 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-8
AO:372
ARTICLE II
PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES; ENFORCEMENT47
§ 17-13. BUILDING PERMITS.
No one shall erect, construct, alter, repair, remodel, convert, remove or
destroy any building or structure without first obtaining a building permit
from the construction official except as expressly provided in these
ordinances or by State law. Building permits shall be issued only upon
compliance with all applicable requirements, including but not limited to
any requirements imposed by the municipal planning board, zoning office,
zoning board of adjustment, department of health, department of public
works, and any other municipal, State or Federal requirement imposed
by ordinance, regulation or statute. Where applicable, a building permit
will only be issued after the full width of the bituminous stabilized base
course and all curbs, drainage systems and utility crossings within the
full right-of-way are constructed, inspected, and approved by the township
engineer up to and along the frontage of the lot on which the building
or structure is to be erected. Builder and/or developer may enter into a
developer's agreement, acceptable to the township engineer and approved
by the township committee, which may modify via a construction phasing
plan the requirement that the aforementioned public improvements be
constructed prior to the issuance of a building permit.
§ 17-14. ZONING PERMIT.
a. A zoning permit shall be required as a condition precedent to the
commencement or change of a use or the erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration (except interior alterations which do not
affect use), conversion or installation of a structure or building.
b. A zoning permit may be obtained for the convenience of the owner or
prospective user of a property to acknowledge that such use, structure
or building complies with the provisions of the Hopewell Township Land
Use and Development Law or variance therefrom which has been duly
authorized by the proper municipal agency.
c. All requests for zoning permits shall be made to the zoning official in
writing, specifying the lot or building involved, and the proposed use
and such other information as may be required. A zoning permit shall
not confer upon the applicant the right to build, construct or alter a
building, but shall pertain only to the use thereof.
If it shall appear at any time to the zoning officer that any erection,
construction, alteration, repair, or conversion is being performed upon
the premises or any use conducted thereon differing materially from
47.Editor's Note: Former subsection 17-1.8a-h was renumbered as sections 17-13 through
17-20. Sources contained herein include Ordinance Nos. 528, 556-80, 723-86, § 1, 741-87,
745-87 § 2, 756-88, § 1 and 821-89.
§ 17-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-14
AO:373
§ 17-15. CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY. [Ord. #05-1340, § 1]
A certificate of occupancy must be obtained pursuant to the Uniform
Construction Code for all new constructions, reconstructions, alterations,
conversions or installations of a structure or building.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all applicable requirements
of the Uniform Construction Code and the regulations adopted thereunder,
the site plan, subdivision, and plot plan have been complied with, including
all underground utilities, bituminous stabilized base course for the roadway,
and grading within six inches of approved finished grade which shall be
shown on an as-built survey certified by a New Jersey licensed land
surveyor. Said as built grading survey shall not be a requirement for the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the construction of an addition to
existing single family residences when said addition does not exceed 25% of
the gross floor area of the existing structure and does not require any bulk
variance(s).
A certificate of occupancy shall be issued when unfinished site work, such
as parking, landscaping, drainage and lighting, is covered by a performance
guarantee. The performance guarantee shall be posted with the township
committee, in an amount approved by the township engineer and form
approved by the township attorney, to ensure the completion of the
unfinished site work.
§ 17-16. TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. [Ord.
#05-1340, § 2]
that permitted by a duly issued zoning permit, he shall forthwith revoke
the zoning permit.
a. In extraordinary or exceptional situations, where construction or
alterations have been delayed due to weather or other conditions
beyond the owner's control, the construction official may authorize the
issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy to enable the use and
occupancy during completion. No such temporary permit shall be
authorized if the use of occupancy would constitute a health or safety
hazard or would be detrimental to the public welfare. A temporary
certificate of occupancy must reflect the approximate length of time
needed to complete the work, as determined by the construction official
in consultation with the appropriate subcode officials or with the
agency governing the incomplete approval, as appropriate. A
temporary certificate of occupancy shall not be issued when any of the
following items that are part of a construction project have not yet been
provided: health and life-safety systems; sewer or septic system
connection; water supply connection or well certification; electric
utilities connection; gas utilities connection; New Home Warranty;
rooming and boarding home license; elevation certificate in flood
hazard plain; where required, an accessible route must be provided,
§ 17-14 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-16
AO:374
§ 17-17. CONSTRUCTION TRAILER AND SHED PERMITS.
§ 17-18. TEMPORARY RESIDENTIAL LIVING UNIT.
Where a building permit has been issued to restore, reconstruct or alter an
existing residence made uninhabitable due to a disaster such as a fire, the
construction official may issue a temporary permit for a temporary living
unit which unit shall not be permanently affixed to either the land or utilities
thereon but may be used by the owners of the property in question as a
residence during the reconstruction of the residence. This permit shall be
valid for a period not to exceed six months and may be extended for one
additional period of not more than six months if the construction official
finds that construction has been diligently pursued and that justifiable
circumstances require such an extension. Such type of living unit shall be
situated upon the land for which the building permit has been issued and be
approved by the construction official and the department of health prior to
occupancy.
although the accessible route provided under a TCO may be temporary;
or emergency vehicle access.
b. No temporary certificate of occupancy permit shall be authorized
unless a performance guarantee shall be posted with the township
committee in an amount approved by the construction official and form
approved by the township attorney, to insure the completion of all
erection, construction, alteration, repair, or conversion and attendant
requirements for which application has theretofore been made. Such
bond may be waived upon good cause shown, by the township
committee.
a. The temporary use of readily portable construction sheds and
construction trailers may be permitted in any district during the period
of, and in connection with the actual construction of a permanent
structure on the lot upon which such shed or trailer is located as
determined by the zoning officer.
b. No such shed or trailer shall be used or suffered to be used for dwelling
or living purposes at any time.
c. The location of any shed or trailer shall conform to the requirements for
locating buildings in a flood hazard area (Chapter 12).
d. Permits for such sheds or trailers shall be issued by the construction
official only for the reasonably anticipated period of the construction at
which they are to be used and shall, in no event, be issued for more than
one year.
e. Such permits may be renewed by the construction official for periods
not longer than six months, if construction activity is continuing.
f. Any such shed or trailer shall, in any event, be removed immediately
upon substantial completion of the construction at which it is used.
§ 17-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-19
AO:375
§ 17-19. TEMPORARY ACTIVITIES PERMIT.
§ 17-20. CERTIFICATES AS TO APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION OF
LAND.
a. For the purpose of this section, temporary activities shall be defined as
sporadic, seasonal or infrequent activities which, because of their
exigent, charitable, or beneficial nature are so required or conducted
that they contribute materially to the health, welfare or economic
advantage of the township and of its citizens.
b. Temporary activities shall be permitted, provided that the township
committee shall find that the temporary activity requested is such as to
come within the above definition and directs the zoning officer to issue
a temporary activity permit.
c. Notwithstanding any of the provisions hereinabove set forth, a
temporary activity permit shall be issued for a period not to exceed 14
consecutive days. Such permits may be renewed by the zoning officer
without further application to the governing body for one additional
period of up to 14 consecutive days. Any such permit shall expire upon
the date specified therein.
d. The receipt of a temporary activity permit shall create no permanent
right in the applicant nor any right of the applicant to conduct such
activity at any time in the future beyond the time limited by the terms of
such permit, whether by way of estoppel, acquiescence, sufferance or
otherwise.
e. In the event that any temporary activity is permitted or suffered to
depart from the terms of the permit under which it is purportedly
conducted, the zoning officer shall forthwith revoke the same and the
applicant shall cease all such activities as well as all temporary
activities for which a temporary activity permit was given.
a. A prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other person
interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision, or which
formed part of such a subdivision on or after August 1, 1973, may apply
in writing to the township administrator for the issuance of a certificate
certifying whether or not such subdivision has been approved by the
planning board. Such application shall contain a diagram showing the
location and dimension of the land to be covered by the certificate and
the name of the owner thereof. The township administrator shall make
and issue such certificate within 15 days after the receipt of such
written application and the fees therefor. The administrator shall keep a
duplicate copy of each certificate, consecutively numbered, including a
statement of the fee charged, in a binder as a permanent record of his
office.
b. Each such certificate shall be designated a "certificate as to approval of
subdivision of land," and shall certify:
§ 17-19 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-20
AO:376
§ 17-21. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. #528]
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired,
converted, or maintained, or any buildings, structure or land is used in
violation of these ordinances or other regulations, the proper authorities
of the township or an interested party, in addition to other remedies, may
institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent
the occupancy of such building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal
act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
§ 17-22. through § 17-28. (RESERVED)
1. That there exists in the township a duly established planning board
and there is an ordinance controlling subdivision of land adopted
under the authority of State law.
2. Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in the
application, has been approved by the planning board, and, if so,
the date of such approval and any extensions and terms thereof,
showing that subdivision of which the lands are a part is a validly
existing subdivision.
3. Whether such subdivision, if the same has not been approved, is
statutorily exempt from the requirement of approval as provided
under the Municipal Land Use Law.
c. Any person who shall acquire for a valuable consideration an interest in
the lands covered by any such certificate of approval of a subdivision in
reliance upon the information therein contained shall hold such interest
free of any right, remedy or action which could be prosecuted or
maintained by the municipality pursuant to the provisions of section
17-29c.
d. If the township administrator fails to issue the same within 15 days
after receipt of an application and the fees therefor, any person
acquiring an interest in the lands described in such application shall
hold such interest free of any right, remedy or action which could be
prosecuted or maintained by the municipality pursuant to section
17-29c.
§ 17-20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-22
AO:377

ARTICLE III
SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN APPROVALS, PROCEDURES48
§ 17-29. REQUIRED APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISIONS AND SITE
PLANS.
§ 17-30. EXCEPTIONS BY PLANNING BOARD FROM SUBDIVISION
OR SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
The planning board when acting upon applications, shall have the power
to grant such exceptions from the subdivision and site plan requirements
of this chapter as may be reasonable and within the general purpose
and intent of the provisions for subdivision/site plan review and approval
if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the land in question.
The planning board when acting upon an application which includes
provisions for lower income housing, may waive those portions of the design
a. Every subdivision plat must be approved by the planning board (or by
the board of adjustment if it has jurisdiction pursuant to section 17-53g)
as a condition for the filing of the plat with the county recording officer.
b. Every use, other than those exempted below, shall receive site plan
approval by the planning board (or by the board of adjustment if it has
jurisdiction pursuant to section 17-53g) as a condition for the issuance
of a building permit if the work to be done involves (i) a new structure,
or a conditional use or use variance, or new parking area or new egress
to a public right-of-way; or (ii) the alteration of a structure which would
increase the total floor area or any outside dimension of the structure;
or (iii) the alteration of a structure which would facilitate a change in
the nature of the use resulting in different parking, drainage, and/or
other design criteria as required by this chapter; or (iv) the alteration of
a residential structure or its parking area or driveway in order to
initiate or expand any home occupation or office or professional use of
the premises. Except that planning board approval shall not be required
for any work on premises which are to be used exclusively for
agricultural purposes or exclusively for one-dwelling unit or twodwelling
unit residential purposes.
c. Sale of Land before Final Subdivision Approval. Any sale or transfer of
land, or agreement to sell or transfer land, prior to the subdivision
approval, shall be subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55.
d. Filing of subdivision applications (including lot line changes) shall be
received for official processing by the township no later than 20
working days prior to the date of the meeting.
48.Editor's Note: Former subsection 17-1.10a-m was renumbered as sections 17-29 through
17-41. Sources contained herein include portions of Ordinance Nos. 528, 556-80, 654-84,
§§ 1, 2, 662-84, § 1, 686-85, §§ 3, 4, 695-85, 90-853, §§ 1, 2.
§ 17-29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-30
AO:379
standards that do not create health and safety concerns for the township
or for the future residents of a development, provided such exemption from
these standards will reduce construction costs so that the savings therefrom
will be passed on to the buyers and renters of lower income housing in the
form of reduced housing costs.
§ 17-31. GRANT BY PLANNING BOARD OF VARIANCES AND
DIRECTIONS TO ISSUE PERMITS.
Whenever the proposed development requires approval pursuant to this act
of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use, but not a variance pursuant
to section 17-53d, the planning board shall have the power to grant to the
same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the board of adjustment:
§ 17-32. NOTICE OF HEARING.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this article, notice of the hearing
on the application for development shall include reference to the request
for a variance, or direction for issuance of a permit, as the case may be.
§ 17-33. TIME PERIODS.
Whenever an application for approval of a subdivision plat, site plan or
conditional use includes a request for relief pursuant to section 17-31, the
planning board shall grant or deny approval of the application within 120
days after submission by the developer of a complete application to the
township administrator or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant. In the event that the developer elects to submit separate
consecutive applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to the
a. Variances pursuant to section 17-53c;
b. Direction for issuance of a permit for a building or structure in the bed
of a mapped street or public drainage way, flood control basin or public
area reserved on the official map; and
c. Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for issuance of a permit for a
building or structure not related to a street.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this section, notice of the hearing on
the application for development shall include reference to the request for a
variance, or direction for issuance of a permit as the case may be.
The developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting approval
of the variance or direction of the issuance of a permit and a subsequent
application for any required approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional
use. The separate approval of the variance or direction of the issuance of a
permit shall be conditioned upon grant of all required subsequent approvals by
the planning board. No such subsequent approval shall be granted unless the
approval can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone plan and
zoning ordinance.
§ 17-30 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-33
AO:380
application for approval of the variance or direction for issuance of a permit.
The period for granting or denying and subsequent approval shall be as
otherwise provided in this chapter. Failure of the planning board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application and
a certificate of the township administrator as to the failure of the planning
board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant and it shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval,
herein required, and shall be so accepted by the county recording officer for
purposes of filing subdivision plats.
Minor site plan approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of the
date of submission of a complete application to the administrative officer, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure
of the planning board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute
minor site plan approval.
§ 17-34. APPROVAL BY MERCER COUNTY PLANNING BOARD.
The applicant shall be responsible for submitting a copy of the plat to the
county planning board for review. Every subdivision which might affect a
county road or drainage facilities and every site plan involving land along a
county road shall be approved by the Mercer County Planning Board. The
planning board may approve a subdivision or site plan subject to receipt of
a favorable report by the county planning board, or approval by the county
planning board by its failure to report within 30 days from date of mailing
by certified mail or personal delivery of plans for such subdivision.
§ 17-35. SUBMISSION OF COPIES OF APPLICATION FOR
DEVELOPMENT TO ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
The planning board shall make available to the environmental commission
an informational copy of every application for development submitted to the
planning board. Failure of the planning board to make such informational
copy available to the environmental commission shall not invalidate any
hearing or proceeding.
§ 17-36. CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN APPLICANTS.
Every corporation or partnership applying for (a) permission to subdivide
a parcel of land into six or more lots, or (b) a variance to construct a
multiple dwelling of 25 or more family units or (c) approval of a site plan
for a site to be used for commercial purposes, shall list the names and
addresses of all stockholders or individual partners owning 10% or more of
its stock in any class or 10% or more of the interest in the partnership. If
any such stockholder or individual partner is a corporation or partnership,
the names and addresses of all stockholders or individual partners owning
10% or more of its stock or 10% or more of the interest in the partnership
shall be listed; and this requirement shall be followed for every corporate
stockholder or partner in a partnership until the names and addresses of
the noncorporate stockholders and individual partners, exceeding the 10%
§ 17-33 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-36
AO:381
ownership criterion, have been listed. No application subject to this section
may be approved unless this section is complied with.
Any corporation or partnership which conceals the names of the
stockholders owning 10% or more of its stock, or of the individual partners
owning a 10% or greater interest in the partnership, as the case may be,
shall be subject to a fine of $1,000 to $10,000 which shall be recovered
in the name of the municipality in any court of record in the State in
a summary manner pursuant to "The Penalty Enforcement Law" (N.J.S.A.
2A:58-1 et seq.).
§ 17-37. PROCEDURE FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL.
a. The planning board or its subdivision committee is authorized to waive
notice and public hearing for an application for development if the
planning board or its subdivision committee find that the application for
development conforms to the definition of "minor subdivision" except
that the subdivision committee is not hereby empowered to act on
applications involving variances which must be referred to planning
board. Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final approval
of the subdivision by the board. The board or the committee may
require, as a condition for approval, compliance with such of the
standards for subdivisions set forth in Articles V, VI and VII as it deems
appropriate.
b. Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
the date of submission of a complete application to the township
administrator, or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant. Failure of the planning board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute minor subdivision approval and a certificate
of the township administrator as to the failure of the planning board to
act shall be issued on request of the applicant; and it shall be sufficient
in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein
required, and shall be so accepted by the county recording officer for
purposes of filing subdivision plats.
c. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of
municipal approval unless within such period a plat in conformity with
such approval and the provisions of the "Map Filing Law" P.L. 1960, c.
141 (C. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), or a deed clearly describing the approved
minor subdivision is filed by the developer with the county recording
officer, the township engineer and the township tax assessor. Any such
plat or deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the
chairman and secretary of the planning board, or the vice chairman or
assistant secretary in their absence. In reviewing the application for
development for a proposed minor subdivision the planning board may
accept a plat not in conformity with the "Map Filing Act," P.L. 1960, c.
141 (46:23-9.9 et seq.), provided that if the developer chooses to file the
minor subdivision by plat rather than deed such plat shall conform with
the provisions of such act.
§ 17-36 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-37
AO:382
§ 17-38. PROCEDURE FOR PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
d. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was
granted, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of
minor subdivision approval; provided that the approved minor
subdivision shall have been duly recorded as provided in this section.
e. The approved plan shall be submitted for signature to the appropriate
officers of the planning board within 30 days of the date of approval or
within such additional period of time as the planning board may
determine. Failure to submit the plan for signature within the above
mentioned period of time shall render the approval void. Copies of
executed preliminary plans shall be furnished by the applicant to the
planning board secretary, tax assessor, the zoning officer, the
construction official, the township engineer and the county planning
board.
a. The developer shall submit to the township in tentative form for
discussion purposes a site plan together with an application form
containing the information prescribed by the planning board, the
required fee and such other engineering documents and other
materials as may be reasonably necessary, in the judgment of the
planning board, to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements necessary for preliminary site plan approval have been
met. If architectural plans are required to be submitted for site plan
approval, the preliminary plans and elevations shall be sufficient. If the
application is part of the implementation of an approved general
development plan, the preliminary site plan shall be prepared in
conformance with the requirements and conditions of the approved
general development plan.
Filing of the site plan application shall be received for official
processing by the township no later than 20 working days prior to the
date of the meeting.
b. Upon the submission to the township administrator of a complete
application for a site plan, which involves 10 acres or less, and 10
dwelling units or less, the planning board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such submission or
within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Upon
the submission of a complete application for a site plan, which involves
more than 10 acres, or more than 10 dwelling units, the planning board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Otherwise, the planning board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval of the site plan.
c. If the planning board requires any substantial amendment in the layout
of improvements proposed by the developer that have been the subject
of a hearing, an amended site plan shall be submitted and proceeded
§ 17-37 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-38
AO:383
§ 17-39. PROCEDURE FOR PRELIMINARY MAJOR SUBDIVISION
APPROVAL.
upon, as in the case of the original application. The planning board
shall, if the proposed site plan complies with this chapter, grant
preliminary site plan approval.
d. The approved plan shall be submitted for signature to the appropriate
officers of the planning board within 30 days of the date of approval, or
within such additional period of time as the planning board may
determine. Failure to submit the plan for signature within the abovementioned
period of time shall render the approval void. Copies of the
executed preliminary plans shall be furnished by the applicant to the
planning board secretary, the tax assessor, the tax collector, the zoning
officer, the construction official, the township engineer, and the county
planning board.
a. The developer shall submit to the township administrator in tentative
form for discussion purposes, a plat together with an application form
containing the information prescribed by the planning board, the
required fee and such other engineering documents and other
materials as may be reasonably necessary, in the judgment of the
planning board, to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements necessary for preliminary major subdivision approval
have been met. If the application is part of the implementation of an
approved general development plan, the subdivision plat shall be
prepared in conformance with the requirements and conditions of the
approved general development plan.
b. Upon the submission to the township administrator of a complete
application for a major subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the planning
board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a complete
application for a major subdivision of more than 10 lots, the planning
board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the planning board shall be
deemed to have granted preliminary approval to the major subdivision.
c. If the planning board requires any substantial amendment in the layout
of improvements proposed by the developer that have been the subject
of a hearing, an amended application shall be submitted and proceeded
upon, as in the case of the original application. The planning board
shall, if the proposed subdivision complies with this chapter, grant
preliminary approval to the subdivision.
d. The approved plan shall be submitted for signature to the appropriate
officers of the planning board within 30 days of the date of approval, or
within such additional period of time as the planning board may
determine. Failure to submit the plan for signature within the
§ 17-38 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-39
AO:384
§ 17-40. EFFECT OF PRELIMINARY APPROVAL OF SITE PLAN OR
MAJOR SUBDIVISION.
Preliminary approval of a site plan or major subdivision shall confer upon
the applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date of
the preliminary approval:
§ 17-41. FINAL APPROVAL OF SITE PLANS AND MAJOR
SUBDIVISIONS.
aforementioned period of time shall render the approval void. Copies of
executed preliminary plans shall be furnished by the applicant to the
planning board secretary, the tax assessor, the tax collector, the zoning
officer, the building inspector, the township engineer, and the county
planning board.
a. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval
was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to use
requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and
sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract improvements; except
that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the township from
modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of
preliminary approval as relate to public health and safety.
b. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary plat or site plan, as the case may be;
c. That the applicant may apply for and the planning board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided
that if the design standards have been revised by ordinance such
revised standards may govern.
d. In the case of a subdivision of, or site plan for, an area of 50 acres or
more, the planning board may grant the rights referred to in
paragraphs a, b, and c above for such period of time, longer than three
years, as shall be determined by the planning board to be reasonable
taking into consideration (1) the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval, (2)
economic conditions, and (3) the comprehensiveness of the
development. The applicant may apply for thereafter and the planning
board may thereafter grant an extension to preliminary approval for
such additional period of time as shall be determined by the planning
board to be reasonable taking into consideration (1) the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under
preliminary approval and (2) the potential number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area of the section or sections awaiting final
approval (3) economic conditions and (4) the comprehensiveness of the
development; provided that if the design standards have been revised,
such revised standards may govern.
§ 17-39 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-41
AO:385
a. The developer shall submit to the township administrator the plans,
containing such details as may be required by rules and regulations of
planning board, an application form containing the information
prescribed by the planning board and the other materials required by
this section and a report by the township engineer certifying that he has
received plans showing all utilities, roads, drainage facilities and other
improvements in exact location and elevation and identifying the
portions already installed and those to be installed, and either (i) that
all improvements have been installed in accordance with ordinances
and regulations and the terms of the preliminary approval or (ii) that
appropriate performance and maintenance guarantees have been
posted with the township administrator in compliance with section
17-42 and in sufficient amount to assure the completion of all required
improvements, and specifying that amount. The developer may then
request final approval by the planning board of all or part of a major
subdivision or site plan which had received preliminary approval. The
planning board shall grant final approval if all conditions, engineering
plans and other requirements set forth in these ordinances and in the
terms of the preliminary approval have been completed or fulfilled, the
required improvements have been installed or guarantees properly
posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of
such guarantees, and proof submitted that no taxes or assessments on
the property are due or delinquent. For a major subdivision, the
standards prescribed by the "Map Filing Law," P.L. 1960, c. 141 (C.
46:23-9.9 et seq.) shall be complied with. In the case of a planned unit
development, planned unit residential development or residential
cluster, the planning board may permit minimal deviations from the
conditions of preliminary approval necessitated by change of conditions
beyond the control of the developer since the date of preliminary
approval without the developer being required to submit another
application for development for preliminary approval.
b. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the township administrator, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the planning board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute final approval and a certificate of the township administrator
as to the failure of the planning board to act shall be issued on request
of the applicant and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein required, and shall
be so accepted by the county recording officer for purposes of filing
subdivision plats. Final site plans and final subdivision plans shall be
submitted to the appropriate officers of the planning board for
signature within 60 days from the date of final site plan or subdivision
approval. Failure to submit the site plan or subdivision plan for
signature within 60 days shall render the approval void.
c. Whenever review or approval of the application by the county planning
board is required, the planning board shall condition any approval that
it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by
§ 17-41 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-41
AO:386
§ 17-42. GUARANTEES AND INSPECTIONS RELATING TO
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS; SURETY; RELEASE. 49
As a condition of final approval of a site plan or major subdivision the
planning board shall accept for the purpose of assuring the installation and
maintenance of on-tract improvements.
§ 17-42.1. Guarantees.
the county planning board or approval by the county planning board by
its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
d. Copies of executed final site plans and subdivision plans shall be
distributed by the applicant to the planning board secretary, the tax
assessor, the tax collector, the construction official, the township
engineer, and the county planning board.
a. The furnishing of a performance guarantee in favor of the township in
an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation for
improvements it may deem necessary or appropriate including streets,
grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street lighting, shade
tree, surveyor's monuments, water mains, culverts, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal, drainage
structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices, public
improvements of open space and, in the case of site plans only, other onsite
improvements and landscaping. Such guarantees may consist of
cash which shall be a minimum of 10% of the total performance
guarantee as recommended by the planning board. Performance
guarantees shall be approved by the township attorney as to form,
sufficiency and execution.
1. A letter of credit shall be an acceptable form of performance
guarantee if approved by the township attorney and only under the
following conditions:
2. It is irrevocable for an initial period of at least one year with
automatic one year renewal unless the bank notifies the township
in writing by certified mail at least 90 days before the initial date of
expiration or each anniversary of such date that it will not be
renewed;
3. If the letter of credit is not renewed the township shall have the
right to immediately draw a draft on sight if the developer's
performance is not satisfactory as of that date, or to draw a draft 30
days after receipt of said notice if, after notification by the
municipality that the letter of credit will not be renewed, the
developer fails to submit a satisfactory replacement performance
guarantee; and
49.Editor's Note: Former subsection 17-1.11a-c was renumbered as section 17-42,
subsections 17-42.1 through 17-42.3. Sources contained herein include Ordinance Nos.
528, 556-80, 673-85, § 1, 766-88, §§ 1, 2.
§ 17-41 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-42.1
AO:387
The developer agrees to cease and desist all such work upon
receipt of notification from the municipality that the letter of credit
will not be renewed until such time as a satisfactory replacement
performance guarantee is submitted; and
4. The developer shall execute any agreement(s) required by the
township attorney confirming the conditions set forth herein prior
to the township's acceptance of said letter of credit.
b. Provision for a maintenance guarantee to be posted with the township
committee for a period not to exceed two years after final acceptance of
the improvement, in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the
improvement. In the event that other government agencies or public
utilities automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the
improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance guarantee
to another governmental agency, no performance or maintenance
guarantee, as the case may be, shall be required by the township for
such utilities or improvements.
c. The amount of any performance guarantee may be reduced by the
township committee by resolution, when portions of the improvements
have been certified by the township engineer to have been completed.
The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by such
body by resolution.
As a condition or as part of any such extension, the amount of any
performance guarantee shall be increased or reduced as the case may
be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of the installation as
determined as of the time of the passage of the resolution.
d. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the township for the reasonable cost of
the improvements not completed or corrected and the township may
either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete
such improvements.
e. Upon substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility
improvements, and the connection of same to the public system, the
obligor may notify the governing body in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the municipal clerk of the completion, or
substantial completion of improvements and shall send a copy thereof
to the municipal engineer. Thereupon the municipal engineer shall
inspect all improvements, of which such notice has been given and shall
file a detailed report, in writing, with the governing body, indicating
either approval, partial approval or rejection of such improvements
with a statement of reasons for any rejection. The cost of the
improvements, as approved or rejected, shall be set forth.
f. The township committee shall either approve, partially approve, or
reject the improvements, on the basis of the report of the municipal
§ 17-42.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-42.1
AO:388
§ 17-42.2. Inspections. [Ord. #93-949, § 1]
engineer and shall notify the obligor in writing, by certified mail, of
the contents of such report and the action of the approving authority
with relation thereto, not later than 65 days after receipt of the notice
from the obligor of the completion of the improvements. Where partial
approval is granted, the obligor shall be released from all liability
pursuant to its performance guarantee, except for that portion
adequately sufficient to secure provision of the improvements not yet
approved; provided that 30% of the amount of the performance
guarantee posted may be retained to ensure completion of all
improvements. Failure of the township committee to send or provide
such notification to the obligor within 65 days shall be deemed to
constitute approval of the improvements and the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be released from all liability pursuant to such performance
guarantee for such improvements.
g. If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete such improvements and,
upon completion, the same procedure of notification, as set forth in this
section shall be followed.
h. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
township committee or the township engineer.
a. The obligor shall reimburse the township for all reasonable inspection
fees paid to the municipal engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements, as set forth in Chapter 10, "Fees and Permits" of the
Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Hopewell (1978),
provided the township may require of the developer a deposit for all or
a portion of the reasonable anticipated fees to be paid to the municipal
engineer for such inspection. In the event the obligor fails to reimburse
the township within 30 days of receipt of a statement of professional
fees paid by the township, interest shall accrue at the rate of 1 1/2% per
month on the outstanding balance.
b. No work shall commence without prior notification of the engineer and
all work shall be inspected and approved by the township engineer. No
underground installation shall be covered until inspected and
approved. The municipal engineer's office shall be notified after each of
the following phases of the work has been completed so that he may
inspect the work: road subgrade; curb and gutter forms; curbs and
gutters; road paving (after each coat in the case of priming and
sealing); drainage pipes and other drainage structures before
backfilling; shade trees and planting strips, street name signs; and
monuments.
§ 17-42.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-42.3
AO:389
§ 17-42.3. Approval.
In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:55D-38, the provisions of this section shall be
applied by stage or section.
§ 17-43. EFFECT OF FINAL APPROVAL OF SITE PLANS AND MAJOR
SUBDIVISIONS. [Ord. #528]
§ 17-44. APPROVALS ON CONDITION. [Ord. #528]
a. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer by the
preliminary approval, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be
changed for a period of two years after the date of final approval;
providing that in the case of major subdivision the rights conferred by
this section shall expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within the
time period required. If the developer has followed the standards
prescribed for final approval, and, in the case of a subdivision, has duly
recorded the plat, the planning board may extend such period of
protection for extensions of one year but not to exceed three
extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, the granting of
final approval terminates the time period of preliminary approval for
the section granted final approval.
b. In the case of subdivision or site plan for a planned unit development or
planned unit residential development or residential cluster of 50 acres
or more or conventional subdivision or site plan for 150 acres or more,
the planning board may grant the rights referred to in paragraph a of
this section for such period of time, longer than two years, as shall be
determined by the planning board to be reasonable taking into
consideration (1) the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under final approval, (2) economic conditions and (3)
the comprehensiveness of the development. The developer may apply
for thereafter, and the planning board may thereafter grant an
extension of final approval for such additional period of time as shall be
determined by the planning board to be reasonable taking into
consideration (1) the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under final approval, (2) the number of dwelling units
and non-residential floor area remaining to be developed, (3) economic
conditions and (4) the comprehensiveness of the development.
a. In the event that during the period of approval heretofore or hereafter
granted to an application for development the developer is barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal action instituted by
any State agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the
public health and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any State
agency, political subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to
protect the public health or welfare and the developer is otherwise
§ 17-42.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-44
AO:390
§ 17-45. FILING AND EXPIRATION OF APPROVED PLATS.50
§ 17-45.1. Filing of Subdivision Plats.
No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the county recording
officer until it has been approved by the planning board as indicated on the
instrument by the signature of the chairman or vice chairman and secretary
or assistant secretary of the planning board or a certificate has been issued
in lieu thereof as provided by law. The signature of the chairman or vice
chairman and secretary or assistant secretary shall not be affixed until
the developer has posted the required guarantees. If the county recording
officer records any plat without such approval, such recording shall be
deemed null and void, and upon request of the township the plat shall be
expunged from the official records.
§ 17-45.2. Recording of Final Approval of Major Subdivision.
Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date of
signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have been duly
filed by the developer with the county recording officer. The planning board
ready, willing and able to proceed with such development, the running
of the period of approval under this chapter shall be suspended for the
period of time such legal action is pending of such directive or order is
in effect.
b. In the event that a developer submits an application for development
proposing a development that is barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, by a legal action instituted by any State agency, political
subdivision or other party to protect the public health and welfare or by
a directive or order issued by any State agency, political subdivision or
court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health and welfare,
the application for development shall be processed in accordance with
this chapter and, if such application for development complies with this
chapter it shall be approved conditioned on removal of such legal
barrier to development.
c. In the event that development proposed by the application for
development requires an approval by a governmental agency other
than the planning board or zoning board of adjustment or township
committee such municipal agency shall, in appropriate instances,
condition its approval upon the subsequent approval of such
governmental agency; provided that a decision on any application for
development shall be made within the time period provided in this
chapter or within an extension of such period as has been agreed to by
the applicant unless the municipal agency is prevented or relieved from
so acting by the operation of law.
50.Editor's Note: Former subsection 17-1.14a, b was renumbered as section 17-45,
subsections 17-45.1 and 17-45.2. Sources contained herein include Ordinance No. 528.
§ 17-44 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-45.2
AO:391
may for good cause shown extend the period for recording for an additional
period not to exceed 190 days from the date of signing of the plat.
§ 17-46. through § 17-52. (RESERVED)
§ 17-45.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-46
AO:392
ARTICLE IV
VARIANCES, HEARINGS, TIME LIMITS, APPLICATION REVIEW
§ 17-53. GRANT OF VARIANCES BY BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. [Ord.
#528; Ord. #566-80; Ord. #662-84, § 1; Ord. #723-86 § 2]
The board of adjustment shall have the power to:
a. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an
administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement
of this chapter.
b. Hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
requests for interpretation of the zoning map or ordinance or for
decisions upon other special questions upon which such board is
authorized to pass by the zoning ordinance or official map, if any.
c. 1. Where: (a) by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or
shape of a specific piece of property; or (b) by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a
specific piece of property; or (c) by reason of an extraordinary and
exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property
or the structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of
any regulation pursuant to this chapter would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue
hardship upon the developer of such property, grant, upon an
application or an appeal relating to such property, a variance from
such strict application of such regulation so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardship.
2. Where in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of
property the purposes of this act would be advanced by a deviation
from the zoning ordinance requirements and the benefits of the
deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a
variance to allow departure from zoning regulations: provided,
however, that no variance from those departures enumerated in
section 17-53d shall be granted under this section; and provided
further that the proposed development does not require approval
by the planning board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use
in conjunction with which the planning board has power to review a
request for a variance pursuant to this chapter.
d. In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to allow
departure from zoning regulations to permit:
1. A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such use
or principal structure;
2. An expansion of a nonconforming use;
§ 17-53 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-53
AO:393
3. Deviation from a specification or standard pursuant to section
17-56 pertaining solely to a conditional use;
4. An increase in the permitted floor area ratio as defined in section
17-181;
5. An increase in permitted density as defined in section 17-181
except as applied to the required lot area for a lot or lots for
detached one or two dwelling unit buildings which lot or lots are
either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor
subdivision. A variance under this section shall be granted only by
affirmative vote of at least five members in the case of a municipal
board.
e. No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and zoning ordinance. In
respect to any airport hazard areas delineated under the "Air Safety
and Hazardous Zoning Act of 1983" (N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.) no variance
or other relief may be granted under the terms of this section
permitting the creation or establishment of a nonconforming use which
would be prohibited under the standards promulgated pursuant to that
act except upon issuance of a permit by the Commissioner of
Transportation. An application under this section may be referred to
any appropriate person or agency for its report; provided that such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the zoning
board of adjustment shall act.
f. Referral to Planning Board or Others.
1. The board of adjustment may refer to the planning board all
applications for a use variance, for its comments and
recommendations with respect to the compatibility of the proposal
with the master plan and the zoning ordinance, applications for
similar uses which have been and are currently being considered
for other sites; and land use, traffic and other factors which the
planning board deems pertinent. The board of adjustment may also
refer to the planning board all subdivision and site plan
applications, for its comments and recommendations. The township
administrator shall distribute to both the board of adjustment and
the planning board copies of all applications to the board of
adjustment for a use variance and for subdivision or site plan
approval.
2. The board of adjustment may refer any application under this
section to any appropriate person or agency, for its report.
3. Reference to the planning board or to another person or agency
shall not extend the period within which the board of adjustment
shall act.
§ 17-53 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-53
AO:394
g. The board of adjustment shall have the power to grant to the same
extent, and subject to the same restrictions as the planning board,
subdivision or site plan approval or conditional use approval pursuant
to paragraph d of this section, whenever the proposed development
requires approval by the board of adjustment of a variance pursuant to
section 17-53d of this chapter. The developer may elect to submit a
separate application requesting approval of a variance and a
subsequent application for any required approval of a variance and a
subsequent application for any required approval of a subdivision, site
plan or conditional use. The separate approval of the variance shall be
conditioned upon grant of all required subsequent approvals by the
board of adjustment. No such subsequent approval shall be granted
unless such approval can be granted without substantial impairment of
the intent and purpose of the zone plan and zoning ordinance. The
number of votes of board members required to grant any such
subsequent approval shall be otherwise provided in this chapter for the
approval in question, and the special vote pursuant to the aforesaid
section 17-53d of this chapter shall not be required.
h. Time Periods. The board of adjustment shall render its decision not
later than 120 days after the date (1) an appeal is taken from the
decision of an administrative officer or (2) submission of a completed
application for development.
Whenever an application for development requests relief pursuant to
paragraph g of this section, the board of adjustment shall grant or
deny approval of the application within 120 days after submission by
a developer of a complete application to the township administrator
or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
In the event that the developer elects to submit separate consecutive
applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to the application for
approval of the variance. The period for granting or denying any
subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this chapter.
Failure of the board of adjustment to act within the period prescribed
shall constitute approval of the application and a certificate of the
township administrator as to the failure of the board of adjustment to
act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient
in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein
required, and shall be accepted by the county recording officer for
purposes of filing subdivision plats.
i. Lapse of Variances. Any zoning variance which involves activities
requiring a building permit shall lapse and be of no effect two years
from the date of approval of the variance unless such a building permit
has been issued, except that the board of adjustment may extend such
period for an additional period or periods not exceeding one year each.
j. Procedure for Appeals and Applications to Board of Adjustment.
1. Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of an administrative officer of the
§ 17-53 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-53
AO:395
§ 17-54. HEARINGS.51
§ 17-54.1. Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment to Hold.
The planning board or the zoning board of adjustment, as the case may
be, shall hold a hearing on each application for development, except as
provided in sections 17-29 through 17-41 with respect to certain minor
subdivisions.
§ 17-54.2. Rules, Documents to Be Provided.
The planning board and the zoning board of adjustment shall make their
own rules governing such hearings consistent with this chapter and other
provisions of law. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at
a hearing shall be on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days
before the date of the hearing during normal business hours in the office
of the township administrator. The applicant may produce other documents,
township based on or made in the enforcement of the zoning
ordinance or official map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20
days by filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the
appeal is taken specifying the grounds of such appeal. The officer
from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the
board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
2. A developer may file an application for development with the board
of adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior
application to an administrative officer.
k. Time for Decision.
1. The board of adjustment shall render a decision not later than 120
days after the date (1) an appeal is taken from decision of an
administrative officer or (2) the submission of a complete
application for development to the board of adjustment.
2. Failure of the board to render a decision within such 120-day
period or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant, shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
l. Modification on Appeal. The board of adjustment may take action on
appeal as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-74.
m. Stay of Proceedings by Appeal; Exception. An appeal to the board of
adjustment shall stay all proceedings as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-75,
except as provided therein.
51.Editor's Note: Former subsection 17-1.17a-i was renumbered section 17-54, subsections
17-54.1 through 17-54.9. Sources contained herein include Ordinance Nos. 528, 566-80,
662-84, § 1.
§ 17-53 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-54.2
AO:396
records, or testimony at the hearing to substantiate or clarify or supplement
the previously filed maps and documents.
§ 17-54.3. Powers of Presiding Officer.
The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may designate
shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and production of relevant evidence including
witnesses and documents presented by the parties, and the provisions of the
"County and Municipal Investigations Law," P.S. 1953, c. 38 (C. 2A:67A-1 et
seq.) shall apply.
§ 17-54.4. Testimony of Witnesses.
The testimony of all witnesses shall be taken under oath or affirmation by
the presiding officer, and the right of cross examination shall be permitted
to all interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly,
if not represented subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
§ 17-54.5. Types of Evidence.
Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but the
presiding officer may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
evidence.
§ 17-54.6. Transcript of Hearing.
The board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the proceedings
by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means. The board shall
furnish a transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu thereof, on request to any
interested party at his expense.
The transcript cost will not exceed the maximum permitted in N.J.S.A.
2A:11-15 (currently $0.40 for each folio of original, $0.10 for each copy). A
deposit representing an estimate of the cost of such transcript shall be paid
prior to its preparation.
§ 17-54.7. Findings.
The municipal agency shall include findings of fact and conclusions based
thereon in each decision on any application for development and shall
reduce the decision to writing. The municipal agency shall provide the
findings and conclusions through:
a. A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period provided
in the act for action by the municipal agency on the application for
development; or
b. A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later than 45
days after the date of the meeting at which the municipal agency voted
to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the municipal agency
§ 17-54.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-54.7
AO:397
§ 17-54.8. Decision.
A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant, or if represented then to his attorney,
without separate charge, and to all who request a copy of the decision for
a reasonable fee. A copy of the decision shall also be filed by the board in
the office of the township administrator. The township administrator shall
make a copy of such filed decision available to any interested party for
a reasonable fee and available for public inspection at his office during
reasonable hours.
§ 17-54.9. Notice of Decision.
A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official newspaper of
the township or a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Such
publication shall be performed by the township administrator within 10
days of the date of the decision.
The township may make a reasonable charge for its publication. The period
of time in which an appeal of the decision may be made shall run from the
first publication of the decision, whether arranged by the township or the
applicant.
§ 17-55. NOTICE OF HEARING. [Ord. #528; Ord. #566-80]
who voted for the action taken may vote on the memorializing
resolution, and the vote of a majority of such members present at
the meeting at which the resolution is presented for adoption shall
be sufficient to adopt the resolution. An action pursuant to sections
17-189c or 17-206 (resulting from the failure of a motion to approve
an application) shall be memorialized by resolution as provided above,
with those members voting against the motion for approval being the
members eligible to vote on the memorializing resolution. The vote
on any such resolution shall be deemed to be a memorialization of
the action of the municipal agency and not to be an action of the
municipal agency; however, the date of the adoption of the resolution
shall constitute the date of the decision for the purposes of the mailings,
filings and publications required by this section. If the municipal agency
fails to adopt a resolution or memorializing resolution as hereinabove
specified, any interested party may apply to the Superior Court in
a summary manner for an order compelling the municipal agency to
reduce its findings and conclusions to writing within a stated time
and the cost of the application, including the attorney's fee, shall be
assessed against the municipality.
a. Applicant shall be responsible for giving notice under paragraphs a, b,
c, e, f, g, and h hereof at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing as
provided in this section. Each notice shall state the date, time and place
of the hearing, the nature of the matters to be considered, an
identification of the property proposed for development by street
§ 17-54.7 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-55
AO:398
address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown
on the current tax duplicate in the municipal tax assessor's office, and
the location and times at which any maps and documents for which
approval is sought are available for public inspection.
b. Public notice shall be given, by publication in the official newspaper of
the township or in a newspaper of general circulation in the township
for a hearing on any application for development except regular site
plan review, minor subdivisions for which a hearing is waived or for
final approval of a major subdivision. Such public notice shall also be
given for a hearing which involves a site plan or subdivision and also
involves a request that the planning board grant a variance or direct the
issuance of a permit for a building in the bed of a mapped street or
other specified area or direct the issuance of a permit for a building not
related to a street, pursuant to section 17-31, and in such cases the
public notice shall include references to the subdivision or site plan as
well as to the variance or other relief sought.
c. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice pursuant to paragraph b of
this section shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on
the current tax duplicate located in the State and within 200 feet of all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing; provided
that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to the (1)
condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit has
a unit above or below it, or (2) horizontal property regime in the case of
any co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above or below it.
Notice shall be given by: (1) serving a copy thereof on the property
owner as shown on the current tax duplicate, or his agent in charge of
the property, or (2) mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the
property owner at his address as shown on the current tax duplicate.
Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized by
appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the corporation.
Notice to a condominium association, horizontal property regime,
community trust or homeowners' association, because of its ownership
of common elements or areas located within 200 feet of the property
which is the subject of the hearing, may be made in the same manner
as to a corporation without further notice to unit owners, co-owners, or
homeowners on account of such common elements or areas.
d. Upon the written request of an applicant, and payment of the fee as set
forth in Chapter 10, "Fees and Permits" of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Hopewell (1978), the township
administrator shall, within seven days, make and certify a list from the
current tax duplicates of names and addresses of owners to whom the
applicant is required to give notice pursuant to subsection 17-56.2. The
applicant shall be entitled to rely upon the information contained in
such list, and failure to give notice to any owner not on the list shall not
invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
§ 17-55 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-55
AO:399
§ 17-56. CONDITIONAL USES.52
§ 17-56.1. Time Limit.
The planning board shall grant or deny an application for a conditional
use within 95 days of submission of a complete application to the township
administrator, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
e. Notice of hearings on applications for development involving property
located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be given by
personal service or certified mail to the clerk of such municipality. All
required notices shall be given by the applicant.
f. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the county
planning board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the official county map or on the county master plan, adjoining other
county land or situated within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
g. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
commissioner of transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a State highway.
h. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the township administrator pursuant to
subsection 17-56.2.
i. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the board
holding the hearing on the application for development in the event that
the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to this section. Any
notice made by certified mail shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
j. The planning board may waive notice and public hearing for an
application for development if the planning board or site plan
subcommittee of the board appointed by the chairman finds that the
application for development conforms to the definition of a "minor site
plan." Minor site plan approval shall be deemed to be final approval of
the site plan by the board, provided that the board or the subcommittee
may condition such approval on terms insuring the provision of
improvements.
k. Notice pursuant to paragraphs e, f, g, and h of this section shall not be
deemed to be required, unless public notice pursuant to paragraph a
and notice pursuant to paragraph c of this section are required.
52.Editor's Note: Former subsection 17-1.19a-c was renumbered as section 17-56,
subsections 17-56.1-17-56.3. Sources contained herein include Ordinance Nos. 566-80 and
723-86, § 3.
§ 17-55 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-56.1
AO:400
applicant. The review of a new or expanded conditional use shall include
any required site plan review. Failure of the planning board to act within
the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application and a
certificate of the township administrator as to the failure of the planning
board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval,
herein required, and shall be so accepted by the county recording officer for
purposes of filing subdivision plats.
§ 17-56.2. Approval.
In approving a conditional use, a time limit of two years from the date of the
approval shall be set within which time the owner shall secure a building
permit, otherwise, the approval shall be null and void. In this two-year
period, no conditions of the approval and no zoning changes shall affect the
approval. The planning board may for good cause shown extend the period
for securing a building permit for an additional period not exceeding one
year, but not to exceed three extensions.
§ 17-56.3. Review of Application.
In reviewing the conditional use application, the planning board shall
exercise reasonable judgment in approving, denying, or approving with
conditions the application, it being recognized that the imposition of
conditions or the denial of an application are within the board's authority
provided its conclusions are based on findings of fact as applied against the
various zoning, planning and design standards set forth in this chapter and
the adopted master plan. The board shall review the number of employees,
customers or users of the property, that the use will not cause congestion
or other unsafe conditions on any street, and shall be satisfied the applicant
has complied with all reasonable elements which would affect the public
health, welfare, safety, comfort, and convenience such as, but not limited
to, the proposed use related to the character of the area, compatibility with
other land uses in the area, the environmental impacts on the site and
surrounding area, vehicular travel patterns highway access, traffic accident
patterns, pedestrian ways, landscaping, lighting, signs, drainage, sewage
treatment, potable water supply, utilities, and structural location(s) and
orientation(s). Each conditional use shall be considered as an individual
case. In all requests for approval of conditional uses, the burden of proof
shall be on the applicant.
§ 17-57. VOTING ELIGIBILITY. [Ord. #662-84, § 1]
A member of the municipal agency who was absent for one or more of the
meetings at which a hearing was held shall be eligible to vote on the matter
upon which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his absence from
one or more of the meetings; provided, however, that such board member
has available to him the transcript or recording of all of the hearing from
which he was absent, and certifies in writing to the board that he has read
such transcript or listened to such recording.
§ 17-56.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-58
AO:401
§ 17-58. WHEN APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT DEEMED
COMPLETE; WAIVER OF DEFECTS.53 [Ord. #662-84]
An application for development shall be complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by a municipal agency
when so certified by the municipal agency or its authorized committee or
designee. In the event that the agency, committee or designee does not
certify the application to be complete within 45 days of the date of its
submission, the application shall be deemed complete upon the expiration
of the forty-five-day period for purposes of commencing the applicable time
period unless:
§ 17-59. SIMULTANEOUS REVIEW OF SEPARATE ACCOUNTS. [Ord.
#723-86, § 4]
a. The application lacks information indicated on a checklist adopted by
ordinance and provided to the applicant; and
b. The municipal agency or its authorized committee or designee has
notified the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the application
within 45 days of submission of the application. The applicant may
request that one or more of the submission requirements be waived, in
which event the agency or its authorized committee shall grant or deny
the request within 45 days. Nothing herein shall be construed as
diminishing the applicant's obligation to prove in the application
process that he is entitled to approval of the application. The municipal
agency may subsequently require correction of any information found
to be in error and submission of additional information not specified in
the ordinance of any revisions in the accompanying documents, as are
reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements necessary for approval of the application for development
have been met. The application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack
of any such additional information or any revisions in the accompanying
documents so required by the municipal agency.
a. The approving authority shall have the power to act upon subdivisions,
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously without the developer's
making further application, or the approving authority being required
to hold further hearings. The longest time period for action by the
approving authority, whether it be for subdivision, conditional use or
site plan approval, shall apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use
is requested by the developer in conjunction with a site plan or
subdivision, notice of the hearing on the plat shall include reference to
the request for such conditional use. See section 17-56, Conditional
Uses.
b. The developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting
approval of the variance or direction of the issuance of a permit
53.Editor's Note: See Appendix A, included as an attachment to this chapter, for application
checklists.
§ 17-58 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-59
AO:402
§ 17-60. through § 17-66. (RESERVED)
followed by a subsequent application for any required approval of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate approval of the
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit shall be conditioned
upon grant of all required subsequent approvals by the planning board.
No such subsequent approval(s) shall be granted unless the approval
can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone
plan and zoning ordinance. In the event that the developer elects to
submit separate consecutive applications, the required time for action
by the approving authority shall apply to the application for approval
of the variance or direction for issuance of a permit. The period for
granting or denying subsequent approval(s) of a subdivision, site plan,
or conditional use shall be as otherwise provided in this chapter for that
separate application.
§ 17-59 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-60
AO:403

ARTICLE V
SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS, PLAT DETAILS
§ 17-67. REQUIREMENTS TO BE MET FOR SUBDIVISIONS AND
SITE PLANS. [Ord. #528]
Every subdivision and site plan shall meet all of the following requirements
except as expressly provided in these ordinances or by law, and except as
the planning board or the board of adjustment duly grants an exception to
compliance with any items.
§ 17-68. RECOGNITION OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS AND
COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING ORDINANCE AND OFFICIAL MAP, IF
ANY. [Ord. #528]
The layout or arrangement shall be consistent with the requirements of the
zoning provisions and the official map, if any. It is intended that critical
areas be avoided by development improvements wherever possible to
minimize environmental impacts. Use of cluster zoning and/or selective
siting of buildings, paving and similar improvements are intended. Where
encroached upon in exceptional cases, the subdivision/site plan design shall
be modified so the intrusion is minimal and the development standards
shall incorporate methods and designs to deal with the natural limitations.
Steep slopes, flood hazard areas and stream corridors should be avoided.
Beech grove climax vegetation areas should be protected. Areas of good and
excellent ground water recharge should minimize coverage and maximize
opportunities for stormwater percolation.
§ 17-69. APPLICATION FORMS; PLAT DETAILS.54 [Ord. #03-1298,
§ 2]
The applicant shall complete the appropriate application forms and the
checklists for completeness set forth in Appendix A.55 In addition, applicant
shall submit all materials required by the rules and regulations of the
approving authority. In the event that the applicant requests waivers from
the submission requirements, applicant shall complete the checklist to
advise of the submission waivers requested and shall comply with the rules
and regulations of the approving authority and the instructions in Appendix
A with regard to such submission waivers.
54.Editor's Note: Former subsection 17-2.3a-d was renumbered as section 17-69, subsection
17-69.1-17-69.4. Sources contained herein include Ordinance Nos. 528, 686-85 §§ 5 — 7,
745-87 §§ 3 — 4, 90-862 § 1. Information pertaining to Checklist for Complete Planning
Board Applications may be found in section 17-125.
55.Editor's Note: Appendix A, referred to herein is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 17-67 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-69.1
AO:405
§ 17-69.1. Application Forms and Other Documents. [Ord. #94-978,
§ 2; Ord. #03-1298, § 3]
The applicant shall submit the type and number of application forms, plats
and other materials prescribed by the planning board regulations, together
with:
a. Required Fees. In accordance with Chapter 10, section 10-7c and
section 17-92b, the applicant shall be made aware that in addition to
the application fee required herein, a lower income housing fee is
required to be paid. One-half the estimated lower income housing fee is
to be paid at the time the building permit is issued. The remainder of
the fee is to be paid at the time the certificate of occupancy is issued;
b. The proposed plat or plan;
c. Deed descriptions of all proposed new lots;
d. Road right-of-way dedications for any street of substandard width on
which the parcel fronts;
e. Stream drainage easements for all streams within or adjoining the
parcel;
f. Stream maintenance easements for all streams to which municipal
access might be desirable for maintenance purposes;
g. Stream encroachment easements for all streams shown on the plat;
h. Soil erosion and sediment control plans, when required by section
17-107;
i. Calculations demonstrating that adequate drainage facilities will be
installed;
j. Reports of all percolation tests and soil logs which were taken on the
parcel, when sewage will be disposed of by septic systems;
k. Sewer system plans, approved by the Hopewell Township Municipal
Utilities Authority, when sanitary sewers are proposed or required;
l. Central water supply plans, approved by the Hopewell Township
Municipal Utilities Authority, when a central water supply is proposed
or required;
m. Landscaping and shade tree layout plans;
n. An environmental impact report, when required by section 17-84;
o. Receipt from the tax collector showing that all taxes and/or
assessments for the local improvements have been paid. If any taxes or
assessments are either due or delinquent, the application shall be
deemed incomplete until the taxes and/or assessments are paid;
§ 17-69.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-69.1
AO:406
§ 17-69.2. Data For All Plats. [Ord. #03-1298, § 4]
All plats for all subdivisions and site plans shall comply with the following
requirements: (See also Article VI).
p. When the applicant is a corporation or a partnership and the
application is covered by section 17-36, the certificate of ownership
required by that section;
q. For applications for final approval of site plans and major subdivisions,
the report by the township engineer, performance guarantee,
maintenance guarantee and other materials required by section 17-41;
r. Applications in any flood plain shall submit the documents required by
Chapter 12 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Hopewell (1978);
s. Residential subdivision applications and all site plan applications shall
submit information required to satisfy section 16-6 entitled "Wells, Well
Tests, and Water Supplies" of Chapter 16 entitled "Health" and section
17-149 entitled "Water Supply and Analysis Requirements".
a. Designed, drawn, signed and sealed by a licensed New Jersey
Professional Engineer, land surveyor or architect.
b. Standard size sheets (30" x 42", 24" x 36", 15" x 21", or 8 1/2" x 13").
c. Scale of one inch equals 100 feet preferably, but not less than one inch
equals 200 feet to fit the entire tract on one sheet. If more than one
sheet is required, a key map shall be included to show each section in
relation to all other sections.
d. Tract name; tax map sheet, block and lot numbers, a north arrow;
graphic scale; acceptable title box.
e. Key map, showing roads and streams within 2,000 feet.
f. Elevations showing general slope and natural drainage (twenty-foot
contours for slopes over 10% and five foot contours for slopes under
10%). In general, these contours can be extrapolated from a U.S.G.S.
topographical map by scale of drawing.
g. Location, property lines, dimensions and acreage (to the nearest tenth
of an acre) of the entire tract and each present and proposed lot,
including the identification of the location and number of lots and units
proposed for lower income housing.
h. Names of the record owners of all adjoining property and property
across abutting streets.
i. Zoning of the premises and all adjoining property and property across
abutting streets.
§ 17-69.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-69.2
AO:407
§ 17-69.3. Additional Data For Preliminary Plats.
In addition to the plat requirements of subsection 17-69.2 above, all plats
for preliminary approval of all major subdivisions and site plans shall
comply with the following requirements:
j. Existing structures, streets, roads, streams and stream corridors, flood
hazard areas, fences, bridges, culverts and water supply and waste
disposal facilities on the parcel, and wooded areas on the parcel and
trees over six inches in diameter located outside wooded areas and
within the construction limits. Structures to be removed shall be shown
with broken lines.
k. Present and proposed utility lay-outs, and storm drains.
l. Present and proposed rights of way and easements (including stream
drainage, maintenance and conservation easements).
m. Provisions for collection and discharging water drainage and for soil
erosion and sediment control (if applicable). A composite grading and
drainage plan of the entire development shall accompany each
submission. This plan shall identify the individual grade at all high and
low points and breaks in grade and at the corners of tentative house
locations on each lot. Existing and proposed contours with intervals of
one foot where slopes are less than 2%; with intervals of two feet where
slopes are between 2% and 10%; and with intervals of five feet where
slopes exceed 10% shall also be shown. Contours must be based on
N.J.C. & G.S. elevations and bench marks must be shown. Existing
contours shall be shown as a dash line; proposed contours shall be
shown as a solid line. Where drainage swales are proposed, the
elevation, percent longitudinal slope and typical cross section of the
swales shall be shown. Provisions for soil erosion and sediment control,
where required pursuant to Chapter 12 of the Revised General
Ordinances of Hopewell Township, shall also be shown.
n. Roadway dedications along existing streets, if necessary.
o. The location and results of all percolation tests which were made, and
soil log results.
p. Names and addresses of record owners of parcels; of the applicant; and
of the person who prepared the plat.
q. Applications subject to the water supply analysis requirements of
section 17-149 shall submit the information required in Appendix A56
regarding Water Supply and Analysis Requirements and the
information required by Chapter 16.
56.Editor's Note: Appendix A, referred to herein is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 17-69.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-69.3
AO:408
a. The scale should not be less than one inch equals 100 feet; for site plans
a scale of one inch equals 50 feet is preferable; the scale must be
satisfactory to the planning board engineer.
b. Contours must be shown at five-foot intervals for slopes averaging 10%
or greater, and at two-foot intervals for lesser slopes. Contours must be
based on N.J.C. & G.S. elevations, and bench marks must be shown.
c. For all proposed new streets, typical cross-sections and centerline
profiles.
d. Minimum setback line on all lots. On corner lots the minimum setback
shall be the same as the front yard setback for both sides of the lot.
e. Location and description of all monuments.
f. Detailed provisions for collecting and discharging water drainage and
for soil erosion and sediment control, including present and proposed
storm drains, pipe locations and sizes and direction of flow. A composite
grading and drainage plan of the entire development shall accompany
each submission. This plan shall identify the individual grade at all high
and low points and breaks in grade and at the corners of tentative
house locations on each lot. Existing and proposed contours with
intervals of one foot where slopes are less than 2%; with intervals of
two feet where slopes are between 2% and 10%; and with intervals of
five feet where slopes exceed 10% shall also be shown. Contours must
be based on N.J.C. & G.S. elevations and bench marks must be shown.
Existing contours shall be shown as a dash line; proposed contours shall
be shown as a solid line. Where drainage swales are proposed, the
elevation, percent longitudinal slope and typical cross-section of the
swales shall be shown. Provisions for soil erosion and sediment control,
where required pursuant to Chapter 12 of the Revised General
Ordinances of Hopewell Township, shall also be shown.
g. Existing and proposed shade trees, screening barriers, and other
landscaping including existing trees over six-inch caliber and specific
proposed plantings.
h. Proposed use of each lot, including specified locations for lower income
housing lots and dwelling units.
i. For site plans, all proposed new structures, driveways and parking
facilities, including aisles, indication of specific parking spaces and
curbing. Sufficient elevations shall be shown on the plat to indicate
drainage patterns.
j. Details of all proposed outdoor lighting, including direction and
intensity of illumination and typical detail of fixture.
k. Approval legends by required municipal, county and other bodies.
§ 17-69.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-69.3
AO:409
§ 17-69.4. Final Plat.
The final plat shall follow the preliminary plat requirements including all
changes required as a condition of preliminary plat approval.
§ 17-70. through § 17-75. (RESERVED)
l. Certification that the applicant is the owner of the land or the agent of
the owner, or that the owner has given consent to the application under
an option agreement.
m. The text of any deed restriction in the development shall be included,
including those deed restrictions related to future control over the
rerent and resale prices of lower income housing units.
§ 17-69.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-70
AO:410
ARTICLE VI
DESIGN STANDARDS57
§ 17-76. APARTMENTS AND TOWNHOUSES. [Ord. #94-987; Ord.
#05-1352]
Developments containing townhouses or garden apartments shall meet the
following requirements, in addition to the other applicable zoning and site
plan and subdivision requirements. Apartments and townhouses shall have
site plan approval and public or private central water supply and a central
sanitary sewer system approved by appropriate State and local agencies.
a. Each overall development shall have a compatible architectural and
landscaping theme with variations in design to provide attractiveness to
the development. Each project shall specify how each of the following
considerations has been incorporated in the overall plans; landscaping
techniques; building orientation to the site and to other structures;
topography; natural features such as wooded areas, drainage courses,
soil conditions, and topographic relief; and building design features
such as varying unit widths, staggering unit setbacks, providing
different exterior materials, changing roof lines and roof designs,
altering building heights, and changing types of windows, shutters,
doors, porches, colors and vertical or horizontal orientation of the
facades, singly or in combination and stormwater management.
b. The configuration of structures may be any alignment that meets the
yard requirements and does not exceed the following overall or
component building lengths: (1) 200 feet on one plane; (2) 340 feet on
any angle; and (3) 500 feet along the centerline. Any passageway
between two structures which has a roof attached to both structures
shall be included in calculating these lengths. Townhouse structures
shall have not less than three nor more than five dwelling units on one
plane, nor more than eight units in one overall structure.
c. No dwelling unit shall have a living area level lower than the finished
grade along the front of the structure except that on side hill locations
the number of stories above ground on the uphill side shall not exceed
two stories with a third story permitted above ground on the downhill
side. The height of the building measured from the lowest grade of the
foundation on the downhill side shall not exceed 40 feet.
d. All required open space shall be improved for the purposes intended as
shown on the plan.
e. The location of recreational facilities shall consider the proximity of
structures, type of recreational facility, noise level and evening
57.Editor's Note: Former subsection 17-2.4a-kk was renumbered as sections 17-76 through
17-113. Sources contained herein include Ordinance Nos. 528, 686-85, §§ 8 — 14, 706-86,
§§ 2 — 5, 723-86, §§ 5— 11, 738-87, § 1, 741-87, § 2, 782-88, §§ 1 — 3, 785-88, § 1, 787-88,
§ 1, 788-88, § 1, 790-88, § 1, 791-88, § 1, 801-89, § 1, 815-89, § 1, 816-89, § 1, 817-89, § 2,
90-837, § 1, 90-853, § 3, 90-862, § 2, 90-872, § 1, 91-984, § 2, 92-916, § 1, 92-919, §§ 1, 2,
92-921, § 1.
§ 17-76 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-76
AO:411
illumination which may create nuisances for residents, and pedestrian
and bicycle traffic across major interior roads or driveways. The
periphery of any recreation area shall be no closer to a residential
structure than the minimum yard for that structure.
f. 1. As used in this section:
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Means a building
containing three or more dwelling units occupied or intended to be
occupied by persons living independently of each other, or a group
of such buildings;
RECYCLING AREA — Means space allocated for collection and
storage of source separated recyclable materials.
2. There shall be included in any new multifamily housing
development that requires subdivision or site plan approval an
indoor or outdoor recycling area for the collection and storage of
residentially-generated recyclable materials. The dimensions of the
recycling area shall be sufficient to accommodate recycling bins or
containers which are of adequate size and number, and which are
consistent with anticipated usage and with current methods of
collection in the area in which the project is located. The
dimensions of the recycling area and the bins or containers shall be
determined in consultation with the municipal recycling
coordinator, and shall be consistent with the district recycling plan
adopted pursuant to section 3 of P.L. 1987, c. 102 (N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.13) and any applicable requirements of the municipal
master plan, adopted pursuant to section 26 of P.L. 1987, c. 102.
3. The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential
disposition of source separated recyclable materials, preferably
near, but clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
4. The recycling area shall be well lit, and shall be safely and easily
accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles
shall be able to access the recycling area without interference from
parked cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be
taken to protect the recycling area, and the bins or containers
placed therein, against theft of recyclable materials, bins or
containers.
5. The recyclable area or the bins or containers placed therein shall
be designed so as to provide protection against environmental
conditions which might render the collected materials
unmarketable. Any bins or containers which are used for the
collection of recyclable paper or cardboard, and which are located
in an outdoor recycling area, shall be equipped with a lid, or
otherwise covered, so as to keep the paper or cardboard dry.
6. Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials
accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to
§ 17-76 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-76
AO:412
§ 17-77. BIKEWAYS. [Ord. #05-1352]
Bikeways shall be required at the planning board's discretion in any new
development depending on the development's location in relation to
schools, recreation areas, shopping facilities and other populated areas,
or its location with respect to any overall bike route plan adopted by
the planning board. Bicycle traffic shall be separated from motor vehicle
and pedestrian traffic as much as possible. Bikeways shall comply with
the design criteria of the Americans with Disabilities Act and New Jersey
Department of Transportation and shall be a minimum of six feet wide.
Bikeways shall have a minimum four inch base of crushed stone and a
two inch compacted thickness surface course. Permeable paving materials
shall be used where appropriate and stormwater management and related
drainage controls shall comply with section 17-82a16. Where bike paths
located outside street rights-of-way intersect a street, the curbing shall be
ramped for bicycle access to the street grade.
§ 17-78. BLOCKS.
§ 17-79. CLUSTER DESIGN. [Ord. #00-1155, § 4; Ord. #01-1206, § 7;
Ord. #02-1268, §§ 1, 2]
the recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped
with signs indicating the materials to be placed therein.
7. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor
recycling area and shall be developed in an aesthetically pleasing
manner and shall use indigenous species to the maximum extent
practicable.
a. Except in the industrial zone, no block shall be longer than 12 homes on
one side of the street or 12 lot widths as the zone requires. Block length
and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such as to
accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the zoning
ordinance and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and
safety of street traffic.
b. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required
in locations deemed necessary by the planning board. Such walkway
shall be 10 feet wide and be straight from street to street.
c. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
a. Standards for cluster development in the VRC and MRC Zoning
Districts are included in section 17-160.
b. Cluster development designs in the R-150 and R-100 Zoning Districts
are permitted only on tracts where sewer service is available from the
Ewing-Lawrence Sewerage Authority or from Stony Brook Regional
Sewerage Authority and shall be provided water from a public water
§ 17-76 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-79
AO:413
system. Cluster development is an alternate design intended to provide
flexibility in the design of residential developments mutually acceptable
to the planning board and the developer. The purpose is also to
preserve open space and provide other public amenities and services
by permitting a reduction in residential lot size without increasing the
number of lots or the permitted number of dwelling units allowed under
the density provisions of this chapter. It is intended that all lands to
be offered to the township will be suitably located and improved for
public purpose(s) and acceptable to the township. Through the use
of these provisions, it is intended to encourage energy conservation
and the use of renewable energy sources by reducing street lengths
and by offering more flexibility in orienting the placement of individual
buildings. Through the cost savings realized from the reduction in
streets, utilities and other improvements, opportunities to generate
lower income housing are intended in accordance with section 17-92
and the applicable sections of Article IX. The following specific
requirements must be met in any cluster development.
1. The maximum number of lots or dwelling units shall be as specified
in each zoning district.
2. All dwelling units shall be served by either the Ewing-Lawrence
Sewerage Authority or the Stony Brook Regional Sewerage
Authority and shall be provided water from a public water system.
3. Each cluster design must include open space constituting at least
25% of the tract. The required open space shall not include
required yards, streets or parking areas. All of the required open
space shall remain undeveloped or be developed solely for
recreational purposes. The open space shall either be: (i) dedicated
to the township (at no cost) with the township having the option of
whether or not to accept the open space; or (ii) placed under the
jurisdiction of a homeowner's association duly organized pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 and section 17-88 herein for the ownership
and maintenance of the open space; or (iii) added to abutting lots as
a conservation easement provided the pattern of open space within
the conservation easement follows a logical pattern of woodland,
drainage corridors, slopes, wetlands or other conditions
warranting their placement in a conservation easement.
4. Acceptance of lands offered to the township shall be subject to
approval by the governing body after recommendation by the
planning board and shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The minimum size shall be five acres with no dimension less
than 400 feet.
(b) It shall be an integral part of the development and located to
best suit the purpose(s) for which it is intended except that
wetlands, steep slopes and similar environmentally sensitive
§ 17-79 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-79
AO:414
§ 17-80. COMMUNITY IMPACT STATEMENT.
A community impact statement analyzing the proposed development and
its expected impacts upon existing municipal facilities and services shall be
submitted when site plans exceed 10 acres, or when subdivisions exceed 10
lots or when subdivisions exceed 10 acres of nonresidential development.
The statement shall indicate why, in the applicant's opinion, the proposed
development is in the public interest and it shall provide data and analysis
concerning the following specific items:
lands difficult to develop are not intended to be the prime focus
offered to the township.
(c) Every parcel accepted by the township shall be covered by
deed at the time final plat approval is granted.
(d) The planning board shall be guided by the master plan, the
ability to assemble and relate such lands to an overall plan, the
accessibility and potential utility of such lands to serve the
intended purpose, and the existence of such features as
difficult topography, problem soils, wetlands, and tree cover as
these features may enhance or detract from the intended use
of lands. The planning board may request an opinion from
other agencies or individuals as to the advisability of accepting
lands to be offered, it being intended that the offered lands
should serve a public purpose acceptable to the township.
a. The number of people expected to be added to the municipal population
as a result of the proposed development according to the following age
cohorts; pre-school-aged children, school-aged children, parents of
family-bearing age, middle-aged adults and retired people.
b. The anticipated number of pupils who will be added to the student
population in the municipality and the ability of the existing public
school facilities to absorb the expected student population during a tenyear
time period. Should expanded or new school facilities and/or
increased teaching staff be required, the expected cost for such
additions shall be specified.
c. The existing facilities available to serve the proposed development and
the impact of the development upon the facilities, including the
adequacy of existing public water facilities; public sewerage facilities;
recreational facilities; and library facilities. Should such facilities be
determined inadequate to serve the proposed development, the
remedies, either expected or proposed by the applicant shall be
indicated along with the estimated costs for such additional facilities
and who, in the opinion of the applicant, should pay for them.
d. The existing services provided by the township to serve the proposed
development and the impact of the development upon the services,
§ 17-79 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-80
AO:415
§ 17-81. CURBS.
§ 17-82. DRAINAGE, DETENTION, AND STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT. [Ord. #04-1325, § 3; Ord. #05-1352]
including police protection; emergency rescue, fire protection, solid
waste disposal; and street maintenance services.
e. The existing road network available to serve the proposed road network
within the development itself and the surrounding road network which
will be affected by the proposed development, including the capacity of
the existing and proposed roadways; the anticipated traffic volumes as
a result of the proposed development as well as the increase in traffic
volumes expected from other developments within the area; and any
problem spots in the overall road network including unsafe
intersections, turns, or grades.
f. The revenues expected to be generated from the development
compared to the anticipated costs which the proposed development is
expected to generate. Revenues and costs shall be shown for the
municipality the municipal school systems, and the county.
a. Regular Curbs. The planning board may require among other
conditions in the public interest, that the developer install curbs as a
supplement to the pipe drainage. Curbs shall be constructed in
accordance with the "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Constructions, 1961" of the New Jersey State Highway Department as
amended and the Hopewell Township Standard Specifications. Curbs
shall be constructed of Class B, 4,500 psi concrete, air-entrained.
Unless otherwise required for arterial roads, or by other regulatory
agencies, concrete curb shall be not less than six inches thick at the top
and eight inches at the bottom and 18 inches deep. The top corner on
the face of the curb shall be rounded to a radius of one-half inch. Top of
curb shall project six inches above the finished road surface at the curb
line.
b. Rolled Concrete Curbing. Where required under provisions of this
chapter, rolled concrete curb shall be constructed of Portland Cement
which shall have a compressive strength of 4,000 pounds per square
inch after 28 days. The maximum length of sections shall be 10 feet,
with preformed bituminous expansion joint filler one-half inch thick
installed at a maximum spacing of 20 feet. The curb shall be 24 inches
wide, six inches deep on the pavement side, 10 inches deep on the lot
side, and shall have a one inch depression below the pavement side
located about one-third the distance from the pavement edge. The side
adjacent to the pavement shall be flush with the finished pavement
surface.
a. Drainage.
§ 17-80 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-82
AO:416
1. All off-street traffic facilities, parking facilities, loading areas,
passageways, driveways, walks, roofs, and other similar impervious
surfaces, as well as all lands which have been so changed in
contour or permeability as to alter or quicken the natural flow of
surface waters, shall be so drained as to prevent damage or hazard
to the site or to abutting properties or public streets. The design of
all drainage facilities shall address water quality, flooding and
groundwater recharge and shall incorporate the use of
nonstructural stormwater management strategies to the maximum
extent practicable.
2. Adequate surface and stormwater drainage facilities, (i.e. conduits
and swales) shall be provided. The facilities shall be designed for
the following minimum flow capacities:
Drainage Basin Size Design Storm Frequency
0 to 100 acres 25 years
Over 100 acres 50 years
Watercourse Crossing 100 years
The facilities shall also comply with the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Chapter 12. All pipes shall be sized and located such that
backwater or headwaters shall not flow onto roadways, sewage
disposal fields, or within building setback areas.
3. No change shall be made in the existing contours of the land, and
no construction shall take place, which would result in any change
in the rate, course, width, or elevation of any natural or other
drainage channel, in any manner that would obstruct, interfere
with or change the drainage of such land, taking into account land
development that may take place in the vicinity, except insofar as
adequate drainage is provided. In addition, stormwater runoff shall
not be concentrated over driveways or within 20 feet of a dwelling.
4. Land contours, drainage facilities, detention basins, and other
pertinent aspects of each proposed development shall be designed
to encourage as well as to provide effective soil erosion and
sediment control.
5. The pipe size shall be determined by acceptable drainage design
procedures. In no case shall the pipe size in a surface water
drainage system be less than 15 inches in diameter.
6. Drainage inlets shall be located on both sides of street at all
intersections. Surface runoff in streets shall not exceed six cubic
feet per second at the drainage inlet and surface runoff in parking,
loading, and walkway areas shall not exceed three cubic feet per
second. Access manholes shall be placed at maximum 500-foot
intervals throughout the system and at pipe junctions where there
§ 17-82 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-82
AO:417
are no drainage inlets. Inlets shall be placed at intervals not
exceeding 400 feet.
7. Storm drain pipes shall be constructed longitudinally along streets
and shall cross streets perpendicular to the centerline thereof. Pipe
shall be located under or behind the curbline with the installation
of inlet or manhole structures. Curvilinear alignments, i.e. curved
pipe, pipe bends, or tees, wyes, etc. shall not be permitted.
8. Storm drain pipes shall be the size specified and laid to the exact
lines and grades approved by the township engineer. Specifications
for construction of manholes, inlets, and storm drains shall conform
with the 1983 N.J.D.O.T. Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction, as amended or supplemented or the Site
Improvement Standards of the Township of Hopewell, with the
more restrictive applying.
9. Lots shall be graded to provide proper drainage away from all
buildings, to prevent the ponding of stormwater on each lot or
adjacent lots. Minimum slopes of 1.5% shall be provided on all lots
except in the vicinity of structures, where 2% shall be maintained
for a minimum of 20 feet. All lots shall be designed to convey
stormwater from adjacent lots around the perimeter of the lot in
question by use of stable diversion (swales) or waterways designed
in accordance with the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control in New Jersey.
10. Land designated as a flood hazard area shall not be designed for
any occupancy nor for any other purpose which may endanger life
or property or aggravate the flood hazard. Such land may be
considered for yard areas, or other similar uses and shall be
preserved by a conservation easement.
11. Any underground drainageway or drainage systems outside a
street or other public right-of-way shall be accompanied by a
fifteen-foot wide (minimum) drainage easement dedicated to the
township and conforming with the lines of such system. Sufficient
width shall be provided so as to accommodate maintenance vehicle
access.
12. Stream corridors shall be preserved by a conservation easement.
Stream corridors extend 50 feet from each bank of permanently
flowing streams as these streams are shown on Soil Conservation
Service (SCS) maps. If the natural floodplain is greater, the
corridor shall extend to the limits of the floodplain. Stream
corridors shall also be extended to include contiguous wetlands
and slopes over 12% where the toe of the slope is within 20 feet of
the wet soils. Within the stream corridor and 20 feet of its edge,
natural coverage shall be maintained, no alteration of the natural
terrain shall occur, and no structures or impervious surfaces shall
§ 17-82 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-82
AO:418
be constructed. All roads and utilities, including septic systems,
shall be at least 100 feet from stream corridors.
(a) Stream corridors as defined in Section 17-181 shall be
preserved by a conservation easement, which shall specify the
prohibited uses and contain the customary provisions for a
conservation easement as required by the township committee.
13. In such cases in which an easement extends into a lot for a distance
wider than that which is restricted against building by the required
yard space regulations of this chapter, the planning board may
require the lot to be enlarged to the degree necessary to provide
additional building area.
14. Sump pump discharge lines may be connected to the storm drain
system upon approval of the superintendent of public works, but in
no event shall sump pumps be connected to any sanitary sewer
system. Sump pump connections shall be made using the standard
detail provided in the site improvement standards.
15. Septic systems shall not be connected to the storm drain system.
Where perimeter drains are provided around septic systems for the
sole purpose of lowering the water table, the discharge pipe may be
connected to the storm drainage system after receiving approval
from the board of health and township engineer. Provision shall be
made by the applicant to permit adequate inspection and testing of
the discharge from this line.
16. Stormwater Management. All hydraulic and hydrologic
computations for all site development, subdivisions and site
disturbances shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-5 and N.J.A.C.
5:21.
17. Materials used in the construction of storm sewers shall be of
reinforced concrete, ductile iron, corrugated aluminum, or
corrugated steel. Site or other conditions may dictate alternative
materials or design methods, which will be reviewed case by case
by the township engineer. Specifications referred to, such as ASA,
ASTM, AWWA, etc., should be the latest revision.
18. Wetlands shall be preserved by conservation easements.
b. Detention and Stormwater Management.
1. Shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-5 and N.J.A.C. 5:21.
2. Detention basins shall be appropriately landscaped. All detention
basin landscaping shall be designed by a New Jersey licensed
landscape architect. Floor and side slope areas within the basin
and subject to submergence shall be planted with low maintenance,
water-tolerant ground cover. Nursery stock and multileader trees
shall be used along the perimeter of the basin and side slopes not
§ 17-82 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-82
AO:419
subjected to submergence. Shade tree planting along any portions
of a berm shall not be permitted.
3. Point discharges onto private property shall require a maintenance
easement to a hydraulically stable condition. Minimum width shall
be as determined by the township engineer based on type of access
and maintenance required. The minimum length shall be measured
to the point of calculated stability or 100 feet minimum as
measured from the termination point of the outlet pipe headwall or
flared end section.
4. Submissions. All data required by this paragraph shall be provided
in form and content, in accordance with the stormwater
management checklist items for preliminary major subdivisions in
the Land Use and Development Ordinance, section 17-125.
5. Maintenance and Repair. Responsibility for operation and
maintenance of detention facilities, including periodic removal and
disposal of accumulated particulate material and debris, shall
remain with a homeowners' association, with permanent
arrangements that it shall pass to any successive association,
unless dedicated to the township along with a contribution to the
township of sufficient funds to provide for the maintenance of such
property for a period of 25 years from the date of planning board
approval in accordance with the formula set forth hereafter. These
arrangements shall designate for each project, the property owner,
governmental agency, or other legally established entity to be
permanently responsible for maintenance, hereinafter in this
section referred to as the "responsible person."
Prior to granting approval to any project subject to review under
this section, the applicant shall execute the standard detention
basin easement and detention basin maintenance agreement with
the municipality to ensure the continued operation and
maintenance of the detention facility. The easement shall be in
the standard form contained with the site improvement standards
which may be amended from time to time to include or alter
provisions relating to personal guarantees, deed restrictions,
covenants, and bonds. In cases where a homeowners' association
or similar permanent entity is established as the responsible entity,
a detention basin maintenance agreement shall be prepared. This
document shall incorporate detention basin maintenance standards
of the Township of Hopewell and shall be executed with the
association and all association documents shall address the
provisions herein.
The funds to be contributed for the perpetual care of detention
facilities dedicated to the township shall be computed in
accordance with the following formula:
§ 17-82 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-82
AO:420
Item
No. Description Rate Per Acre Total Acres Freq. Per Year Item Total
1 Mowing $63.42 10
2 Mowing Materials $14.33 10
3 Landscape Maintenance $389.16 2
4 Landscape Maintenance
Materials
$779.92 2
5 General Maintenance $219 1.0 4
6 Periodic Maintenance $4,835 0.076
7 Engineering Inspection $250.00 1
Estimated Annual Maintenance Costs = $ __________
Estimated Annual Insurance Costs = $ __________
Total Estimated Annual Detention Basin Costs (ADBC) = $ __________
To Determine Developer Contribution, Compute 25 Year Present Worth of ADBC
(Assume 6% Inflation and 8% Rate of Return) = ADBC x 18.665
= $ __________
Developer Contribution = $ __________
Computation Factors Description
Item Description
1 Mowing: This item anticipates all labor and equipment necessary for maintaining
an average lawn height of 4 inches including fertilizing and mobilization.
Rates per acre are based upon site work cost data for labor and
equipment as provided by R.S. Mean Company, Inc., and as compared to
prevailing local rates. Frequency reflects the number of times per annum
in order to achieve an average lawn height of 4 inches.
2 Mowing Materials: This item anticipates all materials to be used for mowing and fertilizing.
This item includes gas, oil, and disposal of grass clippings and fertilizer.
Frequency shall be same as item 1. Mowing material rates are based upon
site work cost data as provided by R.S. Mean Company, Inc., and as
compared to prevailing local rates.
3 Landscape
Maintenance:
This item anticipates all labor and equipment necessary for mulching.
Frequency reflects number of times performance of this item is
anticipated annually. Landscape maintenance rates are based upon site
work cost data for labor and equipment as provided by R.S. Mean
Company, Inc., and as compared to prevailing local rates.
4 Landscape
Materials:
This item anticipates all materials to be used for landscape maintenance.
Landscape material rates are based upon site work cost data as provided
by R.S. Mean Company, Inc., and as compared to prevailing local rates
§ 17-82 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-82
AO:421
§ 17-83. DRIVEWAYS. [Ord. #05-1352]
Computation Factors Description
Item Description
5 General
Maintenance:
This item anticipates all labor and equipment necessary to perform
removal of debris around the outlet structure and its receiving waterway
and to insure proper functioning of the basin. Frequency is based upon
frequency of a 25 year storm event. 25 year storms generally produce
such volumes and velocities of runoff that can carry debris which could be
entrapped within the basin thereby interfering with the operation of the
outlet structure General maintenance rates are based upon site work cost
data for labor and equipment as provided by R.S. Mean Company, Inc.,
and as compared to prevailing local rates
6 Periodic
Maintenance:
This item anticipates capital expenditures which might occur during the
25 year period. These costs are assumed to be required during the 12th
and 25th years. This item anticipates all labor, equipment, and materials
necessary to perform this type of maintenance which may include but is
not limited to: replacement of low flow channel, replacement of rusted
elements of outlet structure, restoration of conduit outlet protection. In
order to properly convert these costs to present worth, it is necessary to
introduce a frequency factor which is less than 1. Periodic maintenance
rates are based upon site work cost data for labor and equipment as
provided by R.S. Mean Company, Inc. and as compared to prevailing local
rates
7 Engineering
Inspection:
This item anticipates all labor and materials necessary to contract for
performance of an inspection of the facility and receive a certificate of
adequacy or statement of deficiencies by a New Jersey licensed
professional engineer. The frequency of this item shall be once per year.
Engineering inspection rates are based upon site work cost data for labor
and equipment as provided by R.S. Mean Company, Inc., and as compared
to prevailing local rates
Editor's Note: Exhibits D-1, D-2 and D-3, which were previously included here, are included as
attachments to this chapter.
a. No driveway shall be permitted to be used unless sufficient surfacing
has been installed to prevent soil or dirt from being carried onto a
public right-of-way. Driveways shall be limited to one per lot if the street
frontage is less than 150 feet and two per lot if the same is greater than
150 feet.
b. That portion of a driveway which serves a residence or a farm which is
located on the lot and within 20 feet of the street right-of-way line shall
be straight and shall not deviate more than 30° from a right angle to the
street center line (or if on a curve from a radial to the center line), nor
shall it have a grade of more than 5%.
§ 17-82 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-83
AO:422
§ 17-84. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT.
(See section 17-68.) This report shall accompany all preliminary plats when
site plans exceed 10 acres or subdivisions exceed 10 lots or for all plans
encompassing improvements in any critical area of the township as
identified in the master plan and the township's natural resources inventory.
An environmental impact report shall include:
c. That portion of a driveway which serves other than a residence or a
farm, which is located on the lot and within 30 feet of the street right-ofway,
shall be straight and shall be at a right angle (or if on a curve,
radial) to the street center line and shall not have a grade of less than
one nor more than 5%.
d. All driveways shall be so located, designed, constructed and maintained
as to ensure an unobstructed view of the entire street width for 200 feet
in both directions from a point 2 1/2 feet above the driveway and 10 feet
from the street line for farm or residential driveways and 20 feet from
the same for nonresidential driveways.
e. Wherever a nonresidential driveway entrance may otherwise create a
disruption in the flow of traffic or other safety hazard, appropriate
acceleration and deceleration lanes may be required.
f. Curb cuts shall be installed only at driveways except where ramps are
provided for the handicapped.
g. Driveways shall be designed to use lawn areas to disconnect impervious
surfaces and to use permeable paving materials where appropriate.
a. A description of the development specifying what is to be done during
construction and operation, how it is to be done, and practical alternate
plans to achieve the objective(s) embodied in both the development and
the township's master plan and natural resources inventory.
b. An inventory of the following on-site environmental conditions and an
assessment of the probable impact of the development upon them:
water supply; geology; aquifer recharge potential; soils and properties
thereof, including capabilities and limitations; sewerage; topography;
slope; drainage; vegetation; noise characteristics and levels; land use;
aesthetics and history. Air and water quality shall be described with
reference to standards promulgated by the Department of
Environmental Protection of the State of New Jersey and soils shall be
described with reference to soil conservation service categories and
characteristics.
c. A list and the status of the licenses, permits and approvals needed from
Federal, State, county, or public utility agencies including the
conclusions and comments of these governmental agencies.
d. An evaluation of any adverse environmental impacts which cannot be
avoided. Particular emphasis shall be placed upon air or water
§ 17-83 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-84
AO:423
§ 17-85. FENCES AND HEDGES.
§ 17-86. FIRE.
pollution, increase in noise, increase in sedimentation and siltation,
increase in township services, and consequences to the township tax
structure.
e. A description of steps to be taken to avoid or minimize adverse
environmental impacts during construction and operation, including
necessary maps, schedules and other explanatory data to clarify and
explain these steps.
a. Fences or walls not exceeding 48 inches in height may be erected on
any part of a lot between the front line and the front setback line for
structures and on any other part of the lot may be erected to a height
not to exceed 72 inches. The height of such walls or fences shall be
determined by measurement from the ground level at the lowest grade
level within three feet of either side of such walls or fences.
b. All fences, walls, or hedges must conform to the sight line requirements
of section 17-105 (sight triangles) and section 17-83d (driveways).
c. Tennis Courts. See section 17-159b4(c).
a. Fire and Explosion Hazard. If in the judgment of the planning board a
proposed structure, use, process, product, or material appears to
involve a fire or explosion hazard, the planning board may require the
applicant to supply:
1. A copy of the approved plans from the State Department of
Community Affairs or any other State, county, or local agency
having jurisdiction showing that adequate safeguards against the
origin and spread of fire have been or shall be taken in regard to
such things as the construction and materials of the structure, the
installation of safety and warning devices, and the adoption of fire
prevention procedures in operations; and
2. A statement from the appropriate township fire subcode official
that the applicant has complied with all applicable township fire
prevention regulations; and
3. Where special conditions or hazards exist, that the applicant has
made adequate provision to supplement public fire-fighting
facilities to the extent necessary to insure the safety of employees,
customers and adjacent structures.
b. Fire Service. Whenever streams or other water sources which exist or
are proposed in or near a development may be useful for the purpose of
fighting fires in or near the development, provisions shall be made to
assure continual fire equipment access to such water sources.
Standpipes shall be installed whenever appropriate.
§ 17-84 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-87
AO:424
§ 17-87. FLOOD PLAINS. [Ord. #05-1352]
Also see Chapter 12 and the sections in this chapter entitled "Drainage"
(section 17-82), and "Soil Protection" (section 17-107).
a. The purposes are: (1) to continue the purposes of Chapter 12 and to
implement methods of reducing flood losses as outlined in Chapter 12
as well as implementing the land use regulations of the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection for floodways and flood fringe
area; (2) to discourage construction and regrading in flood hazard
areas; (3) to prevent encroachments into flood hazard areas which
would obstruct or constrict the area through which flood water must
pass, and; (4) to prevent pollution of watercourses during low or high
water periods by preventing the placing or storing of unsanitary or
dangerous substances in flood hazard areas.
b. The flood hazard area as shown on the township's flood insurance rate
map and the flood hazard design elevation based on a 100-year storm
frequency shall be shown on the plat including stream encroachment
line data from the division of water resources. At the expense of the
landowner, the precise location of the floodway and flood fringe area
may be determined by field survey and be marked on the ground and on
the plat. Where State or Federal agencies delineate by contours the
flood hazard design elevation, the report shall be the delineated flood
hazard area as if published in this chapter. If none of the above sources
are available, the board may use any base flood elevation data available
from Federal, State or other sources.
c. No improvement in a floodway shall be permitted unless it is a
permitted use, plat approval has been granted by the planning board
and, if required, by the county planning board, and all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal and State governmental
agencies from which approval is required.
d. No improvement in a flood fringe portion of the flood hazard area shall
be permitted unless it is a permitted use, plat approval has been
granted, and the requirements and procedures of Chapter 12 have been
satisfied.
e. Permitted uses in a flood fringe area shall be as follows provided they
are permitted uses in the district in which they are located.
1. Agriculture: General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant
nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod
farming, and wild crop harvesting.
2. Industrial/Commercial: Lawns, loading areas, and parking areas.
3. Recreation: Golf courses, improved courts and playing fields,
swimming areas, boat launching ramps, picnic areas, camping, and
open space uses such as hiking trails.
§ 17-87 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-87
AO:425
4. Residential: Lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
5. Public lawns, parking areas, play and recreation areas.
f. The applicant shall submit maps, reports and other appropriate
documents permitting the planning board to evaluate the following:
1. Flood Hazard Area. A map showing the boundary of the inundated
area following a 100-year storm.
2. Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and
substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage.
3. Utilities. All new and replacement water supply and sanitary
sewerage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the system and sanitary sewerage
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate discharges from
the systems into flood waters. On-site waste disposal systems shall
be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from
them during flooding.
4. Subdivision Proposals. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent
with the need to minimize flood damage. All public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize flood damage. All subdivision
proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood damage, shall be designed to address water
quality, flooding and groundwater recharge and shall incorporate
the use of nonstructural stormwater management strategies to the
maximum extent practicable.
5. Specific Standards. In all flood hazard areas any new construction
or substantial improvement of any structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the 100-year
flood elevation. As an alternative, any commercial, industrial or
other nonresidential structure may be flood-proofed as set forth in
Chapter 12, of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Hopewell (1978). This section shall not prevent the repair, or
rebuilding, within a flood hazard area, of any lawful pre-existing
structure which was damaged by a flood, or by any other means.
6. Floodways. Located within flood hazard areas are areas designated
as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of flood water which carry debris, potential
projectiles and erosion potential, encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements and other
developments are prohibited unless certification by a licensed
professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels or
erosion during the occurrence of the 100-year flood and required
Federal and State permits have been granted.
§ 17-87 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-87
AO:426
§ 17-88. HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION.
A homeowners' association may be established to own and maintain
common open space and common property designed within a development.
If established, the organization shall incorporate the following provisions:
7. Other Documentation. The applicant shall submit other appropriate
documents permitting the planning board to evaluate whether the
proposal has a low flood damage potential; does not diminish the
flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse;
does not obstruct flood flows or increase flood heights and/or
velocities, does not require channel modification or relocation
without the necessary Federal and/or State permits and township
engineer approval; and does not include the storage of equipment
and materials in the flood plain.
a. Membership by all property owners, condominium owners,
stockholders under a cooperative development and other owners of
property or interests in the project shall be mandatory. Required
membership and their responsibilities shall be in writing between the
organization and each member in the form of a covenant with each
agreeing to liability for his pro rata share of the organization's costs.
b. The organization shall be responsible for liability insurance (with the
municipality carried as a named insured), taxes, maintenance and any
other obligations assumed by the organization, and shall hold the
municipality harmless from any liability. The organization shall not be
dissolved and shall not dispose of any common open space or common
property by sale or otherwise, except to an organization conceived and
established to own and maintain such open space or property for the
benefit of such development. Thereafter such organization shall not be
dissolved and shall not dispose of any of its open space or property
without first offering to dedicate the same to the municipality(s)
wherein the land is located.
c. The organization shall be allowed to adjust the pro rata share to meet
changing needs.
d. The organization shall clearly describe in its bylaws all the rights and
obligations of each tenant and owner, including a copy of the covenant,
model deeds, and articles of incorporation of the organization and the
master deed shall state that every tenant and property owner shall have
the right to use all common properties. These shall be set forth as a
condition of approval and shall be submitted prior to the granting of
final approval.
e. The articles of incorporation, covenants, bylaws, model deeds, and
other legal instruments shall insure that control of the organization
shall be transferred to the members based on a percentage of the
dwelling units sold and/or occupied. The legal instruments shall clearly
indicate that in the event such organization shall fail to maintain the
§ 17-87 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-88
AO:427
§ 17-89. LANDSCAPING.
common open space or common property in reasonable order and
condition, the township committee may serve written notice upon such
organization or upon the owners of the development setting forth the
manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the common
open space or common property in reasonable condition. The notice
shall include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured
within 35 days thereof and shall state the date and place of a hearing
thereon which shall be held within 15 days of the notice. At such
hearing, the designated township body or officer, as the case may be,
may modify the terms of the original notice as to deficiencies and may
give a reasonable extension of time, not to exceed 65 days within which
they shall be cured. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice
or in the modification thereof shall not be cured within 35 days or
any permitted extension thereof, the township, in order to preserve the
common open space and common property and maintain the same for
a period of one year, may enter upon and maintain such land. Such
entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the
common open space and common property except when the same is
voluntarily dedicated to the public by the owners. Before the expiration
of the year, the township committee shall upon its initiative or upon the
request of the organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance
of the common open space and common property, call a public hearing
upon 15 days' written notice to such organization and to the owners of
the development, to be held by the township committee. At this hearing
such organization and the owners of the development shall show cause
why such maintenance by the township shall not, at the election of the
township committee, continue for a succeeding year. If the township
committee shall determine that such organization is ready and able
to maintain such open space and property in reasonable condition,
the township shall cease to maintain the open space and property at
the end of the year. If the township committee shall determine such
organization is not ready and able to maintain such open space and
property in a reasonable condition, the township committee may, in its
discretion, have the township continue to maintain the open space and
property during the next succeeding year, subject to a similar hearing
and determination in each year thereafter. The decision of the township
committee shall constitute a final administrative decision subject to
judicial review.
f. The cost of such maintenance by the township shall be assessed pro
rata against the properties within the development that have a right of
enjoyment of the common open space and common property in
accordance with assessed value at the time of imposition of the lien,
and shall become a lien and tax on the properties and be added to and
be a part of the taxes to be levied and assessed thereon, and enforced
and collected with interest by the same officers and in the same manner
as other taxes.
§ 17-88 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-89
AO:428
a. The landscaping plans for any lot occupied by other than a residence or
farm shall be approved by the planning board.
b. On lots occupied by residential uses, that portion of the required front
yard area not occupied by driveway or parking area shall be graded and
covered with grass sod or other ground cover suitable for soil retention
as well as such shrubbery or trees as may be desired by the owner.
c. For all lot occupancies other than residential or farm, that portion of the
property not occupied by structures, parking areas or driveway shall be
landscaped. In areas other than required front yards, adequately
maintained ground cover shall be considered sufficient landscaping.
d. All landscaping shall be properly maintained through the life of any use
on any lot.
e. A landscaped buffer shall be provided which will effectively screen all
parking and loading areas which are used for industrial or commercial
purposes from adjoining residences, and from adjoining vacant
property located in a residential district (whether the adjoining
property is located in the township or in another municipality), and
from all streets. When the proposed location of the parking and loading
areas is at the same elevation as the proposed buffer and the adjoining
residence or property, the buffer shall be at least 25 feet wide, except
that when the parking and loading areas are along a street, the
landscaped area shall be at least 10 feet wide. All buffers along
residential property lines shall be five feet high when planted, and
buffers along streets shall be three feet high. The landscaping shall
consist of evergreen trees with the lowest branches not more than one
foot above the ground, planted in a zigzag pattern not more than six
feet apart, on center. Existing evergreen trees may be utilized as
appropriate. Deciduous trees and shrubs may also be provided. All
buffers shall produce a screen at the time of planting which will
eliminate the glare of vehicle headlights at all seasons of the year. If the
location of the buffer and the area to be screened and the adjoining
residence or property or street are not at the same elevation so the
plantings would not provide an effective screen, the plantings shall be
high enough to provide a screen equivalent to that provided above
where all land is at the same elevation. No screening is necessary if the
ground is high enough to conceal headlights completely between the
area to be screened and the property line. Berms with trees, which are
stabilized by grass or other plantings, may be used to reduce the
required screening height, if the planning board determines that they
are appropriate in a particular case. Buffers shall incorporate the use of
native vegetation.
f. When a commercial or industrial structure (other than parking or
loading areas) is on a lot which adjoins a residence or a vacant property
located in a residential district (whether the adjoining property is
located in the township or another municipality), and the elevations are
such that the structure is or would be visible from the residential
§ 17-89 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-89
AO:429
property line, landscaping shall be provided, along the property line,
at least 25 feet wide. It shall consist of evergreen trees at least five
feet high when planted with the lowest branches not more than one
foot above the ground, planted in a zigzag pattern not more than six
feet apart. Existing evergreen trees may be utilized as appropriate.
Berms with trees, which are stabilized by grass or other plantings, or
alternative locations and types of landscaping, may be provided if the
planning board determines that the alternative would attain the same
or better screening.
g. Plans for screening referred to above shall be prepared by a landscaper
and submitted as part of a site plan, and shall show the specific location
and types of all existing shrubs and trees in the buffer area and all
proposed new ones, with the botanical name and the common name of
each; the height and diameter of each at the time planted (or at the time
of site plan submission, for existing ones) and the projected height and
diameter two years later; the distance between the centers of all shrubs
and trees; and the detailed timetable for planting.
h. Every effort shall be made to preserve existing trees. Construction shall
not encroach upon the drip line of trees.
i. Shade trees shall be placed not more than 50 feet apart along streets in
all developments and subdivisions (five feet to 15 feet within the rightof-
way lines) five to 10 feet outside the street right-of-way line and shall
not interfere with utilities. No shade trees shall be planted within 50
feet of intersecting street right-of-way lines. The planning board shall
grant a waiver to the above only if there are trees growing along such
streets or on abutting property near the street which are in compliance
with or exceed the requirements of this chapter. The subdivider shall
submit shade tree layout plans to the shade tree committee for approval
and recommendations to the Hopewell Township Planning Board. Trees
shall conform to the regulations set forth in Chapter 14 of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Hopewell (1978) "Shade Tree
Advisory Committee Regulations" and shall be of the species or variety
required by the planning board.
j. That portion of a residential development abutting an arterial or
collector street shall either (a) be planted with nursery grown
evergreens and/or deciduous trees along the full length of the
development to a depth of not more than the twenty-five-foot buffer
strip along the right-of-way (section 17-108g) so that in a reasonable
period of time a buffer area will exist between the development and the
highway, or (b) where topography permits, earthen berms may be
created at a sufficient height to establish a buffer between the
development and the highway. They shall be stabilized by ground cover
to prevent soil erosion and shall be planted with evergreens and
deciduous trees according to a landscaping plan so as to be designed to
have no adverse effect on nearby properties. All trees shall be balled
and burlapped nursery stock having a caliper of not less than 2.5 inches
measured three feet above ground level and be of an approved species
§ 17-89 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-89
AO:430
§ 17-90. LIGHTING.58
§ 17-90.1. Outdoor Lighting. [Ord. #03-1297, § 1]
grown under the same climatic conditions as at the location of the
development. They shall be of symmetrical growth, free of insect pests
and disease, suitable for street use, and durable.
k. Preservation of Existing Natural Resources. The subdivision or site plan
shall preserve existing natural resources on the site, and shall preserve
trees, stream corridors, hilltops, open spaces and views whenever
possible.
a. Purpose. The governing body of Hopewell Township does herein find
that regulation of site lighting in Hopewell Township is necessary to
prevent negative impacts caused by misdirected or excessive
illuminance, inappropriate or misaligned light fixtures, glare, light
trespass, and skyglow. Such regulation is necessary to encourage
conservation of energy and to prevent destructive light pollution.
b. All site light fixtures installed and thereafter maintained, other than
those serving one or two family dwellings, shall be full cut-off fixtures as
defined by the IESNA. Full cut-off fixtures shall not have vertical swivel
mounting capability. Exceptions will be considered for the following
situations:
1. Luminaires used to illuminate flags, statues, or other objects
varying in shape that are mounted on a pole, pedestal or platform,
shall be lamped and aimed such that 90% of the beam angle is not
greater than the size of the object illuminated. Luminaires shall be
shielded to minimize direct glare.
(a) For flags that can rotate 360°, the beam angle shall be based
on a circle having a radius equal to the width of the flag at the
height of the flag, unless the flag is greater than 10 feet. Flags
greater than 10 feet shall be illuminated by a beam with a
radius not greater than two-thirds the flag width.
2. Luminaires used for architectural accent and landscape lighting
shall be lamped and aimed such that 100% of the distribution
pattern falls within the illuminated structure. Luminaires shall be
shielded to minimize direct glare.
3. Signage.
(a) Top mounted luminaires are preferred for externally
illuminated signs. Luminaires shall be lamped and aimed such
that 100% of the distribution pattern or beam angle falls on the
face of the sign. Beam angles shall not exceed the size of the
sign. Luminaires shall be shielded to minimize direct glare. In
58.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 00-1171.
§ 17-89 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-90.1
AO:431
§ 17-90.2. Light Trespass. [Ord. #03-1297 § 1]
residential areas, the luminance shall not exceed an average
maintained vertical existence of 10 fL.
(b) When top mounted luminaires are not feasible for good cause
shown, alternate locations may be used provided that the
luminaires are lamped and aimed such that 100% of the
distribution pattern or beam angle falls on the face of the sign.
Beam angles shall not exceed the size of the sign. Luminaires
shall be shielded to minimize direct glare. In residential areas,
the luminance shall not exceed an average maintained vertical
existence of 10 fL.
(c) Internally illuminated signage is permitted only on commercial
properties with frontage on Route 31. The majority of the sign
surface, typically the background, shall be a dark color.
4. Outdoor recreational and sports facilities where it can be
demonstrated that the arrangement of playing surfaces is such that
illumination using full cutoff luminaires would result in poles
located on or dangerously close to playing surfaces, may utilize
semi-cutoff luminaires. Luminaires shall be constructed, located
and aimed such that illumination at grade does not cross any
property line. Lamps shall be shielded from normal viewing angles.
5. Luminaires used within the interior of a parking structure or where
deemed necessary along roadways shall meet cutoff classification
requirements.
c. The use of mercury vapor lamps is prohibited.
d. Outdoor light fixtures for purposes of private usage shall not be
attached or mounted from public property (i.e. public buildings, utility
poles, street lights, road/street signs). Furthermore, these fixtures shall
not tap or extend power from sources servicing public lighting and/or
power devices.
e. Recreational Facilities. All recreational areas which require lighting
shall comply with the standards set forth in section 17-101b.
a. The principle of shielding whenever light trespass will otherwise occur
shall guide the design, installation and maintenance of outdoor lighting
in institutional, commercial and residential installations. All light
fixtures shall further meet the specifications below:
1. For commercial and institutional applications, illuminance from
exterior lighting, facade lighting, landscape lighting, light
emissions through windows caused by interior illumination, and all
other forms, shall not exceed 0.3 footcandles in the vertical plane
at a height of five feet or higher at the property line of any
§ 17-90.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-90.2
AO:432
§ 17-90.3. Illuminance Requirements. [Ord. #03-1297, § 1]
neighboring residential property, and shall not exceed 0.1
footcandles after 10:00 p.m.
2. For one- and two-family dwellings, illuminance from exterior
lighting, facade lighting, and landscape lighting shall not exceed
0.1 footcandles in the vertical plane at a height of five feet or higher
at the property line of any neighboring residential property.
Exceptions may be granted provided these requirements are
adhered to within 30 feet of the dwelling itself.
b. For commercial and institutional applications, interior lighting shall be
controlled automatically to turn off by 10:00 p.m. unless the building is
occupied. Interior luminaires used for emergency illumination are
excluded. Minimal security night lighting shall be allowed to remain on.
Interior ceilings and vertical surfaces within view from exterior of
building shall not be illuminated at night. This provision is designed to
minimize nuisance glare on neighboring residential properties, and
enhance energy conservation. Acceptable exemptions are:
1. Interior display lighting in retail facilities may remain on for
security purposes. The use of minimal required illumination is
encouraged.
c. All outdoor light fixtures that utilize lamps 50 watts or larger shall be
full cutoff as defined by IESNA. The use of minimal illumination is
encouraged.
1. Light fixtures controlled by motion detector switches shall be
exempt.
d. Outdoor light fixtures shall be continually maintained to assure light
distribution compliant with this section and prevent direct view of
lamps from any adjacent residential property.
a. The principle of minimum required illuminance shall guide the design,
installation, and maintenance of all outdoor lighting.
b. Street Lighting. Roadway lighting shall occur at intersections,
roadways with designated bikeways, dangerous areas as may be
determined by the township committee, or in developments with
average densities of two units per acre or greater. All street lighting
shall be photocell controlled, use house-side shielding when adjacent to
residential areas; and utilize shielding or refractive lenses to mitigate
direct lamp glare.
1. The use of low pressure sodium lamps is encouraged. High
pressure sodium lamps may be used as an alternate.
2. Lights shall be located on inside radius of curves in roadways
wherever possible.
§ 17-90.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-90.3
AO:433
§ 17-90.4. Outdoor Lighting Energy Conservation. [Ord. #03-1297,
§ 1]
c. Outdoor Parking Facilities. All parking lot luminaires shall be full cutoff
light fixtures. Use of high pressure sodium lamps in luminaires is
encouraged; in retail applications where security is a large concern,
metal halide lamps may be utilized. Parking facility illumination shall
comply with the following specifications:
1. On-Grade Parking.
(a) Minimum maintained horizontal illuminance at grade shall not
exceed 0.2 footcandles. (0.5 footcandles is acceptable in
commercial zones where unusual security concerns can be
shown.)
(b) Maximum maintained to minimum maintained horizontal
illumination uniformity ratio shall not exceed 20:1. (15:1 ratio
used when minimum maintained illumination at grade is 0.5
footcandles.)
(c) Minimum vertical illumination shall be at least 0.1 footcandles
measured five feet above finished grade at the point of
minimum horizontal illuminance, facing inward along parking
lot perimeter.
2. Parking Structures.
(a) Open roof deck parking shall comply with requirement for ongrade
parking, outlined above.
a. All outdoor lighting, other than that serving one- and two-family
dwellings, shall be turned off through the use of automatic control
devices during nonoperating hours, or by 10:00 p.m., except where it
can be demonstrated that safety or security purposes require
illumination. The following are acceptable exemptions from this
requirement:
1. Operating hours of the facility are past 10:00 p.m., in which case
the lighting shall turn off at the conclusion of business.
2. Exterior retail and merchandise display lighting may remain on
until 10:00 p.m., but shall not remain on after 10:00 p.m. unless the
business is open to the public later than 10:00 p.m., in which case
the lighting shall be turned off at the conclusion of the business
period.
3. Exterior lighting for recreational areas, athletic fields, and courts
shall not remain on after 10:00 p.m. unless athletic or public
activity is in progress. If organized activity warrants lighting of
these facilities after 10:00 p.m., it is the responsibility of the
§ 17-90.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-90.4
AO:434
§ 17-90.5. Evidence of Compliance. [Ord. #03-1297, § 1]
participants to ensure lights are turned off at the conclusion of
activity.
b. Minimal required levels of illumination are to be used in all
applications. All lighting shall be designed, selected and installed both
to prevent negative impacts caused by misdirected or excessive light
and to conserve energy.
a. Evidence of compliance shall include all of the following:
1. Descriptions of all outdoor luminaires, including lamps.
Manufacturer catalog cut sheets for luminaire shall include model
number, dimensioned cross section, optics, angle of cutoff,
shielding, and photometric report prepared by independent testing
lab graphically indicating candela distributions from 0 to 180°
vertically. Adjustable fixtures shall be capable of locking in place to
prevent movement of fixture during relamping. Lamp description
shall include type of lamp source, wattage, clear or coated bulb,
and initial lumens. Lamps used in spotlights or floodlights shall also
include beam angles.
2. Mounting heights and details should be included for all fixtures.
Light pole diameters and dimensioned foundation details shall be
provided.
3. Where horizontal illumination metrics are required, site lighting
plans, to scale, with computer generated maintained footcandle
calculation points on a maximum calculation grid spacing of every
10 feet are to be provided. Plans shall indicate location of all
fixtures, and aiming angles for spot and flood fixtures.
4. Site lighting plans, to scale, with computer generated initial
footcandle calculation points on a maximum calculation grid
spacing of every 10 feet are to be provided. (Initial illumination
calculations may be used to field verify compliance with lighting
requirements at the completion of construction.)
5. Calculation summary shall include minimum, average, and
maximum maintained illumination levels in footcandles, as well as
uniformity ratios as described in subsection 17-90.3. In addition
provide light loss factor used for each fixture type.
6. Adjustable site lighting fixtures shall indicate aiming angles,
distribution patterns, and illumination or existence levels that
illustrate compliance with subsection 17-90.1b1, 2, or 3.
7. Lighting calculations shall be performed by a NCQLP certified LC
professional, unless this requirement creates undue hardship that
can be demonstrated.
§ 17-90.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-90.5
AO:435
§ 17-90.6. Compliance, Monitoring Penalties and Prohibitions.
[Ord. #03-1297, § 1]
§ 17-91. LOTS. [Ord. #00-1155, § 2; Ord. #02-1268, § 1; Ord.
#04-1325, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #05-1352]
b. Once properly installed, fixtures are to be aimed, permanently affixed,
and with written agreement, maintained in the approved position. All
glare shield and cutoff devices shall be maintained.
a. The township may conduct post-installation inspections of lighting
fixtures in order to ensure compliance with ordinance requirements and
intents. Corrective action may be required for any installation that does
not meet ordinance criteria or which causes unacceptable levels of light
trespass, glare or contributions to skyglow.
b. The township may recommend changes in the field that would correct
problem situations, such as re-aiming floodlights, adding appropriate
shielding, decreasing lamp wattage, or replacing equipment.
c. Searchlights or flashing or animated signs are prohibited, other than as
approved by the township committee.
a. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of the
zoning ordinance.
b. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets, and radial to curved streets.
c. Each new lot must front upon an approved and accepted public street at
least 50 feet in width except lots fronting on streets described in section
17-108e. A double frontage lot shall have access only to the street with
the lower street classification.
d. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
e. Each lot shall be graded in a manner to insure that all surface water is
redirected away from buildings and septic fields. Where there is a
question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their intended use due to
factors such as rock formations, flood conditions, exceptional
topography, or other comparable physical circumstances, or if
development of such lot or lots will adversely affect the health, safety,
morals or welfare of the citizens of Hopewell Township, the planning
board may, after adequate investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
Wherever possible, the sideline of a lot shall be located opposite any Tstreet
intersection.
f. Each subdivision shall have access from a road which is within the
township, without having to use a road which is within another
municipality.
§ 17-90.5 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-91
AO:436
g. Flag lots may be permitted in residential zones only so long as variance
relief from the bulk standards of the ordinance are requested and
granted in order to accommodate unique site conditions. The first
priority in designing developments shall be to provide lots with the
required minimum lot width and lot frontage. If flag lots are proposed,
the following minimum standards shall apply:
1. The required frontage on an improved street may be reduced to not
less than 50 feet.
2. The access strip shall have a width at all points of at least 50 feet.
3. The body of the lot, exclusive of the access strip connecting it to the
public road, shall have an area of at least 20 acres in the MRC
District, 10 acres in the VRC District and five acres in all other
residential districts, except that where an area is served by public
sewer service and also meets the exception in paragraph 4(b)
below regarding the 50% set aside, no more than 10% of the total
number of lots may be flag lots whose size, exclusive of the access
lane, may be at least the minimum lot size for that district.
4. The access strip shall be reasonably suited for construction and use
as a private access lane and shall meet the following conditions:
(a) The access lane shall have proper visibility at its intersection
with the public street meeting the same standards as a local
street intersection.
(b) No access lane shall abut another access lane, except that
where at least 50% of the tract being developed is set aside in
wetlands, wetland buffers, or other permanent open space
(public and/or private), no more than two access lanes may
abut one another.
(c) The grade of the access lane shall not exceed the grade
permitted for a secondary local street.
(d) The access lane shall be designed and constructed with proper
drainage and soil erosion control.
5. The proposed subdivision shall not adversely affect the
development of the remainder of the lot or adjoining properties. In
the VRC and MRC Districts, there shall be a 100-foot setback from
the proposed dwelling to any lot line, and a 200-foot setback from
the proposed dwelling to any existing residence.
6. If a flag lot is proposed to be resubdivided so that more than one lot
or use must be served from the original access lane, the owner of
the access lane shall, at his expense, improve it to public street
specifications and provide assurances that there will be continued
access for all persons and uses being served by the access lane.
Such improvements and assurances shall be made prior to the
§ 17-91 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-91
AO:437
§ 17-92. LOWER INCOME HOUSING. [Ord. #93-933; Ord. #94-978,
§ 3; Ord. 95-1009, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #96-1048; Ord. #97-1061; Ord.
#97-1084, § 2; Ord. #99-1155; Ord. #02-1268; Ord. #07-1399 § 2]
approval of the subdivision or site plan, or if no subdivision or site
plan is required, then prior to the issuance of a building permit
for the additional structure or use. This provision shall not apply
to those situations where two or more lots or uses may agree to
use a single access lane as a matter of choice and convenience, but
this exception shall apply only where each of those lot(s) or use(s)
has its own frontage on a public street that is capable of being
improved for proper access and could be used for access if each of
the occupants chose to improve its own access lane.
h. Lots shall be designed to implement "low impact development"
techniques for stormwater management.
a. Purpose. The purposes of this section are to assure a variety of
opportunities to provide lower income housing without undue densities
of development in any one area, yet have sites related to foreseeable
utility services and highway access, as well as site specific advantages
of jobs, open space or other services to a particular site. These
provisions are geared toward providing for the township's fair share of
lower income units. It is intended that all future developments of lands
in the specified districts will be responsible for some portion of the
lower income housing obligation. No less than 20% of the units
proposed in a project, in these required districts shall be lower income
housing.
b. Required Participation.
1. The developer of any land in any R-6, R-5, R-100, or VRC Valley
Resource Conservation District, or any OP, RO-G, SI-OG, SC-G,
HBO-G, or C-1-G Nonresidential District shall have a responsibility
to participate in the production of lower income housing, except
that improvements to agricultural operations and the operations of
extraction industries such as farming shall be exempt.
2. Developers in every zoning district shall pay a fee, if and as
applicable, to the Lower Income Housing Fund in accordance with
Chapter 10, section 10-7c.
3. Subdivision and site plan approval on properties where the actual
construction of lower income housing is required shall be denied
unless the developer complies with the obligation to provide lower
income housing pursuant to this section 17-92, and the approving
authority may impose any reasonable conditions to secure such
undertaking. At least 20% of the units in each development plan
shall be sold or rented at prices qualifying the units as affordable
for lower income households. This ratio may be higher than 20% in
instances where the township's escrow fund is used to reduce
§ 17-91 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-92
AO:438
development costs, or where land costs are either removed from
or are reduced as part of the development costs, or where land
developers participate in the installation of improvements. Each
lower income unit produced within a development shall be limited
to occupancy of households that qualify by virtue of their having
corresponding low and moderate incomes. With the exception of
inclusionary developments constructed pursuant to low income tax
credit regulations, half the lower income units shall be low income
and the other half moderate income. It is the intent of this section
17-92 that the low and moderate income housing units are to be
integrated within the project. To the extent reasonably attainable,
low and moderate income dwelling units shall not be located in a
single cluster and shall be dispersed throughout the development
unless a waiver is granted by the approving authority.
4. Building permits and certificates of occupancy for the low and
moderate income units shall be phased-in as a development
progresses so that the low and moderate income units are built and
occupied proportionately with the market value units of the
development. In order to accomplish this, building permits may be
issued for not more than 25% of the market-level units before
building permits for the lower income units shall be required.
Certificates of occupancy may be issued for not more than 25% of
the market-level units before certificates of occupancy shall be
required for the lower income units. Thereafter, the lower income
units shall be phased in on an accelerated basis as follows:
Min. % of Low/Moderate
Units Completed
(Certificate of Occupancy)
Max. % of Market Units
Completed
(Certified of Occupancy)
0 25
10 25 + 1 unit
50 50 + 1
75 75 + 1
100 90 + 1
5. Growth Area. The manner in which a residential developer shall
participate in the construction of low and moderate income housing
shall be as set forth in the R-5, R-100, R-100-G and VRC districts,
except that the obligation to construct lower income housing units
shall apply only to those sites having enough land area, before
subdivision, capable of producing 40 or more dwelling units. Other
projects shall contribute money to the Lower Income Housing
Fund. The low/moderate income housing participation required in
the OP, RO-G, SI-G, SC-G, HBO-G, and C-1-G districts shall be as set
forth in the applicable zoning districts and paragraph b6 below. In
order to provide reasonable flexibility for minor subdivision
§ 17-92 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-92
AO:439
activity, each tract may have not more than two lots subdivided off
the original tract without the production of lower income housing
provided the lower income housing obligation of those lots is met
by the required payment to the Lower Income Housing Fund as set
forth in Chapter 10, section 10-7c.
6. In OP, RO-G, SI-G, SC-G, HBO-G, and C-1-G nonresidential
developments, the options for participating in the production of
lower income housing shall be to participate in the payment of fees
as set forth in Chapter 10, Section 10-7c. In addition to those fees,
a nonresidential developer may elect to increase the gross floor
area of the development to no more than 10% above the permitted
gross floor area provided that where any portion of all this bonus
floor area is used, the developer does one or more of the following
and provided the maximum permitted lot coverage for building and
paved surfaces is not exceeded. The building heights may be
increased to a maximum of 40 feet and not more than four stories in
order to achieve additional square footage.
(a) On tracts of 50 acres or more, dedication of at least five acres,
but a maximum of either 20 acres or 20% of the tract,
whichever is greater, to either the township or an entity
responsible for residential development. The dedication shall
be at no cost and therefore land costs shall not be a factor in
the resulting production of housing on that land. As part of the
development of the nonresidential project, if water and sewer
services are not already available to the residential portion
being dedicated, the water and sewer service being developed
for the nonresidential project shall be extended to the
residential site. In exchange for the dedication of land and the
provision of water and sewer service, the nonresidential
developer may take credit for the land dedicated to housing
when calculating the permitted amount of gross floor area and
the percentage of lot coverage allowed on the nonresidential
portion of the tract. However, this option may not be used if the
dedicated acreage, in the opinion of the approving authority, is
inappropriate for housing by virtue of such conditions as, but
not limited to, soil conditions, lot configuration, improper
access and/or insurmountable nuisances from the proposed
nonresidential use(s), or other nearby uses; or
(b) Pay the cost per square foot of bonus floor area as set forth in
Chapter 10, Fees and Permits, section 10-7c(4); or
(c) In lieu of cash contributions outlined above, the developer may
contribute the installation of infrastructure to serve lower
income housing projects such as completed road access, site
grading, curbs, storm water systems, water and sewer service,
and similar site work. The value of the infrastructure shall be
equal to the cash contribution outlined in paragraph b6(b)
§ 17-92 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-92
AO:440
above in exchange for which the gross floor area and building
height may be increased as set forth in paragraph b6(b) above.
7. In order to prevent the bonus residential densities and the
additional floor area in nonresidential districts from inflating land
costs that might be passed on to a third party and thereby
jeopardizing the number of lower income units that might be built
when the intent of the bonuses is to subsidize the development of
lower income housing, no application providing for increased
intensities of development shall be approved unless the approving
authority resolution granting approval contains a condition that the
requirements for low and/or moderate income housing units shall
be binding upon the applicant and all heirs, successors and assigns
and such condition is included as a notice in the deed(s) and
property(ies).
8. All nonresidential developers, except houses of worship, shall pay
one or more of the following fees to the Lower Income Housing
Fund as set forth below.
(a) The basic fee as set forth in accordance with Chapter 10,
section 10-7c.
(b) The cost per square foot of bonus area as set forth in Chapter
10, Fees and Permits, section 10-7c(4) for those developers
using any bonus area permitted in that zoning district.
(c) The amount and timing of payments of cash contributions shall
be as set forth in Chapter 10, section 10-7c.
c. Monitoring Costs of Lower Income Housing.
1. Each development project containing lower income housing shall
include in its application, assurances that purchasers and renters
of lower income housing shall be required to qualify by income for
the low or moderate income dwelling unit they intend to occupy
and that subsequent purchasers or renters shall also qualify by
income, adjusted for the date of the subsequent transaction, in
accordance with Article XIII of this chapter.
2. The period of affordability for controlling the qualifying income of
purchasers and renters, and for controlling subsequent sales prices
and rent levels of a unit, shall be 30 years from the date of the
initial certificate of occupancy for the unit, except that said period
shall be 40 years for non-profit and limited-profit housing
developments approved in accordance with section 17-159c1.
3. No lower income housing unit shall, during these periods, be
occupied unless a certificate of eligibility is issued in accordance
with subsection 17-217.4 of this chapter.
§ 17-92 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-92
AO:441
4. In addition to the above, all lower income housing units shall be
subject to all of the provisions governing Affordable Housing
contained in Article XIII of this chapter.
d. Bulk and Design Requirements. The total number of units of any kind
allowed in a housing development containing lower income housing
units will depend on the gross density as noted in paragraph e below.
The design of housing within that portion of the tract devoted to
housing shall be as follows:
1. Rental Units. Each applicant shall provide data on the current
status of the Township's Affordable Housing Program and the
percentage of low and moderate income units that are, or have
approval to be, occupied by renters. To the extent the rental units
that are occupied, under construction, or have final plat approval
compared with the minimum requirement for rental units
established by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing,
requests for rental units may either be denied (in whole or in part),
or inclusionary developments proposing sales units may be
required to provide rental units (in whole or in part).
2. Bedroom Distribution.
Minimum Maximum
Efficiency and 1-bedroom units
combined
10% 20%
2-bedroom units 30% N/A
3-bedroom units 20% N/A
NOTE 1: With the exception of inclusionary developments
constructed pursuant to low income tax credit regulations, at
least one-third of all units in each bedroom distribution shall be
affordable to low income households.
NOTE 2: The number of people in a household and the unit size
they may occupy shall be as follows:
Efficiency unit - 1 person only.
1-bedroom-half the units for one person; half for 2 people.
2-bedroom-half the units for 2 people; half for 3 people.
3-bedroom-half the units for 4 people; half for 5 people.
3. The design of housing within that portion of the tract devoted to
housing shall be as follows. All development designed in
accordance with the following standards shall require public water
and public sanitary sewer services.
§ 17-92 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-92
AO:442
Non-Profit & Limited
Profit Low/Moderate
Income Housing Per
Section 17-159c1
Standard
Atrium
Patio,
Townhouses,
Duplexes &
Quadplexes
Garden
Apts.
Detached
Single
Family
Detached
Single
Family Age
55+ Per
Note 7 Age 62+ All Other
Min. Lot Size
Overall
Tract
(See Note 1) 5 ac. 5 ac.
Individual
Units
(See Note 1) n.a. 7,000 square
feet
6,600 square
feet
(See Note 1)
Min. Lot
Width/Unit
(See Note 1) n.a. 70 feet6 60 feet (See Note 1)
Min. Lot
Depth/Unit
(See Note 1) n.a. 100 feet 110 feet (See Note 1)
Min. Track
Width/Depth
200 feet 400 feet n.a. n.a. 400 feet 400 feet
Min.
Perimeter
Setback of
Buildings
50 feet2 85 feet n.a. n.a. 50 feet2 100 feet2
Min. Front
Yard
20 feet2 20 feet 30 feet Note 7 50 feet2 100 feet2
Min. Side
Yard
20 feet2,3 20 feet 10 feet6 Note 7 50 feet2,3 100 feet2,3
Min. Rear
Yard
25 feet2 25 feet 25 feet 20 feet 50 feet2 100 feet2
Max. Bldg.
Height
35 feet4 and
2-sty.
35 feet4 and
3-sty.
35 feet4 35 feet4 40 feet4 35 feet5
Max. Lot
Coverage
30%5 22%5 35% Note 7 35%5 35%5
Min. Off-
Street
Parking
2/unit 2/unit 2/unit 2/unit 0.5/unit See section
17-95
NOTE 1: Townhouses, atrium and patio units: Minimum lot width 20 feet. Duplex units: Minimums at 80
feet by 100 feet equals 8,000 square feet/duplex; where the overall lot may be subdivided, the minimum
lot width for one of the units shall be 30 feet. Quadplex: Minimums at 100 feet by 150 feet equals 15,000
square feet/quadplex; where the overall lot may be subdivided so each dwelling unit is on a separate lot,
the minimum lot width for any unit shall be 20 feet.
NOTE 2: The minimum setback from any interior parking lot shall be 15 feet.
NOTE 3: For townhouses, the side yards for attached units is zero feet.
§ 17-92 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-92
AO:443
NOTE 4: Any development located in an airport hazard zone shall be limited to such lower height as
required in an airport hazard area. The maximum height allowed shall be dependent on the distance of
the structure or tree from the side or the end of the runway and shall be limited in height as defined in
section 17-159d8.
NOTE 5: The maximum lot coverage is for the entire townhouse and apartment complex.
NOTE 6: Lot size averaging shall be permitted for detached single family lots. The average lot width and
lot frontage throughout the tract shall be at least 70 feet, but the minimum lot width and frontage shall
be 50 feet. No more than half the number of lots in the development may be less than 70 feet in width
and/or frontage. No lot shall be less than 7,000 square feet in area in any event. Developments may offset
homes to one side of the lot provided the minimum distance between principal buildings on adjacent lots
remains at least 20 feet. Where a principal building is offset to one side of the lot, the minimum side
yard on the side shall be one foot provided: (a) the adjacent lot provides an access easement for access
to the offset home for maintenance and repair. This easement shall encroach on the adjacent lot such
distance as is necessary to assure a distance of 12 feet from the walls and corners of the offset home; (b)
the easement shall prohibit structures and plantings whose location and height would impede access to
either the easement or the adjacent home; and (c) the opposite side yard of the offset home is increased
to at least 19 feet.
NOTE 7: Developments for age-restricted single family home lots shall be required to contain at least
100 dwelling units and to impose a deed restriction limiting occupancy to at least one person being 55
years of age or older and prohibiting children under the age of 19. The zoning requirements shall include
a front yard setback that shall be greater of either 20 feet from the street right-of-way or 23 feet from
the nearest sidewalk, or, if there is no sidewalk, from the curb. The side yard shall provide a minimum
distance between principal buildings on adjacent lots of at least 18 feet, except that where the principal
buildings on a lot is off-set to one side creating a minimum side yard less than 10 feet, but in any event
not less than five feet, there shall be an access easement on the adjacent lot unobstructed by plantings,
fences, and other structures or impediments so that the offset home has an unobstructed distance of
at least 12 feet from the walls and corners of the offset home. Individual lots may have a maximum lot
coverage of 50% provided the total maximum coverage within the area of the entire development does
not exceed 35%.
e. Maximum Gross Density and Density Bonuses. In order to achieve the
development of lower income housing, density bonuses are provided in
those districts designated with the suffix "G." Said bonus densities shall
be applicable for the sole purpose of providing opportunities to
construct, rehabilitate or otherwise provide for lower income housing.
The base density in a given district has had additional density added so
as to bring the density in each district up to the maximum number of
dwelling units/acre of all types as noted below:
Zoning District
Max. Density
(Units/Acre)
R-5 5 units/acre1
R-100-G See section 17-159
VRC See section 17-160
C-1-G See section 17-161
§ 17-92 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-92
AO:444
Zoning District
Max. Density
(Units/Acre)
SC-G See section 17-162
HBO-G See section 17-163
SI-G See section 17-165
OP See section 17-166
RO-G See section 17-168
NOTE 1: See section 17-159d1 for government sponsored and
subsidized projects.
NOTE 2: Notwithstanding the maximum density (units/acre), maximum
floor area ratio, and other design controls set forth above, the
maximum intensity of development permitted on those lots not
connected to public sewage collection and public sewage treatment
systems and/or not located in a designated sewer service area as
shown on the Hopewell Township Wastewater Management Plan shall
be the smaller of either the maximum development permitted by
ordinance or the amount of development which would generate a
design influent sewage flow of less than 2,000 gallons per day, as
determined in accordance with the prevailing design standards and
policies of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
f. Design Density. (The density of units on that portion of the tract devoted
to the housing type noted. The maximum "gross density" for the entire
tract shall be as set forth in paragraph e above.)
Detached Single Family 5.0/acre
Townhouses 10.0/acre
Duplexes 10.0/acre
Quadplexes 12.0/acre
Garden Apts. 15.0/acre
g. Certificate of Occupancy. (See paragraph c above.)
h. Waivers for Lower Income Housing. The approving authority, when
acting upon an application which includes provisions for lower income
housing, may waive those portions of the following standards if they do
not create health and safety concerns for either the township or the
future residents of a development, and provided the waiver(s) reduce
construction costs, the savings therefrom to be passed on to buyers and
renters of the lower income housing in the form of reduced housing
costs, otherwise the standard requirements for the following shall
apply.
1. Curbs and gutters may be waived except in locations where
drainage control and/or erosion control are necessary. When curbs
§ 17-92 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-92
AO:445
and/or gutters are required, they shall conform to section 17-81a
and b.
2. Piped storm water systems may be waived with swales substituted,
except piped storm drain systems may still be required in situations
where swales are likely to increase erosion control problems and in
those portions of a development where design densities are greater
than five units per acre. If used, swales shall have a bottom
elevation that will allow any water under the roadway or parking
lot to seep out and drain away, have side slopes no steeper than
three horizontal to one vertical, have a flat four-foot wide bottom,
be planted to stabilize the soils along the sides and bottom
according to the soil types, have capacity for the computed runoff,
be sloped to handle the rate of runoff while not eroding the soil, and
allow a design flow of at least 0.5 foot per second, but not more
than two feet per second. Street and/or driveway intersections
shall be crowned to assure positive drainage into the swales.
Where pipes are installed at street/driveway crossings or other
required locations, the pipes shall be continuations of the swales.
3. Street and other lighting shall be designed for locations best
meeting overall public safety considerations considering
intersections, public parking areas, walkways, and the intensity of
development. Where installed, lighting shall meet the requirements
and/or objectives of section 17-90.
4. Off-street parking designs may have waivers of some, but not all
landscaping requirements, and may not be required to install
curbing around all parking lots. Curbing will be required, however,
where drainage control is needed and where erosion potential
cannot adequately be addressed by alternate methods.
5. Shade tree plantings and landscaping may be reduced, but not
eliminated, as called for in section 17-89.
6. Sidewalks shall be installed in locations determined by the
approving authority to be in the interest of public safety and proper
pedestrian circulation. Sidewalks need not follow all streets and in
some instances may be better to follow open space corridors. The
determination of whether sidewalks are needed and where they are
best located shall be based on public safety considering the
intensity of development, the probable volume of pedestrian traffic,
the adjoining street classification where sidewalks parallel streets,
access to school bus stops, recreation areas, and the general type
of improvement intended. If required, sidewalks shall meet the
requirements of section 17-104.
7. Local street paving widths may be reduced to less than 30 feet (but
not less than 26 feet) provided such reductions are done only in
conjunction with nearby, expanded off-street parking spaces.
Within each right-of-way, paving widths may vary depending on the
§ 17-92 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-92
AO:446
§ 17-93. MODIFICATION OF LOT AREAS AND OTHER
RESTRICTIONS. [Ord. No. 05-1352]
In reviewing subdivisions, the planning board shall encourage the use of
cluster designs and planned developments (sections 17-79 and 17-98) to
enable greater variety and flexibility in lot designs, promote groundwater
recharge and water quality, promote economy, protect environmental
factors and increase the availability of open space, without increasing
overall population density or intensity of land use.
The planning board shall not approve any cluster design or planned
development unless it complies with the provisions of sections 17-79 and
17-98 and serves one or more of the purposes indicated above and is
consistent with the provisions for public facilities, open space and other
pertinent elements of the master plan. The planning board shall determine
the number of lots which could actually be approved in a conventional
subdivision for the site, and shall not permit more than that number of lots
under this section.
§ 17-94. NONUNIFORMITY OF BUILDINGS.
The subdivision or site plan shall include assurances that Chapter 11,
Building and Housing, of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township
of Hopewell (1978) will be complied with.
§ 17-95. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING. [Ord. 96-1048, § 1;
Ord. #05-1352]
number of units served, whether a street is curbed, and whether
on-street parking is permitted. The options for paving widths shall
be as set forth in section 17-108 and shall be a determination of the
approving authority.
8. The township shall provide expeditious treatment for applications
containing lower income housing units.
a. Developments shall provide for safe and efficient vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, parking and loading, and shall meet the
following specific standards and requirements. No required parking
facilities, loading areas or passageways shall be located within the
required front, side or rear setback lines of any lot located within a
residential district, except as otherwise provided by this chapter.
b. Parking facilities, loading areas or passageways in industrial or
commercial districts may be located within any of the required yard
areas, provided that none of the same are within 25 feet of the street
line nor within five feet of adjacent property lines. In the event that any
subject property abuts a residential district, no such parking facilities,
loading areas, or passageways shall be located within 25 feet of the
district boundary and sufficient landscape screening, as described in
§ 17-92 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-95
AO:447
section 17-89 shall be installed to preclude the transmission of
headlight glare across such district boundary.
c. No loading area or service facility for the handling of freight may face
any street frontage nor be located on the side of the subject property
which abuts a residential district, without an approved landscape or
topographical buffer.
d. Off-street parking spaces shall be either nine or 10 feet wide,1 except
spaces serving retail uses shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide. Parking
spaces shall be a minimum of 20 feet in length1 in accordance with the
following schedule. In parking lots containing more than 10 spaces, a
minimum of one space shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide; and for
parking lots with more than 50 spaces, 1% of all spaces, but not less
than two spaces nor more than 10 spaces, shall be 12 feet wide. These
wider spaces shall be located in areas conveniently related to major
entrances and designated as parking for the handicapped. They shall be
located so that access does not require wheeling or walking behind
parked cars.
Spaces 9 Feet Wide
Aisle Widths for Parking Spaces
Angle of 10 Feet Wide
Parking Space One-Way Aisle Two-Way Aisle One-Way Aisle Two-Way Aisle
90° 25 feet 25 feet 24 feet 24 feet
60° 20 feet 22 feet 18 feet 20 feet
45° 18 feet 20 feet 15 feet 18 feet
30° 15 feet 18 feet 12 feet 18 feet
Parallel 12 feet 18 feet 12 feet 18 feet
*In an effort to reduce paving costs and reduce the amount of paving to assist in storm water
runoff control, the planning board may approve parking plans associated with nonresidential
uses where specially designated and separate parking areas may be set aside for "compact car"
parking areas provided such spaces shall be limited to employee parking and each area for
"compact cars" shall have at least 30 spaces. The "compact car" spaces shall be 8 1/2 feet by 16
feet with aisles reduced to 90% of the dimensions shown above. The number of parking spaces
which may be approved for "compact cars" shall be a determination of the planning board based
upon documentation by the applicant and any data submitted by others.
e. Off-street loading spaces shall have 15 feet of vertical clearance and be
designed in accordance with the following schedule:
Loading Space Apron/Aisle Length
Length Width 90° 60°
60 feet 10 feet 72 feet 66 feet
60 feet 12 feet 63 feet 57 feet
60 feet 14 feet 60 feet 54 feet
§ 17-95 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-95
AO:448
f. All parking facilities and all loading areas which either singly, or in
combination, provide for more than six parking or loading spaces shall
be so located and screened that they cannot be seen from any location
within a residential district other than the lot upon which such facilities
are situate and all loading areas shall be considered as one unless
separated by more than 100 feet.
g. All parking facilities and loading areas, which, either singly or in
combination, contain more than 9,000 square feet shall have curbed,
landscaped islands located within the perimeters of the surfaced area
except as waived in lower income housing developments as permitted
in section 17-92. Where stormwater management strategies requiring
the provision of other equivalent methods of controlling drainage and
defining the edge of paving, protecting the edge of paving from
chipping, and preventing vehicles from encroaching on parking/loading
areas can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the planning board
with the advice of its engineer, curbing may be waived in whole or in
part.
h. Except as may be waived and modified in lower income housing
developments under section 17-92, off-street parking areas containing
10 or more spaces and all off-street loading areas shall have concrete or
Belgium block curbing around the perimeter of the parking and loading
areas and along major interior driveways, with appropriate ramps for
wheelchairs and bicycles. Where stormwater management strategies
require the provision of other equivalent methods of controlling
drainage and defining the edge of paving, protecting the edge of paving
from chipping, and preventing vehicles from encroaching on
nonparking/loading areas can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
planning board with the advice of its engineer, curbing may be waived
in whole or in part. Concrete wheel blocks shall be installed where
necessary to protect adjoining walls, trees, shrubs, sidewalks and other
facilities.
i. Appropriate areas for pick-up of trash and garbage shall be provided,
separate from and in addition to loading areas. If outside a building,
suitable enclosed containers shall be provided which shall be screened
at all times from view from parking areas, streets and adjacent resident
areas or uses.
j. Minimum Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. The minimum
number of off-street parking spaces including required spaces for the
handicapped, and the minimum number of off-street loading spaces
depends on the particular use of the parcel.
The following minimum requirements shall be met: in the case of
uses not listed, the amount of parking and loading spaces shall be
determined by the planning board on the basis of similar uses and the
anticipated actual requirements for the particular use. Sufficient offstreet
parking facilities shall be provided to preclude on-street parking
of any vehicles of employees or customers or visitors of any
§ 17-95 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-95
AO:449
nonresidential structure, and to preclude on-street parking of any
vehicles of residents of residential buildings.
Where either a proposed building or the proposed use of a tract consists
of more than one use, each use with different parking requirements,
or where the building design is such that it could be converted to
a use requiring a higher parking ratio, the site plan shall either: (a)
show an off-street parking design with a sufficient number of parking
spaces to accommodate the use requiring the most number of spaces;
or (b) include as a deed restriction a requirement that either the owneroccupied
or tenant-occupied space, together with the type uses and
the proportion of uses within either a building or on the lot, shall not
change from the uses and layout approved on the site plan unless a
revised site plan is submitted and approved (see also section 17-15
regarding certificates of occupancy). Where the developer proposes to
construct less parking than would be required for the use requiring the
most parking spaces, the plan shall show where any additional spaces
can be located in the event additional parking is needed. In the event
the use changes and additional parking is required, or observation
by the township engineer reveals additional parking is required, the
township may require the owner to construct some or all of the
additional parking in accordance with the approved plan. The plan and
the deed to the property shall indicate that the township may require
the expanded parking under either of these circumstances.
Minimum Off-Street Loading
Gross Floor Area/(GFA) in Square Feet
Use
Minimum Off-
Street Parking
Spaces6 Min. No. Spaces
At which 1st
Berth Req'd
No. Add'l Square
Feet for Each
Add'l Berth
Agricultural uses None required 0 — —
Assembly Plant 1 space/800
square feet GFA
(See footnote 4)
1 5,000 40,000
Bowling Alley 2 spaces/lane or
alley
1 10,000 100,000
Car Dealer (new) 1 space/300
square feet show
room area and
sales office
1 10,000 40,000
Car Wash 10 spaces/washing
land
1 — —
Cemetery None required 1 — —
§ 17-95 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-95
AO:450
Minimum Off-Street Loading
Gross Floor Area/(GFA) in Square Feet
Use
Minimum Off-
Street Parking
Spaces6 Min. No. Spaces
At which 1st
Berth Req'd
No. Add'l Square
Feet for Each
Add'l Berth
Child Care (6+
children)
The larger of
either 3 spaces/
teacher, or 0.25
space/student
based on the
State's approved
capacity,
whichever is
greater
4 No add'l spaces required
Church 1 space/5 seats 0 — —
Day Care Same as Child
Care
§ 17-95 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-95
AO:451
Minimum Off-Street Loading
Gross Floor Area/(GFA) in Square Feet
Use
Minimum Off-
Street Parking
Spaces6 Min. No. Spaces
At which 1st
Berth Req'd
No. Add'l Square
Feet for Each
Add'l Berth
Dwellings 2 spaces for each
detached single
family dwelling.
Single family
dwellings with
front yards of less
than 40 feet shall
have double width
driveways at least
18 feet wide for at
least a length of
30 feet measured
from that end of
the driveway
closest to the
dwelling. For
apartment and
townhouse
developments, the
minimum offstreet
parking
shall be based on
1.5 spaces per
1-bedroom unit,
1.75 spaces per
1-bedroom unit
with a den and all
2-bedroom units,
and 2.0 spaces per
3-bedroom unit.
(See footnote 5)
0 — —
Fabrication 1 space/800
square feet GFA
(See footnote 4)
1 5,000 40,000
Family Day Care
Home
Same as
"Dwelling"
2 No add'l spaces required
Fast Food
Restaurant
1 space/3 seats
plus 1 space/40
square feet GFA
excluding the
seating area
0 — —
§ 17-95 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-95
AO:452
Minimum Off-Street Loading
Gross Floor Area/(GFA) in Square Feet
Use
Minimum Off-
Street Parking
Spaces6 Min. No. Spaces
At which 1st
Berth Req'd
No. Add'l Square
Feet for Each
Add'l Berth
Farm Stand or
Farm Market
Min. 6 spaces 1 10,000 N.A.
Fiduciary Inst. 1 space/250
square feet GFA
0 10,000 100,000
Financial Inst. 1 space/250
square feet GFA
0 10,000 100,000
Golf Course 4 spaces/green 1 — —
Golf Driving
Range
1.2 spaces/tee 0 — —
Gymnasium 1 space/6 seats in
auditorium or 1
space/1,000
square feet
whichever is
greater
0 — —
Home Occupation Min. 3 spaces (See
footnote 1)
0 — —
Hospital 1.5 spaces/bed 1 10,000 100,000
Library 1 space/300
square feet GFA
0 10,000 100,000
Lumber and
Contractor Yard
1 space/5,000
square feet
storage area and
1,250 square feet
retail GFA
1 10,000 30,000
Manufacturing 1 space/800
square feet GFA
(See footnote 4)
1 5,000 40,000
Medical Clinic Min. 10; 1 space/
150 square feet
GFA (See footnote
4)
1 10,000 40,000
Mortuary Min. 25; 15
spaces/viewing
room and chapel
0 — —
Motel 1.1 space/unit 1 10,000 100,000
Night Club 1 space/4 seats 1 10,000 25,000
§ 17-95 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-95
AO:453
Minimum Off-Street Loading
Gross Floor Area/(GFA) in Square Feet
Use
Minimum Off-
Street Parking
Spaces6 Min. No. Spaces
At which 1st
Berth Req'd
No. Add'l Square
Feet for Each
Add'l Berth
Nursery Min. 10; 3 spaces/
1,000 square feet
GFA + space/
1,000 square feet
outside display
area
1 — —
Nursery School Same as Child
Care
Office Building/
Office
1 space/250
square feet GFA
(See footnote 4)
1 10,000 100,000
Park None Required 0 — —
Parish House 2 spaces 0 — —
Playground None Required 0 — —
Professional
Offices
1 space/250
square feet GFA
0 10,000 40,000
Pro Shop 1 space/300
square feet GFA
1 10,000 —
Research/Design/
Development/
Experimental
1 space/800
square feet GFA
(See footnote 4)
1 5,000 40,000
Restaurant (See
also Fast Food
Restaurant)
1 space/3 seats 1 10,000 25,000
Retail Sales 1 space/150
square feet GFA
(2)
1 10,000 20,000
Schools (See footnote 3) 1 — —
Senior Citizens 1 space/3 units 0 (Per site plan review)
Service Station 4 spaces/bay and
work area
0 — —
Shopping Center
Up to 705,880
square feet GFA
4.5 spaces/1,000
square feet GFA
1 10,000 40,000
705,880 square
feet or more
5.0 spaces/1,000
square feet GFA
§ 17-95 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-95
AO:454
Minimum Off-Street Loading
Gross Floor Area/(GFA) in Square Feet
Use
Minimum Off-
Street Parking
Spaces6 Min. No. Spaces
At which 1st
Berth Req'd
No. Add'l Square
Feet for Each
Add'l Berth
Sunday School None Required 0 — —
Swimming Pool
(Community)
1 space/15 square
feet water surface
0 — —
Tennis Courts 3 spaces/courts 0 — —
Theater 1 space/4 seats
and sales office
1 10,000 40,000
Utility Min. 10; add'l per
site plan review of
use
0 — —
Veterinary
Hospital
6 spaces/doctor 1 — —
Warehouse 1 space/5,000
square feet GFA
1 5,000 40,000
FOOTNOTES pertaining to minimum off-street parking and loading schedule on immediately
preceding pages
GFA = GROSS FLOOR AREA
Note 1. For physicians and dentists, a minimum of 6 spaces, but not less than 3 spaces per examination
room or dental chair, or 1 space/150 square feet GFA, whichever is larger
Note 2. Where 5 or more stores are on 1 tract with common parking and access facilities, the parking
may be computed at 5.5 spaces/1,000 square feet GFA. In addition, a maximum of 20% of the GFA can be
office use without additional parking for the office use except a medical clinic shall be excluded from this
exemption. Office use above 20% shall require parking at the appropriate office rate
Note 3. School:
Elementary: 1.2 spaces/classroom; minimum 1/teacher and staff
Secondary: 2.0 spaces/classroom; minimum 2/teacher and staff
Note 4. Where a use is on a tract of 100 or more acres with the parking and loading spaces located at
least 300 feet from a public street, the planning board may waive or reduce the minimum requirements if
it determines that adequate parking/loading is being provided and that feasible expansion of the parking/
loading areas is shown on the plat in the event additional facilities are needed
Note 5. Where apartments or townhouses have assigned parking spaces per unit, e.g. garages, driveways
to each unit, or some other design that restricts or tends to restrict parking spaces to particular units,
an additional 0.5 space per dwelling unit shall be required in unassigned spaces to serve visitors. Such
unassigned spaces shall be dispersed throughout the project in convenient locations in groups of 5 or
more spaces.
§ 17-95 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-95
AO:455
FOOTNOTES pertaining to minimum off-street parking and loading schedule on immediately
preceding pages
Note 6. In parking lots containing more than 10 spaces at least 1 space shall be designated for
handicapped persons, and in parking lots containing more than 100 spaces, 1% of the spaces (but
not more than a total of 10) shall be designated for handicapped persons. The spaces designated for
handicapped persons shall be located as near as practical to an appropriate entrance to the facility.
k. Drainage. All parking and loading areas shall have drainage facilities
installed in accordance with good engineering practice and in
accordance with the "drainage" provisions of section 17-82. The design
of all drainage for parking facilities shall address water quality, flooding
and groundwater recharge and shall incorporate the use of
nonstructural stormwater management strategies to the maximum
extent practicable. All parking and loading areas shall be designed to
minimize impervious surfaces by use of permeable materials where
appropriate, and use of multi-level parking where appropriate. Where
sub-base conditions are wet, springy, or of such nature that surfacing
would be inadvisable without first treating the sub-base, these areas
shall be excavated to a depth of at least 12 inches below the proposed
sub-grade and filled with a suitable sub-base material. Where required,
a system of porous concrete pipe, sub-surface drains shall be
constructed beneath the surface of the paving and connected to a
suitable drain. After the sub-base material has been properly placed
and compacted, the parking area surfacing material shall be applied.
l. All required driveways, passageways, off-street parking facilities and
loading areas shall be located on the same lot as the structure or use
which they are designed to serve and shall be readily accessible
thereto. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, where more than
one use exists on the same lot, the total passageways, parking facilities,
loading areas and the capacity of the driveways shall be the sum of the
requirements for each individual use.
m. All driveways, passageways, off-street parking facilities and loading
areas shall be so designed, constructed and maintained as to permit
free access and allow vehicles to enter, to leave and to turn within such
places in a safe and orderly manner and without disrupting or causing
hazard to the flow of traffic in any public right-of-way. No such
driveway, passageways, off-street parking facilities or loading areas
shall be encroached upon, reduced in any manner, or devoted to any
other use.
n. In any case where special conditions exist respecting the proposed use
of a particular lot or contiguous lots, the immediate development of all
driveways, passageways, parking facilities and loading zones will not be
required if the applicant demonstrates:
1. That appropriate areas are reserved for the possible future
construction of all such facilities;
§ 17-95 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-95
AO:456
§ 17-96. OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS. [Ord. #05-1352]
As a condition of final subdivision or site plan approval, the planning board
shall require an applicant to pay his pro rata share of the cost of providing
reasonable and necessary street improvements and water, sewerage and
drainage facilities, and easements and rights-of-way therefor, located
outside the property limits of the development but necessitated or required
by construction or improvements within such development. The off-tract
improvements for which the applicant must contribute shall be based on
the circulation plan and the utility service plan elements of the master plan
and/or other major development proposals/applications having significant
impact at the point of consideration.
2. That the required number of parking facilities or loading areas
would be greatly in excess of any immediate or reasonably to be
anticipated need therefor;
3. That the probable time of maximum use of such parking facilities or
loading areas will be such as to make the sharing of such facilities
feasible;
4. That the location and capacity of both future and proposed
passageways, parking facilities and loading areas is such that the
joint use of driveways will not disrupt or cause hazard to the flow of
traffic at or neat their entrance onto a public right-of-way; and
5. Such joint use as is proposed is protected by recorded easements.
o. In general, except for lots containing one-family houses, all driveways,
parking and loading areas and other off-street traffic facilities shall be
paved. Areas likely to experience relatively heavy use shall be paved
with at least four inches of compacted base course of plant-mixed
bituminous stabilized base course constructed in layers not more than
two inches compacted thickness, or equivalent, and a minimum twoinch
thick compacted wearing surface of bituminous concrete (FABC),
or equivalent. All construction shall comply with the Standard
Specifications of the New Jersey Department of Transportation.
a. Improvements to be Constructed at the Sole Expense of the Developer.
In cases where the reasonable and necessary need for an off-tract
improvement or improvements is necessitated or required by the
proposed development application and where no other property owners
receive a benefit thereby, the applicant may be required, as a condition
of approval, at the applicant's sole expense, to provide for and construct
such improvements as if such were an on-tract improvement in the
manner provided hereafter and otherwise provided by law, including
performance and maintenance guarantees.
b. Other Improvements. In cases where the need for any off-tract
improvement is necessitated by the proposed development application
and where it is determined that properties outside of the development
§ 17-95 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-96
AO:457
will also benefit by the improvement, then the applicant shall pay his
proportionate or pro rata share of the costs of such improvements. The
planning board shall be guided by the following factors in determining
such share:
1. Streets: Including street widening, alignment, corrections,
channelization of intersections, construction of barriers, new or
improved traffic signalization, signs, curbs and gutters, sidewalks,
trees, streets lights, and related drainage and utility improvements
not covered elsewhere, the construction of new streets and other
similar street or traffic improvements: The applicant's
proportionate cost factor shall be the ratio of the estimated future
peak-hour traffic generated by the proposed development to the
total estimated future peak-hour traffic on the route or at the
location under consideration. The product of this ratio times the
sum of the design, acquisition, legal and construction costs shall be
the applicant's pro rata share for the improvement. 10% of the total
cost shall be added thereto and paid to the township to help defray
legal, engineering and other professional review and
administrative costs. For design purposes a level of service "B"
shall be used for estimating future peak hour traffic.
2. Water Distribution Facilities: As required by the franchised water
supplier plus 10% to help defray legal, engineering and other
professional review and administrative costs.
3. Stormwater and Drainage Improvements: Including the
installation, relocation or replacement of storm sewers, culverts,
bridges, catch basins, detention and retention ponds and the
installation, relocation or replacement of other appurtenances
associated therewith: The applicant's proportionate cost factor
shall be the ratio of the estimated peak surface runoff as generated
by the development to the total estimated future peak surface
runoff from the watershed as measured in cubic feet per second at
the location under consideration. The product of this ratio times
the sum of the design, acquisition, legal and construction cost shall
be the applicant's pro rata share for the improvement. 10% of the
total cost shall be added thereto and paid to the township to help
defray legal, engineering and other professional review and
administrative costs. Peak flow shall be determined in accordance
with the drainage design standards of the Land Use and
Development Ordinance with the total watershed area being the
design drainage area.
4. Sanitary Sewer Facilities: As required by the relevant franchised
sewer company, municipal authority, or government operating the
sewer system, plus 10% to help defray legal, engineering and other
professional review and administrative costs.
c. Performance Guarantee and Developers Agreement. In instances where
the developer is to construct improvements set forth under paragraphs
§ 17-96 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-96
AO:458
§ 17-97. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
a and b above, the developer shall post with the township a
performance guarantee in an amount equal to 120% of the estimated
cost of the improvement and enter into a developer's agreement with
the township committee concerning said improvements.
d. Cash Payment. Instances where the township is to construct said
improvements set forth under paragraphs a and b above, the developer
shall post cash as calculated under paragraphs a and b above, with the
township prior to signature of final plans.
Where a developer pays the amount determined as his pro rata share
under protest, he shall institute legal action within one year of such
payment in order to preserve the right to a judicial determination as to
fairness and reasonableness of such amount.
a. Electricity. Electronic equipment shall not interfere with any radio or
television reception beyond the operator's property.
b. Glare. No use shall direct or reflect a steady or flashing light beyond its
lot lines. Exterior lighting and lighting resulting from any
manufacturing or assembly operations shall be shielded, buffered, and
directed as approved on the site plan so that any glare, direct light,
flashes, or reflection will not interfere with the normal use of nearby
properties, dwelling units and streets. Also see section entitled
"Lighting", section 17-90.
c. Air, Water and Environmental Pollution. No use shall emit heat, odor,
smoke, radiation, vibrations, noise, or any other pollutant into the
ground, water, or air that exceeds the most stringent, applicable State
and Federal regulation. No building permit, zoning permit or certificate
of occupancy shall be issued for any use where a State permit is
required until the State has ascertained and approved the level of
emission, quality of emission, type and quality of emission control, and
level of monitoring to be conducted by the State, and such other State
regulations governing the emission of pollutants into the ground, water,
or air.
d. Storage and Waste Disposal. Except for agricultural operations, no
materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they can be transferred off the lot, directly or indirectly, by
natural forces such as precipitation, surface water, evaporation or wind.
All materials or wastes which might create a pollutant, be a safety
hazard, or be a health hazard shall be stored indoors and/or be in closed
containers to eliminate such pollutant or hazard. No flammable or
explosive substance shall be stored on a property except under
conditions approved by the construction official.
§ 17-96 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-98
AO:459
§ 17-98. PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS. [Ord. #05-1352]
Any project proposed as a general development plan, or under a cluster
design, or as an industrial or office park, or as a research/office use, or
a planned unit residential development, or residential projects using the
density bonus provisions of this chapter shall follow the appropriate zoning
criteria of this chapter and the applicable subdivision and site plan criteria.
To the extent that other subdivision and site plan criteria of this chapter
conflict with the provisions for a general development plan, the general
development plan provisions shall prevail. Prior to approval of any planned
development, the planning board shall find the following:
§ 17-99. PRINCIPAL USE.
No lot shall have erected upon it more than one principal permitted use
except as hereinafter provided. No more than one principal building shall be
permitted on one lot except that a shopping center, apartment or townhouse
complex, condominium project and industrial complex, all receiving site
plan approval or on a farm as hereinafter set forth, may be permitted to
have more than one building on a lot in accordance with the standards
of the zoning district in which it is located and with all buildings sited to
a. The planned development provisions shall supersede any conflicting
portions of this chapter to the extent of such inconsistencies.
b. Proposals for maintenance and conservation of any common open space
shall be provided and, if proposed to be handled by a private agency,
shall be established in accordance with the "homeowners' association"
provisions of section 17-88. Also, the amount, location, and purpose of
the common open space shall be adequate for the use intended.
c. The physical design of the proposed development in relation to public
facilities and services, safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
traffic circulation, the amenities of light and air, recreation and open
space uses, and an overall design sensitive to contours, wetlands, flood
hazard areas, and similar natural features shall be prepared so as to
comply with appropriate portions of this chapter and the master plan.
Any planned development shall be designed to address water quality,
flooding and groundwater recharge and shall incorporate the use of
nonstructural stormwater management strategies to the maximum
extent practicable.
d. The development will not have an unreasonably adverse effect, as
defined herein, upon that portion of the township in which it is
proposed to be located.
e. In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, the terms and conditions of
approval shall be sufficient to protect the interests of the general
public, including the residents, occupants, and owners of the proposed
development.
§ 17-98 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-99
AO:460
comply with all yard definitions and the definition of "industrial or office
park." Notwithstanding the above, a second principal building may be
constructed on a farm in excess of 25 acres if the property can thereafter be
subdivided in accordance with both the subdivision and zoning ordinances
in the event of the transfer of either principal use to a third party.
§ 17-100. PUBLIC AREAS, RESERVATION.
§ 17-101. RECREATION AREAS. [Ord. #94-1001; Ord. #97-1059;
Ord. #05-1352]
a. Designation of Public Areas. The subdivisions or site plan shall show the
size, shape and location for all public streets, drainage ways, flood
control basins and other public areas on the site which are provided for
on the master plan or official map, if any.
b. If the master plan or the official map, if any, provides for the reservation
of designated streets, public drainage ways, flood control basins, or
public areas within a proposed development, the planning board may
reserve the location and extent of such streets, ways, basins or areas
shown on a proposed subdivision or site plan for a period of one year
after the approval of the final plat or within such further time as may be
agreed to by the developer. Unless during such period or extension
thereof the township shall have entered into a contract to purchase or
institute condemnation proceedings according to law for the fee or a
lesser interest in the land comprising such streets, ways, basins or
areas, the developer shall not be bound by such reservations shown on
the plat and may proceed to use such land for private use in accordance
with applicable development regulations. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to streets and roads, flood control basins or public
drainage ways necessitated by the subdivision or land development and
required for final approval.
c. The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss
found to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation of
use. In such instance, unless a lesser amount has previously been
mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be deemed to be the fair
market value of an option to purchase the land reserved for the period
of reservation; provided that determination of such fair market value
shall include, but not be limited to, consideration of the real property
taxes apportioned to the land reserved and prorated for the period of
reservation. The developer shall be compensated for the reasonable
increased cost of legal, engineering, or other professional services
incurred in connection with obtaining subdivision approval or site plan
approval, as the case may be, caused by the reservation.
a. In order to provide for the general welfare as new residential
developments are proposed, any property, before subdivision, which
has the capacity to produce 20 or more new detached single family and/
or two-family dwelling units, or 40 or more apartment, townhouse, or
§ 17-99 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-101
AO:461
other types of multi-family dwelling units, shall make provision for
a dedication of land and improvements for recreation facilities. It is
the purpose of this section to recognize that the need for recreation
activities is a direct result of the impact created by each new residential
development requiring an area of land in a manner similar to the need
for streets, storm water control, utility services, minimum lot sizes and
setbacks, and other design and improvement standards required to
serve the public health, safety and welfare.
1. Where an original tract is proposed to be subdivided into smaller
parcels, and each smaller parcel would have a capacity less than
the minimum number of units set forth above, the recreation
requirement shall be an obligation calculated on the capacity of the
original tract. Each smaller parcel shall either provide its
proportionate share of the obligation of the original tract (even if
there are fewer units generated by the smaller parcel than the
minimum number set forth above) or, in the event the smaller
parcel's proportionate share of the obligation is to be deferred, the
obligation shall be transferred to the remainder of the original
tract. The remainder of the original tract would then have an
increased recreation requirement if and when the remainder of the
original tract is developed. Any recreation obligation transferred to
the remainder of an original tract shall be imposed by a deed
restriction on the remainder of the original tract. In any event,
transferring a recreation obligation to the remainder of an original
tract shall not be permitted where any remaining area would result
in an obligation greater than 50% above its own requirement.
2. In the event a development is served by water and sewer and the
density of the development is 2.0 units per acre or more, the
allocation of land shall be achieved by the use of available zoning
options to reasonably assure that the permitted number of dwelling
units can be achieved together with setting aside the land for
recreation. These options include cluster design (section 17-79),
Modification of Lot Areas and Other Restrictions (section 17-93),
Planned Development (section 17-98), lot size averaging as set
forth in paragraph a3 below, or a mixture of housing types
permitted in the applicable zoning standards of sections 17-92 and
17-159 for the residential zoning district in which the property is
located, singly or in combination. While these options are available,
if a developer opts not to use them, any resulting loss of units would
be a choice of the developer.
3. Where one or more utilities is not available and the density is less
than 2.0 units per acre, land dedication for recreation together
with the opportunity to develop the number of dwelling units
permitted under the zoning for that district may be created by
using lot size averaging throughout the development where the
smallest lot size would be the lot size permitted under the cluster
options (but without the requirement for public water and sewer)'
§ 17-101 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-101
AO:462
provided the on-site well and septic systems can be provided in
accordance with the applicable health regulations. In that manner,
any land within the development able to meet the requirements for
on-site wells and septic systems may have a higher concentration of
dwelling units while the land which cannot meet the requirements
for well and septic systems may be able to be used to meet the
recreation requirement.
4. In any event, when using the alternative designs (cluster, lot size
averaging, mixed housing types, etc.), the resulting number of lots
and dwelling units shall not exceed the permitted density or the
number of dwelling units that would have resulted with the use of
standard development designs.
5. It is anticipated that some recreation areas might result in
locations where approved sites for wells and septic systems could
not be found, but the land is otherwise usable for surface activities
such as recreation, or on areas identified as wetlands or wetland
buffers where N.J.D.E.P. has permitted intrusion into these areas as
part of N.J.D.E.P.'s approval for wetland buffer averaging or other
boundary adjustments and mitigation programs.
b. Recreation Improvements. The following shall be minimum standards
for meeting the recreational requirements of the township. The primary
goal is to develop the recreation areas on-site, but alternative sites,
alternative sized recreation tracts and/or types of facilities, and/or such
other reasonable alternatives to meet the recreational requirements
may be offered to the approving authority by the developer and
accepted by the township consistent with the objectives of this section.
1. Developments located on sites identified for recreation facilities on
various plans set forth in the adopted master plan shall be designed
to implement the master plan. The approving authority shall
encourage the use of applicable provisions of the section (see
paragraph a2 above) that will assist in generating the recreation
areas with minimal or no reduction in the amount of development
permitted under the zoning. Where the developer does not wish to
create the recreation area as common property, the developer may
use a lot size averaging design and offer the properly sized
property to the township for public purposes.
2. The location and type of recreation improvements shall be a
determination of the approving authority based on
recommendations by the developer and the approving authority's
consideration of the site's location and size, duplication of nearby
recreation facilities, and the physical features of the land. The
location for recreation improvements shall be suitable for the
intended purpose(s) considering road access, slope, drainage,
proximity to residences, lighting (if any), the size of the total tract,
and the size of the recreation site.
§ 17-101 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-101
AO:463
3. Active recreation uses shall be planned to avoid the following: land
with final grades greater than 10% of such less slopes that would
preclude the installation of the intended facility; storm water
detention basins; areas closer than 200 feet to the centerline of
electric poles carrying more than 13 Kv; and designated wetland
buffer areas except as set forth in paragraph a5 above.
4. The developer shall be responsible for the following: providing the
recreation site; grading the recreation site so it has positive
drainage, but achieving an appropriate level condition for the
activity(s); landscaping the area and providing the required buffer
area adjacent to residential development; and installing the
appropriate facilities as shown on an approved site plan.
Improvements shall be designed to meet regulation size(s) for the
designated fields, courts, and other activities, and shall be
improved with the appropriate grading, seed or sod, blacktop,
fencing, lighting (if any), and related facilities such as, but not
limited to, standards and baskets for basketball, nets and fencing
for tennis, infield dirt and outfield grass for baseball and softball,
turf and goal posts for soccer and football, paved walkways,
parking areas, bicycle racks, player benches, and water supply for
drinking, sanitary and irrigation purposes where public water
service is available.
5. The minimum area required for recreation purposes shall be as
follows, except that there shall be no minimum area requirement
for developments where all the units are restricted to occupancy by
senior citizens:
(a) In residential developments containing the minimum number
of dwelling units set forth in paragraph a above, the following
minimum percentages of the gross tract area shall be
dedicated to recreation use, except that no area shall be less
than the area set forth in paragraph 5(b) below.
Type Number of Dwelling Units
Single Family or Two-Family 20-30 31-100 101+
Apt. Townhouse & Other Multi-Family 40-60 61-200 201+
Zoning District Recreational Requirement
R-250 District No requirement
R-200 District 1.5 ac 3.50% 3.00%
R-150 Districts 1.5 ac 4.00% 3.50%
R-100 and R-100-G Districts 1.5 ac 4.50% 4.00%
R-75 and R-50 Districts 1.5 ac 5.00% 4.50%
R-5 District 1.5 ac 5.50% 5.50%
§ 17-101 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-101
AO:464
(b) The minimum tract size for recreation shall be the larger of
either 1.5 acres, with no dimension less than 200 feet, or two
times (2x) the minimum area required for the standard
footprint of the specific recreation facility(s) in order to
provide spectator areas, parking areas, and space for foul
balls, landscaping, and minimizing nuisances and hazards on
adjoining lots and streets. If a site is to be offered to the
township for a public facility at no cost to the township, the
minimum size shall be three acres with no dimension less than
300 feet.
(c) Each recreation area shall have its major frontage on a street
and shall have no more than one-half its perimeter abutting a
lot line of a residential use. Where a recreation area abuts
residences there shall be a planted buffer area at least 25 feet
wide, planted consistent with section 17-89. Said buffer area
shall not be counted as meeting the minimum acreage required
for the recreation area.
6. For purposes of this section, a totlot shall not be permitted as
stand-alone facility, but a totlot may be one of several
improvements within, and as part of, a larger facility.
7. The recreational facilities to be provided shall be field and/or court
games of such number as appropriate for the size of the
development, the size and dimension of site on which the facilities
are to be located, and the proximity of other recreation facilities. In
the case of a development limited entirely to occupancy by senior
citizens (defined as either age 55+ or age 62+ in accordance with
the Fair Housing Act), the recreation requirement may be met by
providing an on-site club house, community building, or similar
facility containing rooms for social functions, meetings and the like
whether these are included in a free standing building or as an
integral part of the floor plan of an apartment complex.
8. Where swimming pools are constructed, they shall remain a
homeowners' association facility and shall not be offered for
dedication to the township.
9. The method of preserving the recreation areas for their intended
purposes shall be a determination of the approving authority and
may be by easement, deed restriction, dedication to the township
or other governmental agency, a homeowners' association, or other
means of perpetual dedication acceptable to the approving
authority.
10. Recreation areas shall be designed to address water quality,
flooding and groundwater recharge and shall incorporate the use of
nonstructural stormwater management strategies to the maximum
extent practicable.
§ 17-101 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-102
AO:465
§ 17-102. SERVICE STATIONS. [Ord. #03-1297, § 3; Ord. #05-1352]
When service stations are permitted, they shall comply with the following
requirements in addition to the other zoning and site plan requirements.
§ 17-103. SEWAGE DISPOSAL. [Ord. #00-1139, § 1; Ord. #00-1174,
§§ 1, 2]
Satisfactory provisions for the disposal of sewage shall be provided.
a. All pits, lifts, and working areas shall be within a building. All
lubrication, repair or similar activities shall be performed in an
enclosed building and no dismantled parts shall be placed outside.
Storage areas and trash facilities shall be enclosed on all sides.
b. All gas station pumps, air pumps, and the islands upon which pumps are
normally located shall be set back from the street line at least 40 feet
and from any property line at least 50 feet. A minimum space of 25 feet
shall exist between any two islands and between any island and the
service station building. Pole mounted lighting fixtures shall be full
cutoff. Lighting fixtures under the canopy, if any, shall be full cutoff also.
c. No junked motor vehicle or part thereof and no unregistered motor
vehicle with a registration expired for a period of more than three
months shall be permitted outside an enclosed service station building.
Other than employee's vehicles, no more than six motor vehicles may be
located outside a service station building for a period not to exceed five
days provided the owners are awaiting the repair of such motor
vehicles. Concerning illumination within the service station, the station
shall average maintained horizontal illumination at service pump areas
that do not exceed 5 fc at grade. Average maintained horizontal
illumination at entrances and perimeter areas shall not exceed 1.5 fc at
grade.
d. It is intended that service stations be designed compatibly with other
permitted commercial or industrial uses in the zone in which they are
located. Ingress and egress shall be designed to recognize the turning
movements generated. These access points shall be coordinated with
the access points required for nearby uses, frequency of intersecting
side streets, minimizing left turns off collector and arterial streets, and
maintaining building setbacks compatible with the required setbacks
and landscaping.
e. Service stations shall be designed to address water quality, flooding and
groundwater recharge and shall incorporate the use of nonstructural
stormwater management strategies to the maximum extent practicable.
a. Areas Served by a Sanitary Sewerage System. Subject to the provisions
of paragraph d below, when the planning board determines that an area
is or could be served by an existing sanitary sewerage system, the
developer shall install a satisfactory system for the collection of
sanitary sewage. The developer shall convey to the Township of
§ 17-102 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-103
AO:466
Hopewell title to or easements across all lands necessary to ensure the
operation and maintenance of the collection system. The system shall
comply with all applicable requirements of the Township of Hopewell
and the State of New Jersey. Title to the system shall be conveyed and
dedicated to the township under the terms of all applicable permits.
b. Areas Likely to Be Served by a Sanitary Sewer in the Future. Subject to
the provisions of paragraph d below, when the planning board
determines that a major subdivision is located in an area which is not
served by an existing sanitary sewerage system, but may be served,
then the planning board may require that a dry line system for the
collection of sanitary sewage be installed. All requirements of
paragraph a shall be complied with.
c. When No Sanitary Sewers are Available.
1. A developer may install a sanitary sewerage system only upon
obtaining approval of the Township of Hopewell and the State of
New Jersey, in compliance with all of the requirements of
paragraphs a and d.
2. If no sanitary sewerage system is available, no subdivision or site
plan shall be approved unless the planning board determines that
an on-site sewage disposal system meeting all township and State
requirements can be installed on the site. In order to enable the
planning board to make this determination, the applicant shall
accompany his application with a minimum of two percolation tests
and one soil log for each of the proposed lots in the subdivision and
a minimum of two percolation tests and one soil log on the lands
remaining unless said remaining lands are 50 acres or larger in
size, in which case no percolation tests or soil logs will be required
thereon. The test holes shall be located in the area where the
disposal field is intended to be placed. Septic systems shall be a
minimum of 50 feet from a watercourse unless otherwise increased
by the township health department. Septic systems proposed on
slopes greater than 12% shall identify the design standards to be
used for the preparation of individual plot plans for each lot for
approval. The planning board may define and require such other
tests as are needed to discharge its responsibilities under this
section, or it may refer the application to the board of health for its
recommendations.
3. Location of all percolation tests and soil logs shall be shown with
dimensions from any proposed lot boundary, any watercourse
within 200 feet of the test area, any existing or proposed septic
system within 200 feet of the test area, and any wells within 200
feet of the test area on the plans submitted. The results for each
proposed lot shall be referenced on the plan submitted and
separate reports for each passing and failing test performed,
signed, and sealed by a New Jersey licensed professional engineer,
shall be submitted with the development application. Each report
§ 17-103 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-103
AO:467
§ 17-104. SIDEWALKS. [Ord. #05-1352]
Sidewalks shall be installed in locations determined by the planning board
to be in the interest of public safety and proper pedestrian circulation
considering the probable volume of pedestrian traffic, the adjoining street
classification where sidewalks, parallel streets, school bus stops, recreation
areas, schools, and the general type of improvement intended. Where
required, sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide and may be constructed
of concrete, brick or bituminous material. All sidewalks shall have a four
inch granular base. If constructed of concrete, sidewalks shall be four
inches thick, except at points of vehicular crossing where they shall be
at least six inches thick, of Class B concrete having a twenty-eight-day
compressive strength of 4,500 p.s.i., and shall be air-entrained. If
constructed of bituminous materials, where permitted by the planning
board, they shall adhere to the bikeway standards. Where sidewalks cross
curbs curb ramps shall be provided. Preformed expansion joint material
shall be placed on concrete sidewalks at twenty foot intervals and where
sidewalks abut curbing or a structure.
Sidewalks shall be designed to comply with the design criteria of the
Americans with Disabilities Act and New Jersey Department of
Transportation. Permeable paving materials shall be used where
appropriate and stormwater management and related drainage controls
shall comply with section 17-82a16.
§ 17-105. SIGHT TRIANGLES.
No natural or artificial thing shall be installed or permitted if it would
obstruct vision between a height of 2 1/2 feet and eight feet above the
centerline grades of intersecting streets, or the intersection of a street
submitted shall identify the proposed lot upon which the test was
performed.
4. All existing septic systems on lands being considered for a
development by the planning board shall be tested by a New Jersey
licensed professional engineer for adequacy to serve the lands
remaining for the purpose indicated on the development
application. A certification bearing the signature and seal of a New
Jersey licensed professional engineer identifying any existing
deficiencies and recording any repairs shall be submitted with the
development application.
d. Sewer Connections. No person shall be permitted to connect to any
public sewer system except through and with the approval of the
Hopewell Township Committee, provided such Hopewell Township
Committee approval is required or permitted pursuant to applicable
law, regulations, rules or water quality management plan for the
connection, extension or addition to or of a public sewer system, which
approval must be received through the affirmative vote of not less than
two-thirds of the full membership thereof.
§ 17-103 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-105
AO:468
and a driveway, in an area bounded by the streets (or the street and the
driveway) and a straight line which connects sight points along the street
or driveway. The sight points shall be the following distance from the
intersection: 130 feet on an arterial street; 60 feet on a collector street; 50
feet on a primary or secondary local street. For driveways, section 17-83d.
§ 17-106. SIGNS. [Ord. #10-1501]
Except as otherwise set forth herein, it shall be unlawful for any person
to erect, alter, relocate or maintain within the township any sign, as set
forth and defined in this chapter without first making application for, and
obtaining a sign permit from the construction official.
a. General. Every sign erected shall conform to the requirements of this
chapter. A sign is a structure and subject to a permit and all other
regulations provided in the construction code and in all township
ordinances.
Any existing signs which do not conform to this chapter may be
continued provided they complied with the requirements of the
township at the time of their erection. No sign shall be altered, rebuilt,
enlarged, or relocated, unless it is changed to conform with this
chapter.
b. Exempt Signs. The following are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter:
1. Parking lot markers, parking lot directional signs, and entrance or
exit signs which do not exceed two square feet in area and do not
contain any advertising matter, provided that the number, design
and location of such signs must be approved by the planning board
during site plan review.
2. Signs not exceeding one-half square foot in area and bearing only
property numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants of
premises or other identifications of premises not having
commercial connotations.
3. Flags and insignia of any government, except when displayed in
connection with commercial promotion.
c. Prohibited Signs. All signs not provided for in this chapter are
prohibited. As a guide, and not by way of limitation, the following signs
are prohibited:
1. Any exterior sign that:
(a) Has any moving, flashing or fluttering parts, or that gives such
an illusion;
(b) Emits smoke, visible vapor or particles, sound or odor;
§ 17-105 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-106
AO:469
(c) Produces glare or emits light from a direct bare bulb or
reflector, including mirrors;
(d) Uses exposed incandescent bulbs or neon tubes, mirrors
reflecting a direct light source, or any similar device;
(e) Is of such a design or location that it would interfere with,
compete for attention with, or might be mistaken for a traffic
signal, sign or device. This includes arrow devices and the
word "Stop";
(f) Is located within a required sight triangle;
(g) Is fastened to a tree, or utility pole, except a warning or
nontrespassing sign where permitted in this chapter;
(h) Is erected other than in conjunction with a permitted use on
the lot on which the sign is created;
(i) Is the type of sign commonly known as a billboard, or promotes
the sale of goods or services not available on the immediate
premises;
(j) Is painted on or affixed to a water tower, storage tank, or
similar structure;
(k) Is a commercial illustration painted on the wall of a building
and is not part of the main sign for the business at that
location.
2. Any interior sign that is visible from the street or from adjacent
property that:
(a) Has any moving, flashing or fluttering parts;
(b) Produces glare;
(c) Uses exposed incandescent bulbs or neon tubing;
(d) Uses mirrors reflecting a direct light source or any similar
device;
(e) Is illuminated during nonbusiness hours;
3. Any vehicle or trailer that is parked in such a way as to utilize it as a
portable sign on any public right-of-way, public property, or on
private property so as to be intended to be viewed from a motorized
vehicular public right-of-way, which has attached thereto or located
thereon any sign or advertising device for the basic purpose of
providing advertisement of products or directing people to a
business or activity located on the same or nearby property or any
other premises.
d. General Regulations Pertaining to Permanent Signs.
§ 17-106 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-106
AO:470
1. Sign Permits. A permit shall be secured from the construction
official for the erection, or change in location of any permanent
sign other than an exempt sign. No permanent right is granted or
implied, nor shall any permit be transferable to any succeeding
owner, lessee or tenant of the property if any change is made in the
sign, either in structure or text.
2. Fees. Fees as established in Chapter 10, "Fees and Permits" of the
Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Hopewell (1978)
shall be payable upon application for a sign permit.
3. Sign Wording. The wording of exterior permanent signs shall be
limited to the name of the person or company conducting business
on the premises and the nature of that business, except for service
stations. Prices may not be stated. A listing of items sold also is
prohibited.
4. Double-Faced Signs. Double-faced, free-standing signs are
permitted provided that the faces do not form an angle greater
than 40°, are not more than one foot apart, at one end, and the
vertical projections of the faces coincide. Such signs shall
otherwise conform to the requirements of this chapter. The
computed area shall be that of one face.
5. Sign Maintenance. Every sign must be constructed of durable
materials, maintained in good condition, and not allowed to become
dilapidated. Whenever a sign becomes dilapidated, structurally
unsafe, or endangers the public health or safety, the construction
official shall order that such sign be renovated, made safe, or
removed. Such order shall be complied with within 10 days of the
receipt thereof by the person, firm or corporation owning or using
the sign. The area surrounding ground signs shall be kept neat,
clean and landscaped.
6. Sign Removal. Signs advertising business or industrial
establishments shall be removed within 30 days of the closing of
such business by the owner of the property.
7. Setback Requirements. All sign setback requirements shall be
measured from the right-of-way line.
8. Free-standing Signs. Unless otherwise specified, free-standing
signs shall be located no closer to a side lot line than the minimum
side yard for the principal building, and shall have a setback from
the right-of-way line of at least 15 feet, and shall not be located in
any sight triangle.
9. Attached Signs. Attached signs shall be affixed parallel to the wall
to which they are attached and the face of the sign shall project no
more than 15 inches from the surface of the wall. They may be
affixed to the front wall of a principal structure, or to the roof
§ 17-106 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-106
AO:471
parallel with the front wall. They may not project above the ridge
line or roof of the building.
10. Illuminated Signs. Illuminated signs shall be arranged to reflect the
light and glare away from adjoining or nearby lots and streets. All
lighted signs shall have the light source shielded from adjoining or
nearby lots, streets, and interior drives. All lights shall be either
shielded or have translucent fixtures to reduce off-site effects.
e. Regulations Pertaining to Temporary Signs.
1. No permit is required for a temporary sign.
2. A temporary sign must not interfere with any traffic sight lines or
create a distraction to motorists, or be illuminated.
3. The following types of temporary signs are permitted:
(a) A temporary real estate sign identifying the lot upon which it is
located as being for rent or sale, not exceeding four square feet
in residential districts and 10 square feet in all other districts,
and not more than five feet high. There may be one sign for
each street the lot abuts, but no more than one sign for each
1,000 feet of frontage on each street. All such signs must be
removed within 30 days after the sale of the lot.
(b) Temporary real estate signs identifying lots or dwellings in an
approved major subdivision upon which the signs are located
as being for sale, not exceeding 10 square feet and not more
than five feet high. There may be no more than one such sign
for each subdivision. All such signs must be removed within 30
days after the sale of all of the lots or dwellings.
(c) Temporary signs identifying the contractors who are building a
structure, not exceeding four square feet and not more than
five feet high. All such signs must be removed as soon as the
contractor's work is substantially completed.
(d) Temporary political or election signs not exceeding 10 square
feet and not more than five feet high. All such signs may be
erected 45 days prior to a general or primary election and must
be removed within one week after the date of the election to
which they relate. Political or election signs may not be
stationed on or affixed to publicly-owned properties.
(e) Temporary signs advertising religious, educational, charitable,
political or similar events, not exceeding four square feet in
residential districts and 10 square feet in other districts and
not more than five feet high. Such signs may not be displayed
for more than 14 days.
§ 17-106 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-106
AO:472
(f) Temporary signs advertising seasonal "garage sale" not
exceeding four square feet and not more than five feet high.
Such signs may not be displayed for more than 14 days.
(g) Temporary signs advertising seasonal agricultural products
grown on the same property which are for sale at the time, not
exceeding four square feet and not more than five feet high.
(h) Temporary signs at a sales office and at model homes
associated with a housing development. The sales office may
have one sign identifying it as the sales office (maximum 24
square feet) and each model home may have one sign giving
the name of that model (maximum 10 square feet). The signs
shall be unlighted. The sales office sign may be mounted either
on the building no higher than the eave of the roof or 15 feet
high, whichever is lower, or be a free-standing sign no higher
than five feet. All house model signs shall be free-standing
signs no higher than three feet.
f. Permitted Types of Permanent Signs.
1. Farms. One free-standing sign giving the name of the farm or
owner not exceeding four square feet, and no more than five feet
high.
2. Memorial and Historical Markers and Tablets. The design and
location of such signs shall be determined by the township
committee with recommendations by the planning board.
3. Attached Signs Identifying a Business or Facility. There shall be no
more than one attached sign per established business. The
maximum area shall be no greater than 100 square feet, or the
equivalent of 1.5 square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of
width of the wall on which the sign is located, whichever is smaller.
4. Free-standing Signs Identifying Office or Professional Tenants. One
freestanding sign identifying the facility at each street from which
a driveway permits ingress to the facility, not exceeding four square
feet for each tenant, but in no event more than 32 square feet, and
not more than 10 feet high.
5. Free-standing Signs Identifying Commercial, Industrial and Other
Facilities. One sign identifying the facility and its occupants at each
street from which a driveway permits ingress to the facility, not
exceeding 20 square feet for the first business identified plus four
square feet for each additional occupant but in no event more than
32 square feet, and not more than 14 feet high.
6. In addition to the above, shopping centers shall be permitted one
ground or pylon sign advertising the name of the shopping center
and meeting the following specifications:
§ 17-106 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-106
AO:473
(a) Located no closer to the intersection of two street lines than 50
feet.
(b) Not exceeding 20 feet in height.
(c) No closer than 50 feet to a property line.
(d) An area not exceeding two square feet for each linear foot of
front yard setback, but not to exceed 60 square feet.
7. Service Stations. In addition to other signs permitted in this
chapter, service stations may display the following special signs
which are deemed customary and necessary to their respective
business:
(a) One ground or pylon sign advertising the name of the station
and the principal products sold on the premises or both,
including any special company or brand name, insignia or
emblem, provided that such sign shall not exceed 30 square
feet in area on a side and shall be erected at least 20 feet from
the property line and, four feet above the ground, shall be at
least 10 feet but not more than 20 feet above the ground. Highrise
or "turnpike-height signs" are prohibited.
(b) No more than one sign advertising gasoline prices, not to
exceed 12 square feet in area on a side.
8. Development Signs. Where there is a development of more than
150 dwelling units, the developer may elect to construct a
permanent identification sign at no more than three entrances to
the development. Said sign shall be limited to the name of the
development, located no closer than 10 feet to the curbline, be
outside any public right-of-way, and be no larger than 25 square
feet. The sign may be lighted pursuant to paragraph d10. The sign
shall be mounted on a brick or stone wall, or implanted within a
landscaped berm. The wall shall be no more than five times the
area of the sign. No part of the wall, berm or sign shall exceed a
height of five feet. If such a sign is intended as part of a
development, the location, design landscape features and an
elevation of the proposed sign shall be submitted as part of the
subdivision or site plan application. In addition, adequate
provisions for its maintenance shall be part of the application. Any
exception from the above standards may be granted by design
waiver for good cause shown.
9. Open Space Access Identification Signs. One freestanding sign
identifying the owner/managing entity of the preserve, open space,
or farmland and the words "Public Trail" or similar identification
not exceeding six square feet and no more than five feet high at
each public access location. Signs may be placed no closer than six
inches to the street right-of-way line provided that the sign is set
§ 17-106 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-106
AO:474
§ 17-107. SOIL PROTECTION.
§ 17-108. STREETS. [Ord. No. 02-1268 § 1; Ord. #05-1352]
back at least 10 feet from the edge of pavement and does not
interfere with any sight triangle.
a. Top Soil Protection. No top soil shall be removed from the site or used
as spoil. Top soil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover to all areas and
shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. Ground cover must be
planted on all areas in the first planting season after disturbance. Silt
traps may be used.
b. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control. In addition to the specific provisions
set forth in sections 17-82 and 17-107a, all provisions of Chapter 12
shall be complied with.
a. Emergency Access and Stub Streets. All streets shall be of sufficient
width and suitable grade and suitably located to accommodate
prospective traffic and to provide access for firefighting equipment and
emergency equipment to buildings. The arrangement of streets shall
constitute a convenient circulation system for the proposed
development, shall provide for suitable access to adjoining undeveloped
property, shall provide stub streets constructed up to the adjoining
property line with a temporary turnaround, shall be consistent with
appropriate traffic circulation when there is full development of all
property near the proposed development, and shall conform to the
official map, if any, and the circulation plan of the master plan. Where
stub streets are approved, a notice shall be provided to all lot owners
fronting on said stub street by appropriate deed restriction. All
temporary turnaround areas shall be created by easement.
b. The arrangement of all streets shall provide for the appropriate
extension of existing streets and for future connection to adjoining
undeveloped properties. When a development adjoins land capable of
being developed or subdivided further, suitable provisions shall be
made for optimum access from the adjoining tract to existing or
proposed streets.
c. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
d. Developments abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal service
road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting or some other
means of separation of through and local traffic as the planning board
may determine appropriate.
e. The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line and
shall be not less than the following:
1. Right-of-way minimums:
§ 17-106 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-108
AO:475
Street Classification Right-of-Way Width Cartway Width Traffic Lanes
Arterial 80 feet 64 feet 4 at 12 feet
Collector 66 feet 40 feet 2 at 12 feet
Primary Local 60 feet 36 feet 2 at 10 feet
Secondary Local 50 feet 20 to 28 feet
The cartway width and traffic lanes on secondary local roads shall depend on the probable
extent of curbside parking and on the amount of traffic which is likely to use them when
surrounding areas are developed, as determined by the planning board.
The right-of-way and cartway widths for arterial and collector streets shall be increased by 10
feet on the right side approaching each other arterial or collector street for 300 feet from the
intersection of the centerlines.
2. The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multi-family,
commercial and industrial development shall be determined on an
individual basis, and shall in all cases be of sufficient width and
design to safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and
loading needs and maximum access for firefighting equipment.
f. Developments that adjoin or include existing streets that do not
conform to widths as shown on the master plan or official map, if any, or
the street width requirements of this chapter shall either be widened by
dedication along one or both sides, as is most appropriate in the opinion
of the planning board, or additional land along both sides of such street
sufficient to conform to the right-of-way requirements shall be
anticipated in the subdivision design by creating oversized lots to
accommodate the widening at some future date. If the development
abuts one side of such a road, one-half or the deficient amount of rightof-
way shall be dedicated and the roadway improved to township
standards, except in such cases as the planning board determines that
the acquisition of the additional width on the opposite side of the street
is unfeasible, unlikely, or undesirable because of location of existing
buildings, tree growth, topographic conditions or other similar
consideration. In such cases, the full amount of deficient right-of-way
shall be dedicated.
Where the development abuts both sides of an existing street, the entire
street shall be improved to the Township of Hopewell specifications.
Where the development abuts one side of an existing street, one-half
of the street shall be improved to the extent deemed necessary by the
planning board.
g. In order to reduce the number of driveways intersecting arterial and
collector streets, all residential driveways shall, wherever possible,
intersect minor streets. Abutting lots may be required to use abutting
driveways with one curb cut. Except in the MRC district, all residential
lots requiring reverse frontage shall have an additional 25 feet of depth
to allow for the establishment of the buffers outlined in section 17-89j.
§ 17-108 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-108
AO:476
h. Permanent Cul-de-Sacs. Permanent cul-de-sacs shall not be permitted
unless granted as a design waiver as an exception for good cause shown
where there is no other circulation alternative. The maximum length of
a permitted cul-de-sac shall be the shorter of either 500 feet or the
length necessary to serve no more than five conforming single family
lots in the district in which it is located, or no more than 12 multi-family
dwelling units in a district where multifamily units are permitted.
i. If the cul-de-sac is of a temporary nature, because of provision for
future street extension, provision shall be made for reversion of the
excess right-of-way to the adjoining property owners by notation on the
final plat.
j. Intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible and in no
case be less than 60°. The minimum sight distance within the right-ofway
of a minor or collector street approaching an intersection is 240
feet ± five feet for each 2% of street gradient measured from the
centerline of the intersecting street along the centerline of the
intersected street. The minimum sight distance of a primary or arterial
street approaching an intersection is 520 feet ± 12 feet for each 2% of
street gradient measured from the centerline of the intersecting street
along the centerline of the intersected street.
1. The block corners at intersections shall be rounded at the curb line
with a curve having a minimum radius of not less than 30 feet for
intersection angles 80° or greater or 40 feet for intersection angles
less than 80°.
2. A clear sight area in the form of a triangle shall be provided as
specified in the section entitled "sight triangles" (section 17-105).
3. Multiple intersections involving more than two streets are
prohibited.
4. T-intersections on opposite sides of a street shall be separated by at
least 200 feet as measured between the centerlines.
5. The minimum distance between intersections along one side of any
street shall not be less than 400 feet when measured between
centerlines.
k. Horizontal alignment of streets shall be such that the minimum radius
of curvature for minor or collector streets is 225 feet and 700 feet for
primary streets. Reverse curves shall be joined by a tangent of not less
than 100 feet for collector streets or of less than 500 feet for primary or
arterial streets.
l. Vertical alignment of streets shall be such that the minimum gradient is
not less than 0.75% and the maximum gradient is 6%; however, the
maximum gradient restriction may be waived by the township engineer
in certain situations where a 6% gradient is impractical. All changes in
gradients shall be accomplished gradually by means of a vertical,
§ 17-108 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-108
AO:477
parabolic curve. The minimum length of vertical curve for minor and
collector streets shall be 50 feet up to a 4% algebraic difference of
street gradient; for algebraic gradient differences between 4% and 8%
it shall be 50 feet plus 50 feet for each 1% difference, above 8% it
shall be 250 feet plus 50 feet for each 2% difference. The minimum
length of vertical curve for primary and arterial streets shall be 100 feet
for algebraic street gradient differences up to 2%; for algebraic street
differences between 2% and 10% it shall be 100 feet plus 100 feet for
each 1% difference; above 10% it shall be 900 feet plus 100 feet for
each 2% difference.
m. No street name shall duplicate or nearly duplicate the name of any
existing street in the Township of Hopewell. If a street is a continuation
or extension of an existing street, the name shall be used. All street
names are subject to approval by the planning board.
n. All lots abutting only arterial or collector streets shall be provided with
a suitable driveway area to provide a turn around within the lot.
o. All driveways shall be paved 20 feet from the cartway with concrete or
bituminous concrete. Where sidewalks are installed the paved portion
of the driveway shall be from the street curb line to the sidewalk; this
pavement shall be Class B (4500 psi) concrete.
p. Streets, Construction Details.
1. Crowns of all streets shall not be less than four inches nor more
than six inches. The sidewalk area shall be graded to an elevation
of two inches above the finished centerline grade.
2. Where sub-base conditions are wet, springy, or of such nature that
surfacing would be inadvisable without first treating the sub-base,
the street construction shall conform to section 17-95n.
3. Except for those streets for which a lighter pavement may be
approved by the planning board, the street roadway area shall be
constructed for its full width with (1) a five inch compacted
thickness of Bituminous Stabilized concrete, (2) tack coat,
asphaltic oil applied at the rate of 0.10 gallons per square yard, and
(3) a 1.5 inch compacted thickness surface course of hot mixed
bituminous concrete type FABC-1.
The township engineer reserves the right to order the installation
of 1.5 inches quarry blend stone and prime coat, if conditions
warrant. The installation of the surface course shall not be
performed until all irregularities and settlement of pavement have
been corrected and approval is received from the township
engineer.
Where new streets meet existing pavement, where existing streets
are to be improved, and when continuing a previously laid
pavement, the edges of all existing pavements are to be neatly cut
§ 17-108 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-108
AO:478
§ 17-109. STREET SIGNS.
Regulatory and cautionary traffic signs shall be metal reflectorized meeting
the requirements of the New Jersey State Department of Transportation
standards. Street name signs shall show the intersecting street names in
four directions. These signs shall be Lyle-series E, embossed with black
lettering on a white background, or equal approved by the township
engineer. All signs shall be mounted on 2 1/2 inch diameter pipe posts
embedded in a minimum of two feet and five inches in Class D (2500 PSI)
concrete one foot square. Street name signs shall be located with eight feet
above the proposed ground line to the bottom of the name plates.
§ 17-110. STRUCTURES IN REQUIRED SETBACK AREAS.
No structure may be located more than 30 inches above the general ground
level of a graded lot within any required front, side or rear yard, except for
fences, garden walls, posts and other customary ornaments.
§ 17-111. SWIMMING POOLS AND HOT TUBS.
at a 45° angle along a straight line and the exposed edges shall
be painted with a thin coat of asphaltic cement. The practice of
"feathering" shall not be permitted.
All of the above construction shall be in accordance with current
New Jersey State Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications and Supplements thereto on file in the office of the
township engineer.
4. Streets shall be designed to comply with the design criteria of the
American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials and the New Jersey Department of Transportation.
Stormwater management and related drainage controls shall
comply with section 17-82a16.
a. General Provisions Applicable to All Uses.
1. No private residential pool or hot tub shall be installed on any lot
unless said lot shall contain a residence.
2. All pools and hot tubs shall be a residential accessory use.
3. Outdoor hot tubs shall be required to have a cover capable of being
locked or meet the requirements for fence enclosures specified in
the Uniform Construction Code. Exception: hot tubs installed on
wood decks without covers shall have guard rails with self-closing,
self-latching gates. The height of the guard rail enclosure system
shall be a minimum of 36 inches on the enclosure side and at least
48 inches above grade on the exterior side.
4. Pools and hot tubs shall otherwise be installed, operated and used
in accordance with other health and safety ordinances regarding
§ 17-108 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-111
AO:479
water filtration, circulation and treatment; fencing; noise; and
lighting.
5. A noncommercial pool may be operated as part of the common
property of a homeowners' association for the use and enjoyment of
the residents of a specified development.
6. Pools operated by a homeowners' association shall be located as
approved on a subdivision and site plan for that residential
development.
b. Single Family.
1. The pool or hot tub shall be located only to the side or rear of a
single family residence and shall meet the setback requirements
for a swimming pool in the district in which it is located, except
where the pool or hot tub is located on a patio or deck attached to
the principal building, the setback shall meet the setback
requirements for the principal building.
2. Hot tubs may be located within the dwelling unit or they may be
located outside on a porch, deck or patio.
3. Fencing shall be required as delineated in the Building Subcode
adopted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14, known as the BOCA
National Building Code/1990, including all subsequent revisions
and amendments with the following exceptions. Inground Pools: A
natural barrier or other protective device, if approved by the
building inspector and maintained by the owner, agent, tenant or
other responsible person may be an acceptable enclosure, as long
as the degree of protection afforded by the substituted device or
structure is not less than the protection afforded by the enclosure,
gate and latch described in the adopted edition of the BOCA
National Building Code. Above Ground Pools: The requirements for
a fence can be waived if the owner, agent, tenant or other
responsible person can and will demonstrate that they can and will
maintain the following:
(a) The pool side wall is a minimum of 48 inches above grade.
Grade meaning a level distance of 36 inches from the pool wall.
(b) The pool wall has smooth sides that will not permit climbing by
small children.
(c) Filtration systems shall be located and maintained a minimum
distance of 36 inches from the side wall of the pool.
(d) All pool access ladders, steps, and decks shall be maintained in
an unusable state by small children or incompetent persons
when the pool is not in use by means of locking in a fold up
position or have locked, self-closing, self-latching gate.
§ 17-111 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-111
AO:480
§ 17-112. TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT. [Ord. #94-996, § 1]
§ 17-113. UTILITIES.
Electric service shall be provided. Except for minor subdivisions, all
electricity, telephone and other utility lines shall be underground. Generally
street lighting shall be installed at time of road construction at all new
street intersections and at such other places as may be required, at the
developer's expense, with fixtures specifically approved by the planning
board.
§ 17-114. WATER.
(e) All pool decks attached to an aboveground swimming pool
must comply with the BOCA Building Code regarding the
requirements for foundations, live load and guardrails.
c. Townhouses. Hot tubs may be located within a townhouse. Hot tubs
may be located outside a townhouse as an accessory use provided the
hot tub is located within a walled patio by a wall that is not less than
3 1/2 feet in height and the elevation of the water surface is at least two
feet lower than the lowest elevation of the wall, and provided further
that the area of the patio covered by the hot tub and any accompanying
framing, deck, pump, filtering system and related structures and
equipment do not exceed 40% of the walled patio area.
a. Adoption by Reference. In order to mitigate and reduce traffic volume
associated with land development in the Township of Hopewell, the
Planning Board may consider in the review of applications for
development the efforts of the applicant to comply with the Federal
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 (CAAA) (42 U.S.C.S. 7401); the New
Jersey Employer Trip Reduction Program (ETRP) (N.J.A.C. 16:50-1, et
seq.) and the New Jersey Traffic Congestion and Air Pollution Control
Act (N.J.S.A. 27:26A-1, et seq.), including any regulation promulgated
under either of these Federal and State Statutes.
a. An adequate water supply for the residents and occupants of the site
shall be provided. If a public water supply is available, water mains
shall be connected to the existing mains, if the Hopewell Township
Municipal Utility Authority approves, and the developer shall
contribute the entire cost of any necessary new wells, additional
storage facilities, extension of water mains and increased size of water
mains, except as provided in section 17-96 with respect to off-tract
improvements.
b. If a public water supply is not available, or if in the judgment of the
planning board it is not economically feasible to extend public water
lines to the site, the planning board shall determine whether individual
wells are appropriate, or whether a central water system should be
installed, subject to the approval by the Hopewell Township Municipal
Utilities Authority of the arrangements for transferring ownership of
§ 17-111 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-114
AO:481
§ 17-115. STREAM CORRIDORS. [Ord. #04-1328, § 4]
the system to the municipal utilities authority. In addition, compliance
with section 16-6 of the Revised General Ordinances shall be required.
c. Whenever a public water supply or central water system is installed or
expanded, the developer shall include fire hydrants, with approved
coupling devices, sufficient for firefighting purposes.
a. Purposes. The purposes of the stream corridor protection provisions
are to:
1. Assure that adequate water supply is available and maintain the
long-term natural equilibrium of the ground and surface waters in
Hopewell Township and in neighboring communities.
2. Improve and maintain the quality of the water supply and sustain
diverse populations of aquatic flora and fauna.
3. Improve the currently impaired streams in the township.
4. Protect significant ecological components of stream corridors such
as floodplains, woodlands, steep slopes and habitats for flora and
fauna.
5. Minimize flood related damage to properties in the township and in
neighboring communities.
6. Complement federal, state, regional, county and municipal
watershed, flood hazard and stream corridor protection and
management programs.
b. Applicability. The stream corridor provisions apply to any land
containing any portion of a stream corridor as defined in Chapter 17,
Article X, Section 17-181.
c. Activities Permitted in Stream Corridors. Stream corridors shall remain
in their natural state and shall not be developed or disturbed, except for
the following activities:
1. Any activity subject to regulation by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection under the New Jersey Freshwater
Wetland Protection Act.
2. Reconstruction of a valid nonconforming structure that predates
the adoption of this section59 in the event of partial destruction by
fire, natural hazards, or other acts of God, provided the
reconstruction does not have a greater footprint or total area than
that of the damaged structure and no change in land use occurs.
59.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 04-1328, codified herein was adopted December 13, 2004.
§ 17-114 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-115
AO:482
3. Any use or related maintenance thereof that existed prior to the
date of adoption of this section.
4. Any agricultural use or structure existing prior to the date of
adoption of this section, but no new agricultural structure, except
for fences, shall be permitted in a stream corridor, subject to
approval by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
5. Existing stormwater management facilities located in stream
corridors are permitted to remain in a stream corridor and may be
expanded or modified in connection with an application for
development and in accordance with the requirements of the
approving authority.
6. Surveying or activities for the purpose of establishing or reestablishing
a boundary line or points, which use only hand held
equipment and do not involve the use of motorized vehicles to
either clear vegetation or extract soil borings. The clearing of
vegetation along the survey line or around the survey points shall
not exceed three feet in width or diameter respectively and shall
not be kept clear or maintained once the survey or delineation is
completed.
d. Stream Corridor Averaging. An applicant may undertake stream
corridor averaging, as defined in Chapter 17, Article X, Section 17-181.
Stream corridor averaging shall only be permitted along the perimeter
of retention basins. Stream corridor width may be reduced to a
minimum of 25 feet for buildings or other structures or zero feet for
dams, pedestrian walkways, walls, and any associated landscaped areas
along the perimeter of a retention basin, provided, however, that the
total length of stream corridor reduction is not greater than 40% of the
length of the perimeter of the retention basin. For every stream
corridor reduced in area along a retention basin, there shall be an
equivalent increase in stream corridor width provided elsewhere along
the perimeter of the retention basin.
e. Prohibited Activities. All activities not specifically permitted by the
provisions of paragraph c above are prohibited. The following activities
are prohibited unless a design waiver is obtained:
1. Alteration of watercourses and stream corridors by development or
disturbance of any type.
2. Clearing or cutting of any vegetation, except for removal of dead
vegetation, pruning for reasons of safety and harvesting of
agricultural products.
3. Disposal of brush, debris or any solid or liquid waste.
4. Installation of fences and sheds.
§ 17-115 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-116
AO:483
§ 17-116. STEEP SLOPES. [Ord. #07-1411, § 1]
§ 17-117. through § 17-124. (RESERVED)
a. The following standards shall apply to all new development on lots
(existing or proposed) with slopes in excess of 15%:
1. In areas with slopes that exceed 25%, no development, regrading
or removal of vegetation shall be permitted.
2. In areas with slopes of 15% to 25%, no more than 15% of such
areas shall be developed, regarded, or cleared of vegetation.
3. For the purposes of subdivision each residential lot created must
include a minimum of two contiguous acres of land with less than
15% slope on which the dwelling, septic system and accessory
structures shall be located.
4. A steep slope analysis showing slope classes 0-14.99%, 15-25% and
greater than 25% shall be provided with all site development or
subdivision plans. The slope classification shall be calculated
utilizing a two-foot contour interval.
5. A grading plan which indicates all site grading necessary for the
development or subdivision of the lot shall be submitted for review
and approval by the township engineer. Such plan shall also
provide for the proper protection and stabilization of all disturbed
areas consistent with the design techniques established by the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Standards, adopted as amended by
the New Jersey State Soil Conservation Committee. The approval of
this grading plan by the township engineer shall be required prior
to the issuance of a building permit.
§ 17-116 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-117
AO:484
ARTICLE VII
COMPLETE APPLICATIONS; GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN
§ 17-125. CHECKLIST FOR COMPLETE PLANNING BOARD
APPLICATIONS. [Ord. #663-84; Ord. #696-85; Ord. #91-903, § 1;
Ord. #00-1165 §§ 1 — 4; Ord. #01-1187, §§ 1 — 4; Ord. #03-1297,
§ 5; Ord. #03-1298, § 6; Ord. #07-1398 § 1]
§ 17-126. GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.61
§ 17-126.1. General.
Notwithstanding the provisions of other zoning and design requirements of
this chapter, a qualified applicant in a district where general development
plans are permitted may choose to submit a general development plan
to the planning board for review, consideration and action. To the extent
the following procedures, design standards, uses and zoning regulations
conflict with other provisions of this chapter, the provisions for a general
development plan shall prevail. All other procedural, design, use and zoning
regulations of this chapter that have not been specifically modified by an
approved general development plan shall be met.
§ 17-126.2. Purpose.
The purpose of the general development plan is to implement N.J.S.A.
40:55D-45.1 through 45.8 to encourage development proposals to be
submitted at larger scales of development in order to:
a. Recent amendments to the Municipal Land Use Law further clarified
the definition of "complete application" and required the adoption, by
ordinance, of a checklist for determining complete applications.
b. The checklist for complete planning board applications is attached
hereto as Appendix A.60
c. Any revisions to said checklist shall be made by ordinance.
1. Amendments to checklist:
(a) September 7, 2000 by Ordinance No. 00-1165.
(b) April 5,2001 by Ordinance No. 00-1187.
a. Promote development that allows for a more efficient and
environmentally sensitive use of land than would otherwise be possible;
60.Editor's Note: Appendix A, referred to herein is included as an attachment to this chapter.
61.Editor's Note: Former subsection 17-2.6a-g was renumbered as section 17-126,
subsections 17-126.1-17-126.7. Sources contained herein include Ordinance Nos. 90-853,
§ 4 and 92-910.
§ 17-125 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-126.2
AO:485
§ 17-126.3. Eligibility.
General development plans shall be limited to the following eligibility
standards.
§ 17-126.4. Effect of Approved Plan. [Ord. #98-1096, § 1]
Development under a general development plan shall be in accordance
with the general development plan as approved by the approving authority.
The plan may be approved for a period not to exceed 20 years from the
date of final approval of the first phase of the planned development, or
such lesser time approved by the approving authority provided the approval
period is at least five years. The general development plan shall set forth the
permitted number of dwelling units, if any, amount of nonresidential floor
space, residential density and nonresidential floor area ratio according to
a phasing or timing schedule setting forth the timing of various sections
of the development. The planned development shall be permitted to be
developed in accordance with the general development plan as approved
by the planning board notwithstanding any provision of P.L. 1975, c.291
(C.40:55D-1 et seq.) (the Municipal Land Use Law), or any ordinance or
regulation adopted pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law following the
effective date of the general development plan approval. No site work or
other development shall take place on-site unless and until preliminary and
final plat approvals have been granted for the section(s) being developed
and appropriate performance and maintenance guarantees have been
posted as required by the township. Approval of a general development
plan, with or without conditions, shall run with the land and approval
shall include a vesting of the right to develop in accordance with the
approved general development plan, including, but not limited to, gross
floor area, total number of dwelling units, if any, and/or such mix and
intensity of uses approved on the general development plan together with
b. Encourage large institutions, corporations, and developers to plan for
long-term phased development that will permit the development of
environmentally sensitive and economically feasible projects;
c. Promote the development of large-scale projects which, because of the
integration of similar and/or symbiotic types of uses, will encourage a
reduction in infrastructure impacts;
d. Coordinate job creation with consequent housing demand and
implement the adopted Housing Element by nonresident contributors
providing housing, including low and moderate income housing, or, at
the developer's option, payments in lieu of housing;
e. Provide up to twenty-year vesting of zoning rights running with the land
to applicants to insure economic stability and phased growth.
a. Sites must have a minimum of 250 acres of land area.
b. Sites must be located within either the RO or the IOP-G zoning districts.
§ 17-126.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-126.4
AO:486
the obligation to fulfill all conditions of approval, phasing off-tract and on
tract improvements, and related matters. Preliminary and final approval of
subdivisions and/or site plans of all or portions of the development shall
be required to confer upon the applicant the rights set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-49 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52.
§ 17-126.5. Plat Required.
The general development plan shall be submitted in plat form at a scale of
about one inch equals 200 feet, or such other scale permitting the entire
site to be shown on one sheet no larger than 36 inches by 42 inches.
Enlargements of portions of the plan may be submitted on separate sheets
of the same size.
§ 17-126.6. Plat Details and Other Documents. [Ord. #98-1096, §§ 2
— 5; Ord. #00-1152, §§ 1 — 3; Ord. #07-1398 § 2]
The plat and application shall include the following information in mapped
and written form. Those elements drawn on a plat shall be drawn
reasonably to scale:
a. General contours not to exceed ten-foot intervals;
b. Total tract area and the estimated acreage for each major component
use of the development;
c. Proposed land use plan indicating the total tract area and general
locations of the land used to be included in the development including
any farmland to be preserved, the total number of dwelling units by
types and locations, if applicable, and the total amount of
nonresidential floor area for each use in the development. The land area
to be occupied by each land use type shall be estimated together with
the gross floor area and floor area ratios of each;
d. Proposed circulation plan showing the general location and types of
transportation facilities including off-street parking, loading and
pedestrian systems on-tract as well as proposed improvements to the
existing transportation system, both on-tract and off-tract, and as may
be required by the Mercer County Development District together with a
traffic management plan for reducing peak hour traffic such as
staggered work hours, flex time, van pooling, corporate sponsored
transit plans, or similar programs. In any instance where the site abuts
a railroad, consideration shall be given for locating a potential railroad
station in the event passenger service is ever revived and the
Transportation Development District requires a station;
e. Proposed open space plan showing the proposed area and general
location of parks and any other land area to be set aside to open space,
wetlands, other conservation areas, recreation areas and buffer areas
together with a general description of the improvements proposed in
§ 17-126.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-126.6
AO:487
each area and the proposed plan for the operation and maintenance of
these areas;
f. Proposed schematic utility plan showing the need for and showing the
proposed location(s) of the sewage collection and treatment system,
water supply and distribution system, drainage facilities, proposed
methods of handling solid waste disposal, and the recycling of
recyclable materials, and a plan for the operation and maintenance of
the proposed utilities;
g. Proposed schematic storm water management plan showing the
proposed method of controlling and managing storm water on the site
and, if appropriate, related off-tract storm water management facilities;
h. An environmental inventory including a description of the vegetation
and any major wooded areas, soil types, topography, geology, surface
hydrology, (wetland area and wetland buffer areas, stream corridors,
floodways and flood hazard areas), climate and cultural resources of the
site, existing man-made structures or features, and the probable impact
of the development on the environmental attributes of the site;
i. A community facility plan indicating the scope and type of supporting
community facilities included in the plan including, but not limited to,
any sites for educational, cultural, historic, library, hospital, fire house,
police station, and recreation uses;
j. A housing plan outlining the number of housing units to be provided
and the extent to which any housing obligation assigned to the
municipality pursuant to P.L. 1985,c.222 (C.52:27D-301 et al.) will be
fulfilled by the development;
k. A local service plan indicating those public services which the applicant
proposes to provide and which may include, but not be limited to, water,
sewer, cable TV, solid waste disposal, recycling, emergency services,
communication services and hazardous waste management;
l. A fiscal report estimating the demand on municipal services to be
generated by the development and the financial impacts on the
township and school district including a projection of tax revenues for
the township, school district, and the county according to the projected
timing schedule for completion of the development;
m. A proposed timing schedule, including the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents, if
any, and nonresident users who occupy any section of the development
prior to completion of each section as well as prior to the completion of
the entire development. Each section of the development shall
coordinate the developer's interest with the public's interest in such
things as the size of each phase, financing costs, bonding, and mixed
uses with logical infrastructure improvements that work properly in the
event no subsequent section(s) of the development takes place. Logical
infrastructure shall include, but not be limited to, the water distribution
§ 17-126.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-126.6
AO:488
system, sewage collection and treatment facilities, coordinated on-site
circulation systems, off-tract road improvements, dedicated open
space, stabilized soil, and storm water control facilities.
n. A written proposed developer's agreement between the township and
the developer or its assignees. A draft agreement shall be initiated by
the applicant and the municipality based upon the approval of the
general development plan prior to preliminary subdivision or site plan
approvals of any phase of the development. The final agreement shall
be executed prior to or at the time of final subdivision or site plan
approval of any phase of the development. The municipal agreement
should specify:
1. The length of time within which zoning rights are vested, not to
exceed 20 years, or such lesser time approved by the approving
authority provided the approval period is at least five years.
2. The applicant's general commitments to phasing in applicable
infrastructure improvements (water, sewer, roads), community
facilities (police, fire, ambulance, library and schools as
applicable), and the method of participating in the township's
housing program.
3. Subject to the rights of the applicant pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-45.1.a the applicant's commitment to abide by changes in
applicable State, Federal or municipal statutes, laws, ordinances
and regulations, such as environmental, infrastructure, and
housing requirements, which changes require modification to prior
approvals relating to construction, funding, phasing and/or site
plan design.
4. Subject to the rights of the applicant pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-45.1.a, the applicant's commitment to reasonably remedy
environmental or infrastructure problems identified by the
township and required to be remedied as a result of changes in
applicable new State, Federal, or municipal statutes, laws,
ordinances or regulations.
5. The applicant's commitment to a phasing or timing schedule that
includes an updating of existing traffic, water, sewer and similar
facilities such as referenced in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 above at each
phase in order to make any necessary adjustments to the timing
schedule and necessary on-site and/or off-tract improvements
based on actual experience rather than initial projections.
6. The form of the agreement shall contain the right of the township
to require the developer, if so determined after appropriate notice
to the developer and a hearing, to provide for the ongoing updating
of studies and to pay the costs of its increased or decreased fair
share of on-site and off-tract improvements which are required by
the applicable law governing such improvements at the time of the
approval of the general development plan based upon the pro rata
§ 17-126.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-126.6
AO:489
§ 17-126.7. Procedures. [Ord. #98-1096, § 6; Ord. #00-1152, § 4]
A general development plan shall be submitted as follows:
share assigned to the development plan based upon the pro rata
share assigned to the developer, to deal with unanticipated events
and the need to accelerate or add, or reduce or eliminate,
additional improvements directly due to the development.
7. The form of agreement shall provide for cooperation in the
execution of endorsements relating to New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy permits, as permitted by law.
o. Nothing herein shall be construed to relinquish any rights of Hopewell
Township under the law.
a. The submission shall be accompanied by a fee as required in the Fee
Ordinance;
b. The general development plan shall be submitted prior to the granting
of preliminary approval. The plan shall be submitted no later than 20
working days prior to the date of the planning board meeting. The
submission shall consist of 15 copies of the required data;
c. The approving authority shall grant or deny the plan within 95 days of a
complete application, or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant. Failure of the planning board to act within the
period prescribed shall constitute general development plan approval.
A general development plan may be granted approval conditioned on
the necessary county, State, municipal or other approving or licensing
agencies acting favorably on or issuing permits and/or licenses prior to
preliminary or final approval of either the entire development or any
phase of the development;
d. Prior to plan approval, the approving authority shall schedule and
conduct a public hearing on the matter. Notice shall be done in
accordance with section 17-55, Notice of Hearing;
e. If, after approval of a general development plan, the applicant wishes to
revise the timing schedule, or to vary the location or types of land uses,
or to increase the density of dwelling units, if applicable, or to increase
the floor area ratio of nonresidential uses, the plan may be revised or
amended only upon an application by the developer approved by the
approving authority except, however, that the developer may reduce
the number of dwelling units, if applicable, of reduce the amount of
nonresidential floor space by no more than 15% of the prior approved
general development plan without requiring approval by the approving
authority, except that there shall be no reduction in the level of
improvements, off-tract contributions, participation in the housing
program (other than developmental fees based upon the equalized
assessed value of improvements to the property), or similar conditions
set forth in the earlier plan approval unless and until there is a revised
§ 17-126.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-126.7
AO:490
plan approved by the approving authority. A revision to the timing
schedule shall be reviewed by the approving authority. Any delays in
complying with the prior approved timing schedule that have been
determined by the approving authority to have been caused by matters
beyond the reasonable control of the developer shall result in an
extension of all subsequent phases of the development by at least
six months, unless more time is approved by the approving authority.
Matters beyond the reasonable control of the developer shall include
but not be limited to such things as delays in receiving governmental
licenses and approvals where the developer made timely and complete
submissions allowing for normal processing times, any lawsuits
enjoining or delaying development from proceeding, strikes, war,
national emergencies, or amended or new laws requiring new or
amended applications for licensing or other governmental approvals
and major national economic changes. Matters determined by the
approving authority to have been within all or some control of the
developer shall be judged on an individual basis;
f. Upon the completion of each section of the development, defined as
having received every certificate of occupancy for every structure in
each section, the developer shall notify the administrative officer, by
certified mail, that the developer is fulfilling his obligations under the
approved plan. If such notification is not received, the township shall
notify the developer, by certified mail, in order to determine whether or
not the terms of the agreement of the approved plan are being complied
with;
g. If a developer does not complete any section of the development within
eight months of the date provided in the approved plan, or within the
amended time schedule as provided in subsection 17-126.7e above, or
at any time the township has cause to believe that the developer is not
fulfilling his obligations, the township shall notify the developer, by
certified mail, and the developer shall have 30 days within which to give
evidence that he is fulfilling his obligations pursuant to the approved
plans. If, after a hearing on the matter, the township finds good cause to
terminate the approval, it shall provide written notice of same to the
developer and the approval shall terminate 30 days thereafter;
h. In the event a developer who has general development plan approval
does not apply for preliminary approval of at least the first phase of the
development within five years of the date of approval of the general
development plan, the township shall have cause to terminate the
approval;
i. In the event that a development is complete before the end of the term
of approval, the approval shall terminate on the date upon which a
certificate of occupancy has been issued for the final structure in the
last section of the development in accordance with the timing schedule
set forth in the approved general development plan and the developer
has fulfilled all of his obligations pursuant to the approval.
§ 17-126.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-127
AO:491
§ 17-127. through § 17-137. (RESERVED)
§ 17-127 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-127
AO:492
ARTICLE VIII
ZONING — GENERAL PROVISIONS62
§ 17-138. ZONING DISTRICTS. [Ord. No. #2018-1679, adopted
January 29, 2018; Ord. #02-1268; Ord. #03-1295, § 1; Ord.
#04-1326, § 1; Ord. #05-1359, § II; Ord. #05-1360, § I; Ord.
#05-1361, § II; Ord. #09-1484; Ord. No. 2016-1645; Ord. No.
2017-1666; Ord. No. 2017-1669; Ord. No. 2017-1671; Ord. No.
2017-1672; Ord. No. 2018-1679; Ord. No. 2018-1687]
a. Map Adopted. The township is divided into zoning districts as shown on
the official zoning map, which has been adopted as part of this
chapter.63
b. Map Amendments.64
1. This zoning map was amended to indicate an extension of the HBOG
District in October 1991.
2. This zoning map was amended January 1995 to provide for the
extension of the R-5 District.
3. This zoning map was amended October 17, 1996 (Ord. #96-1049)
to enlarge the R-100 District to abut Route 31 in the area northwest
of Pennington Borough.
4. This zoning map was amended April 21, 1997 (Ord. #97-1068),
extending the boundary of the HBO District to include all of Lot
6.09 in Block 32.
5. This zoning map was amended August 4, 1997 (Ord. #97-1073), so
as to include Lot 6 in Block 85 within the C-1-G District.
6. This zoning map was amended November 3, 1997 (Ord. #97-1084),
to indicate an extension of the HBO-G District October 1991 and
further amended to add a new R-6 District in October 1997.
7. This zoning map was amended 12-1-1997 (Ord. #97-1089) so that
"SC" District is hereby extended to include Lot 8, Block 66.
8. This zoning map was amended 7-6-2000 (Ord. #00-1154) to
substitute the MC-Mountain Conservation District for the R-250
District, to substitute the VA- Valley Agricultural District for the
R-200 and R-200-G Districts and the OP Office Park District for the
IOP and IOP-G Districts.
62.Editor's Note: Former subsection 17-3.1a-j was renumbered as Article VIII, sections
17-138-17-147. Sources contained herein include Ordinance Nos. 528, 556-80, 580-81,
594-81, 686-85, § 15, 698-86, 723-86, §§ 12, 13, 743-87, § 1, 91-904, § 2, 93-962, § 1.
63.Editor's Note: The zoning map referred to herein is included as an attachment to this
chapter as Appendix B. Historic Landmarks are designated in Subsection 17-244.4
64.Editor's Note: The map amendments referred to herein are included as an attachment to
this chapter in Appendix C.
§ 17-138 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-138
AO:493
9. The zoning map was amended 9-20-2001 (Ord. #01-1206) to
redesignate each and every R-250 District to the MC-Mountain
Conservation District and redesignate each and every R-200 and
R-200-G District to the VA-Valley Agriculture District.
10. The zoning map was amended 9-20-2001 (Ord. #01-1207) as
follows:65
(a) The OP-Office Park Zoning District is hereby established in the
Township of Hopewell.
(b) The official zoning map of the Township of Hopewell is hereby
amended in order to delete those properties identified on the
attached Schedule A-1 from the IOP Zoning District and to
include said properties in the SC Zoning District.
(c) The official zoning map of the Township of Hopewell is hereby
further amended in order to delete those properties identified
on the attached Schedule A-2 from the IOP-G Zoning District
and to include said properties in the OP Zoning District.
(d) The official zoning map of the Township of Hopewell is hereby
further amended in order to delete those properties identified
on the attached Schedule A-3 from the IOP-G Zoning District
and to include said properties in the VA Zoning District.
(e) The official zoning map of the Township of Hopewell is hereby
further amended in order to delete those properties identified
on the attached Schedule A-4 from the IOP Zoning District and
to include said properties in the VA Zoning District.
(f) The official zoning map of the Township of Hopewell is hereby
further amended in order to delete those properties identified
on the attached Schedule A-5 from the IOP Zoning District and
to include said properties in the VA Zoning District.
(g) The official zoning map of the Township of Hopewell is hereby
further amended in order to delete those properties identified
on the attached Schedule A-6 from the HBO Zoning District
and to include said properties in the VA Zoning District.
11. The zoning map was amended 9-20-2001 (Ord. #01-1208) as
follows:
(a) The official zoning map of the Township of Hopewell is hereby
amended in order to delete those properties identified on the
attached Schedule B-1 from the IOP-G Zoning District and to
include said properties in the SI Zoning District.
65.Editor's Note: The schedules referred to herein are included as attachments to this
chapter in Appendix C.
§ 17-138 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-138
AO:494
(b) The official zoning map of the Township of Hopewell is hereby
further amended in order to delete those properties identified
on the attached Schedule B-2 from the SI-G Zoning District and
to include said properties in the SI Zoning District.
12. The official zoning map of the Township of Hopewell was amended
December 19, 2002.
13. The official zoning map of the Township of Hopewell is hereby
clarified to delete thereon any designation of the proposed
Traditional Neighborhood District (TND).
14. The Official Zoning Map of the Township of Hopewell is hereby
amended in order to delete those properties identified on the
attached Schedule "A-7"1 from the "VRC" Zoning District and to
include said properties in the "OP" Zoning District.
15. The zoning map was amended 11-14-2005 (Ord. #05-1359) to
designate the new OLI District as depicted on the attached map
amendment.
16. The zoning map was amended 11-14-2005 (Ord. #05-1360) to add a
part of Lot 19, Block 49 to the C-1, Neighborhood Retail
Commercial District, as depicted on the attached zoning map
amendment.
17. The zoning map was amended 11-14-2005 (Ord. #05-1361) to
designate the new VRC-HLI District as depicted on the attached
map amendment.
18. Zoning Map Amendment, Extension of R-5 District, January, 1995,
was adopted 11-23-2009 (Ord. #09-1484) thereby revising the
zoning map of the Township of Hopewell so as to include the
property known as Lot 10.04, Block 78, in the R-5 Zoning District.
19. The official zoning map of the Township of Hopewell was amended
on November 14, 2016 (Ord. No. 2016-1645) to designate Block 33,
Lots 1.021 and 1.022 as the Pennytown Redevelopment Area
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7.c.
20. The official zoning map of the Township of Hopewell was amended
on October 23, 2017 to designate Block 78.09, Lot 21 as the
Woodmont Redevelopment Area pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7.c.
21. The official zoning map of the Township of Hopewell was amended
on November 27, 2017 to designate Block 78, Lot 17 within the
Inclusionary Multi-Family - 1 Zone (IMF-1).
22. The official zoning map of the Township of Hopewell was amended
on November 27, 2017 to designate Block 85, Lots 3, 4, 5.01, 7 and
24 known as the Zaitz Redevelopment Area pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-7.c.
§ 17-138 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-138
AO:495
§ 17-139. ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
Zoning district lines are intended to follow street centerlines, streams, and
lot lines unless specific dimensions are indicated. Dimensions are in feet,
measured horizontally and measured from the nearer street right-of-way
line (even if the centerline of that street serves as a zoning district line).
The location of any disputed zoning district line shall be determined by the
board of adjustment. Where a street serves as a zoning district line and it
is lawfully vacated, the former centerline shall be considered the zoning
district line.
§ 17-140. INTERPRETATION OF ZONING REQUIREMENTS.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be construed to set forth the minimum requirements which will, in
accordance with present and future needs, best promote the health, safety,
morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as
efficiency and economy in the process of development and the maintenance
of property values previously established. It is not the intent of this chapter
to change or annul any existing or future easements, reverters, or other
restrictive covenants affecting the use or design of land or structures
within the township; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a
greater restriction upon the use or design of land or structures, or requires
larger yards, courts, or open spaces than are required in such covenants,
the provisions of this chapter shall apply. In the event of conflict among
provisions of this chapter, the specific provisions shall take precedence over
the general provisions and, in any event, the most restrictive of conflicting
provisions shall apply.
23. CF Hopewell Redevelopment Area.
(a) The official zoning map of the Township of Hopewell was
amended on November 27, 2017 to designate Block 91, Lots
3.11, 3.14, 3.161, 3.181, 3.191, 3.22, 3.95 and 3.961 and Block
93, Lots 3.01, 5.01 and 6.01 known as the CF Hopewell
Redevelopment Area pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7.c.
(b) The official zoning map of the Township of Hopewell was
amended on January 29, 2018 (such date being the date of the
final passage of this Ordinance No. 2018-1679) to designate
Block 91, Lots 3.11, 3.14, 3.161, 3.181, 3.191, 3.22, 3.95 and
3.961 and Block 93, Lots 3.01, 5.01 5.02 and 6.01 known as the
CF Hopewell Redevelopment Area pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-7.c.
24. The official zoning map of the Township of Hopewell was amended
on March 26, 2018 (such date being the date of the final passage of
this Ordinance #18-1687) to designate Block 85, Lot 30 and Block
86, Lots 32, 33, 34 and 130 in the Zaitz Redevelopment Area
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7.c.
§ 17-138 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-141
AO:496
§ 17-141. APPLICATION OF ZONING REQUIREMENTS.
No structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed or used and no existing
structure shall be reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, moved or
used, nor shall any land be occupied or used, nor shall any open space
contiguous to any structure, be encroached upon or reduced, except in
conformity with the regulations established by this chapter for the district
in which such structure, land or open space is located.
§ 17-142. PROHIBITED USES.
All principal uses which are not expressly permitted by the terms of this
chapter are prohibited, except as provided in section 17-143.
§ 17-143. NONCONFORMING USE OF STRUCTURES AND LOTS.
All uses structures and lots legally in existence January 1, 1979 may be
continued even though they do not conform to the applicable requirements
of this chapter. Any nonconforming structure may be restored or repaired
in the event of partial destruction. No nonconforming use shall be enlarged
in extent or changed in character to other than a conforming use and
no nonconforming structure shall be reconstructed, altered, converted or
added to, so as to enlarge the nature or degree of nonconformity.
Construction of any structure on a vacant lot which is not in compliance
with the standards set by the present ordinance shall be deemed to
constitute an enlargement of the nature or degree of nonconformity and is
not allowed under this article unless in accordance with paragraph d.
a. Abandonment. Whenever a nonconforming use is terminated or
abandoned, it may not be resumed. If a nonconforming use is not
actively pursued for a period exceeding one year, it shall be
conclusively presumed to have been abandoned. Whenever a
nonconforming structure is abandoned, it may not be repaired,
reconstructed, altered, converted or used thereafter except in
compliance with this chapter. If a nonconforming structure is partially
destroyed by fire or other casualty, and remains unrepaired or unused
for a period exceeding one year, it shall be conclusively presumed to
have been abandoned.
b. Merger of Existing Contiguous Nonconforming Lots. Any two or more
contiguous lots of record which are in the same ownership on January 1,
1979 and which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter, or to
any amendments hereof, shall be deemed to be merged into a single
undivided parcel.
c. Zoning Changes. If any changes to zoning requirements render any use,
structure or lot nonconforming, the provisions of this section 17-143
shall apply to such nonconformity.
d. Subdivision, Site Plans and Building Permits Previously Approved and
Issued. Section 17-143 shall not be applicable to any subdivision or site
§ 17-141 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-143
AO:497
§ 17-144. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
Any accessory building attached to a principal building is part of the
principal building and shall adhere to the yard requirements for the
principal building. Unless otherwise specified in Article IX, detached
residential accessory buildings shall be permitted only in side and rear
yards and shall have side yard and rear yard setback requirements
equivalent to one-half those required for principal buildings.
plan which was duly approved prior to its enactment, during those
periods provided for by section 17-21 and/or section 17-43. Also this
section 17-143 shall not be applicable to any construction covered by a
building permit which was duly issued prior to the enactment of such
section for a period of one year following such enactment or the period
for which the building permit or renewal thereof remains in effect.
e. Enlargement of Nonconforming Residential Structures in Residential
Zones.
1. Any single family dwelling may be enlarged, even though the
structure may be on a nonconforming lot, or the existing structure
on the lot may have one or more dimensional violations. Such
enlargement shall be permitted without an appeal to the approving
authority provided:
(a) Such enlargement, extension or increase by itself conforms
with the use requirements of the zoning ordinance and does
not increase the nonconformity of the existing dimensional
setback violations; and
(b) The area of such enlargement, extension or increase when
aggregated with the area of the existing building, does not
exceed the maximum lot coverage standard permitted in that
zone.
2. No accessory building may be added to a nonconforming building
except that, in residential zones, an accessory building may be
added to a nonconforming single family dwelling or a single family
dwelling on a nonconforming lot provided that:
(a) The accessory building, by itself, conforms with all
requirements of this chapter; and
(b) The area of such accessory building, when aggregated with the
area of the principal building does not exceed the maximum lot
coverage standard permitted in the zone.
§ 17-143 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-145
AO:498
§ 17-145. CONVERSION OF SINGLE FAMILY TO TWO-FAMILY
OCCUPANCY.
A single family dwelling in existence in any residential district on January
1, 1979 may be converted into and used as a two-family dwelling provided
that:
§ 17-146. SETBACKS IN EXCESS OF SPECIFIED REQUIREMENTS.
Whenever a pattern of existing building setbacks or front yards is
established, on the same side of a street, which is larger than the front yard
requirement by this chapter, no new building shall be constructed closer to
the street than the established pattern. As proof of a pattern of setbacks
there must be located at least five buildings in a 1,000 foot row. Proof of
the existence of such a pattern and compliance with this requirement is the
responsibility of the applicant.
§ 17-147. FARMS AND AGRICULTURAL USES. [Ord. #93-962, § 1]
Farms and other agricultural uses are permitted as principal uses in all
districts. Barns, silos, tool sheds, fences, walls and other facilities which
are customary for agricultural pursuits are permitted as accessory uses.
Fences permitted herein may be up to eight feet in height where such
fences enclose or protect actively farmed areas. Such fences must conform
to the sight line requirements of section 17-105 (sight triangles) and section
17-83d (driveways). One horse may be kept or raised only on a lot of three
acres or larger, and for each additional horse, one additional acre shall be
required. These regulations apply only to lots under 10 acres. Cattle, sheep
a. The legal and beneficial owner or owners of all of the interest in the
premises actually reside there, as their principal residence;
b. The required off-street parking is provided;
c. The construction official determines that each dwelling unit contains
sufficient space for all proposed occupants.
d. The department of health determines that the well is capable of
providing adequate potable water supply for all residents;
e. The department of health determines that the septic system or other
sewage disposal facilities are adequate for all proposed residents;
f. The owners of the structure file appropriate forms and certificates with
the township administrator and obtain township approval (based on
compliance with the provisions of this chapter) prior to the conversion;
g. Two-family occupancy is authorized for one year following township
approval of the conversion; authorization may then be obtained
annually, upon filing of appropriate forms and certificates and township
approval issued by the township administrator (based upon continuing
compliance with the provisions of this chapter).
§ 17-145 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-147
AO:499
and other livestock may be kept or raised only on lots of five acres or larger.
Paddock holding or feeding lots, animals shelters, barns or pens shall not be
closer than 100 feet of any adjacent property line in any residential district.
§ 17-148. COMMUNICATIONS AND WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS, ANTENNAS, FACILITIES AND
EQUIPMENT. [Ord. #00-1162, § 1; Ord. #07-1417, § I]
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide sound land use
policies, procedures, and regulations for the location and placement of
communications and wireless telecommunications, towers, antennas,
facilities and equipment within the Township of Hopewell in order to
protect the community from the visual and other adverse impacts of
same and to preserve the scenic and historic character of the
countryside that the Hopewell Township Master Plan seeks to protect.
This section seeks to meet the mandate of the Telecommunications Act
of 1996, and at the same time, without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, to:
1. Protect residential areas and land uses from the potential adverse
impacts of towers and related structures;
2. Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and along
major transportation corridors;
3. Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
4. Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites,
and other existing structures, as primary options rather than
construction of additional single-use towers;
5. Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal;
6. Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape, screening and
innovative camouflaging techniques;
7. Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and
efficiently;
8. Consider the public health and safety of communications towers;
and,
9. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through proper engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
10. So that the township committee can be provided with the most up
to date information regarding communication towers and
antennas, the township committee requests the zoning board of
§ 17-147 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-148
AO:500
adjustment and the planning board to provide it with annual
reports regarding the operation of this section.
b. General Requirements.
1. Communications Towers. Communications towers, including, but
not limited to, broadcast facilities, fleet dispatch, aircraft
communication, and cellular communications shall be permitted as
a conditional use in any nonresidential zone district. No
communications towers shall be permitted in any residential zone
district.
(a) The following conditions shall be met for any communications
tower:
(1) The applicant shall first demonstrate that no other existing
tower or structure may be used for the subject application.
Such demonstration may include but not be limited to
expert reports and responses to bona fide inquiries to
owners of existing towers or structures concerning the
availability of space.
(2) The maximum height of the communications tower shall be
150 feet.
(3) The communications tower shall be set back from any
property line a minimum distance equivalent to either the
minimum front yard setback required in the zoning district
in which the tower is located or 110% of the height of the
tower, whichever is greater.
(4) The minimum lot size shall be equivalent to either the
minimum lot size required in the zoning district in which
the tower is located or 2.5 acres, whichever is greater.
(5) Any communications tower shall comply with the
promulgated radiation emissions standards of the F.C.C.
(6) Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, no
communications tower shall be located in an historic
district or on an historic site, not located in an historic
district, which meets Federal, State or local requirements
for historic designation.
(b) Any communications tower that meets the conditional use
standards set forth above shall also conform to the following
bulk standards:
(1) The communications tower shall be set back from any
residence a minimum of 500 feet.
§ 17-148 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-148
AO:501
(2) To the extent feasible, communications towers shall be
painted or disguised to minimize contrast with the natural
environment.
(3) Accessory structures or buildings for equipment not
exceeding 300 square feet in area and 12 feet in height
shall be permitted.
(4) The communications tower and any accessory structures
or buildings for equipment shall be enclosed within a solid
wooden fence at least seven feet and no more than eight
feet high, as approved by the township engineer, which
shall include a locking security gate.
(5) A visually impervious landscape buffer shall be installed
outside the fence around the communications equipment
compound, to shield completely from public view, the base
of the tower, any accessory structures or buildings and
parking. The landscape buffer shall be 20 feet in width and
shall include native evergreen and deciduous trees at least
eight feet high at the time of planting, and the number of
trees shall be based on the equivalent of staggered double
rows at eight feet on center.
(6) Any approval shall be so conditioned as to allow additional
communications operators to lease space on the subject
tower.
(7) All other applicable regulations of this section shall apply.
(c) The communications towers and any accessory structures or
buildings are considered as a principal use. The parcel may
have this use as a second principal use.
2. Wireless Telecommunications Antenna.
(a) Wireless telecommunications antenna is defined as a system of
electrical conductors that transmit or receive radio frequency
signals, digital signals, analog signals, or electromagnetic
waves for wireless communications.
(b) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter 17 to the contrary,
wireless telecommunications antennas installed on existing
buildings or structures, and structures accessory to the
antennas, are considered to be a permitted use in any zone,
subject to site plan approval and the requirements set forth
herein.
(c) The applicant shall site new wireless antennas or equipment
within the applicant's search area according to the priority
schedule below (Number 1 constituting the highest priority).
As indicated below, every effort shall be made to locate new
§ 17-148 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-148
AO:502
antennas in a nonresidential zone, and the applicant shall
demonstrate that such a location is not available before
approval is granted for antennas in a residential zone.
PriorityCategory Equipment Location Permitted (P)
1 Commercial1
Transportation2
Antenna Collocated with other antennas on
existing structure or tower within a
transportation corridor
P
2 Commercial1
Transportation2
Antenna Existing structure or tower within a
transportation corridor
P
3 Commercial1 Antenna Collocated with other antennas on
existing structures or towers
P
4 Commercial1 Antenna Existing structure or tower P
5 Residential3
Transportation2
Antenna Collocated with other antennas on
existing structures or tower with a
transportation corridor
P
6 Residential3
Transportation2
Antenna Existing structure or tower P
7 Residential3 Antenna Collocated with other antenna on
existing structure or tower
P
8 Residential3 Antenna Existing structure or tower P
1"Commercial" includes the VRC-HLI, C-1, SC, SC-1, HBO, OICC, SI, OP, OLI, IC, RO-1, RO-2, RO-3, R-6
and Q zones
2"Transportation" means the lot has frontage on Route 31, Route 29 or 1-95
3"Residential" includes the R-5, R-50, R-75, R-100, R-150, VRC and MRC zones
(d) Wireless telecommunications antennas shall not extend more
than 10 feet from the existing building or structure on which
they are located.
(e) Structures accessory to the antennas shall conform to the
following requirements.
(1) The maximum size of the accessory structure shall be 300
square feet, and the height shall not exceed 12 feet.
(2) The accessory structure shall not extend more than 15 feet
from the existing building or structure.
(3) The accessory structure shall meet the setback
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
(4) Adequate parking shall be available.
§ 17-148 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-148
AO:503
§ 17-149. WATER SUPPLY AND ANALYSIS REQUIREMENTS. [Ord.
#03-1298, § 5]
(5) The accessory structure shall be enclosed within a solid
wooden fence at least seven feet and no more than eight
feet high, as approved by the township engineer, which
shall include a locking security gate.
(6) A visually impervious landscape buffer shall be installed
outside the fence around the accessory structure, to shield
completely the facility from public view. The landscape
buffer shall be 20 feet in width and shall include native
evergreen and deciduous trees at least eight feet high at
the time of planting, and the number of trees shall be
based on the equivalent of staggered double rows at eight
feet on center.
(7) Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, no
wireless telecommunications antennas or their accessory
structures shall be located in an historic district or on an
historic site, not located in an historic district, which
meets Federal, State or local requirements for historic
designation.
(8) The wireless telecommunications antennas and their
accessory structures are considered as a principal use.
The parcel may have this use as a second principal use.
(9) Any communications antenna shall comply with the
promulgated radiation emission standards of the F.C.C.
(f) Platform-mounted or side-arm-mounted antennas are not
permitted.
(g) Aesthetics. Antennas shall be designed, located and screened
to blend with and into the existing natural or built
surroundings so as to minimize, without regard to cost,
adverse visual impacts through the use of color and
camouflaging, architectural treatment, landscaping, and other
appropriate means which shall cause the visual impact of such
antennas to be compatible with neighboring residences and
the character of the community as a whole.
(h) Structural safety. The applicant shall submit a report from a
qualified expert certifying that the wireless
telecommunications antenna and equipment facility comply
with the latest structural and wind-loading requirements as
established by applicable building and electrical codes. The
applicant shall provide a description of the number and type of
antennas that may be accommodated and the effect on
structural integrity.
§ 17-148 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-149
AO:504
a. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to ensure
that residential development of two new lots or more and all site plan
applications demonstrate that adequate water supply is available
without adverse effect on neighboring wells and other resources
including but not limited to wetlands and streams.
b. Applicability.
1. The provisions of this section are applicable to all residential
subdivision applications of two new lots or more and all site plan
applications. These applications must also satisfy the requirements
of Chapter 16, section 16-6.
2. Residential subdivisions of one new lot and wells installed for
nonessential use must satisfy the requirements of Chapter 16,
section 16-6 of the Hopewell Township Code. A tract of land exempt
from these provisions because it creates only one new lot shall be
entitled to this exemption only once. Uses defined as nonessential
and wells defined as nonessential wells are required to satisfy the
testing and analysis requirements of Chapter 16, section 16-6.
3. In the event that the municipal agency waives the requirements of
this section, then the provisions of Chapter 16 are applicable.
c. Prohibition. Based on the limited groundwater resources within
Hopewell Township as outlined in M2 Associates March 2, 2001 report
entitled "Evaluation of Groundwater Resources of Hopewell Township,
Mercer County, New Jersey", no wells shall be permitted to be
connected to a permanent irrigation system except if that system is
used entirely for commercial agricultural purposes. In addition, no
wells can be used for the filling of swimming pools.
d. Definitions.
ABANDONED WELL — Shall mean any well which is not in use, has
been illegally installed or improperly constructed, has been improperly
maintained or is damaged, has not been maintained in a condition
that ensures that the subsurface or percolation water of the State are
protected from contamination, has been replaced by another well or
connection to a public supply, is contaminated, is nonproductive, or no
longer serves its intended use pursuant to the State Act.
ABANDONMENT OR DECOMMISSIONING OF A WELL — Shall mean
the permanent closure or sealing of a well in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:9D-3 et seq.
ALTER — Shall mean to enlarge, deepen or replace any portion of an
existing water supply system. The terms "alteration" and "altered" shall
be construed accordingly.
APPLICANT — Shall mean a developer or property owner submitting an
application for development or permit to install or use a well.
§ 17-149 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-149
AO:505
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the application form
and all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval
of a subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use,
zoning variance, or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
APPLICATION FOR WELL PERMIT — Shall mean the application form
and all accompanying documentation required by the township for
approval to locate, construct or alter a water supply in accordance
with subsection 16-6.5 of Chapter 16 and as authorized by N.J.A.C.
7:10-12.40.
AQUICLUDE — Shall mean a low-permeability unit that forms either
the upper or lower boundary of a groundwater flow system.
AQUIFER — Shall mean rock or sediment in a formation, group of
formations, or part of a formation which is saturated and sufficiently
permeable to transmit economic quantities of water to wells and
springs.
AQUIFER TEST — Shall mean a three-part test conducted to obtain
background, pumping, and recovery data from a pumping well and
observation wells in order to determine aquifer characteristics and
assess potential well interference.
AQUIFER, CONFINED — Shall mean an aquifer that is overlain by a
confining bed. The confining bed has a significantly lower hydraulic
conductivity than the aquifer.
AQUIFER, PERCHED — Shall mean a region in the unsaturated zone
where the soil may be locally saturated because it overlies a lowpermeability
unit.
AQUIFER, SEMI-CONFINED — Shall mean an aquifer confined by a
low-permeability layer that permits water to slowly migrate through to
the aquifer. Also termed leaky artesian or leaky confined aquifer.
AQUIFER, UNCONFINED — Shall mean an aquifer in which there
are no confining beds between the zone of saturation and the ground
surface. Water-table aquifer is a synonym.
AQUITARD — Shall mean a low-permeability unit that can store
groundwater and also transmit water slowly from one aquifer to
another.
BARRIER BOUNDARY — Shall mean an aquifer-system boundary
represented by a rock mass that is not a source of water.
BUILDING LOT — Shall mean a designated parcel, tract or area of land
established by plat or otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed
or built upon as a unit and for which the water supply is obtained from
a private on-site well.
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — Shall mean a source and
distribution system for potable water subject to the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1.1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 7:10-1.1 et seq.
§ 17-149 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-149
AO:506
CONE OF DEPRESSION — Shall mean the area around a pumping well
in which the head in the aquifer has been lowered.
CONFINING BED — Shall mean a body of material of low hydraulic
conductivity that is stratigraphically adjacent to one or more aquifers.
DEVELOPER — Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of
a lot or of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other
person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DRAWDOWN — Shall mean the lowering of the water table of an
unconfined aquifer or the potentiometric surface of a confined aquifer
caused by pumping of groundwater from wells. Drawdown is
determined by subtracting the depth to water from the static water
level determined prior to the start of pumping.
FRACTURE TRACE — Shall mean the surface representation of a
fracture zone.
GROUNDWATER — Shall mean water in the saturated zone that is
under a pressure equal to or greater than atmospheric pressure.
GROUNDWATER MINING — Shall mean the practice of withdrawing
groundwater at rates in excess of natural recharge.
HEAD — Shall mean the height above a datum plane of a column of
water. In a groundwater system, it is composed of elevation head and
pressure head.
HYDRAULIC CONDUCTIVITY — Shall mean the capacity of a rock to
transmit water. It is expressed as the volume of water at the prevailing
density and viscosity that will move in unit time under a unit hydraulic
gradient through a unit area measured at right angle to the direction of
flow.
HYDRAULIC GRADIENT — Shall mean change in head per unit of
distance measured in the direction of the steepest change.
HYDROGEOLOGY — Shall mean the study of the interrelationships of
geologic materials and process with water, especially groundwater.
INFILTRATION — Shall mean the flow of water downward from the land
surface into and through the upper soil layers.
INTERFLOW — Shall mean the lateral movement of water in the
unsaturated zone during and immediately after a precipitation event.
Water moving as interflow discharges directly into a surface-water
body.
IRRIGATION SYSTEM — Shall mean equipment including but not
limited to pumps, piping, and sprinkler heads used to distribute water
to grasses, landscape materials, and other vegetation.
LOCAL AGENCY — Shall mean the board of health, which is the
municipal agency responsible for review and approval of an application
for well operation.
§ 17-149 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-149
AO:507
LOCAL ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Shall mean the township health
officer or other technical representative of the township as may be
designated by the Hopewell Township Board of Health.
NJDEP — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
OBSERVATION WELL — Shall mean a nonpumping well used to observe
the elevation of the water table or the potentiometric surface. An
observation well is generally constructed similar to a pumping well.
Also known as monitoring well.
POROSITY — Shall mean the voids or openings in a rock. Porosity may
be expressed quantitatively as the ratio of the volume of openings in a
rock to the total volume of the rock.
POROSITY, PRIMARY — Shall mean the porosity that represents the
original pore openings when a rock or sediment formed.
POROSITY, SECONDARY — Shall mean the porosity that has been
caused by fractures or weathering in a rock or sediment after it has
been formed.
PUMPING TEST — Shall mean a test made by pumping a well for
a period of time and observing the change in hydraulic head in the
aquifer.
PUMPING TEST, CONSTANT RATE — Shall mean a pumping test
during which the discharge rate from the pumping well is maintained
at a constant rate for the duration of the test.
RECHARGE AREA — Shall mean an area in which there are downward
components of head in an aquifer. Infiltration moves downward to
deeper parts of an aquifer in a recharge area.
RECHARGE BOUNDARY — Shall mean an aquifer system boundary
that adds water to the aquifer such as a stream or lake.
RECHARGE, AQUIFER — Shall mean the volume of water that
infiltrates to an aquifer.
RECHARGE, GROUNDWATER — Shall mean the volume of water that
infiltrates to a saturated zone.
RECOVERY — Shall mean the rate at which the water level in a well
rises after the pump has been shut off. Recovery is the inverse of
drawdown.
SATURATED ZONE — Shall mean the zone in which the voids in the
rock or soil are filled with water at a pressure greater than
atmospheric. The water table is the top of the saturated zone in an
unconfined aquifer.
SPECIFIC CAPACITY — Shall mean an expression of the productivity of
a well, obtained by dividing the pumping rate by the drawdown level.
Should be described on the basis of the number of hours pumping
§ 17-149 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-149
AO:508
prior to measurement of drawdown. Value will generally decrease with
increased time of pumping.
STATIC WATER LEVEL — Shall mean the depth to water in the well
prior to the commencement of pumping.
STORAGE COEFFICIENT — Shall mean the volume of water an aquifer
releases from or takes into storage per unit surface area of the aquifer
per unit change in head. It equals the product of specific storage and
aquifer thickness. Also known as storativity.
TRANSMISSIVITY — Shall mean the rate at which water of a prevailing
density and viscosity is transmitted through a unit width of an aquifer
or confining bed under a unit hydraulic gradient. Transmissivity equals
hydraulic conductivity times aquifer thickness.
UNSATURATED ZONE — Shall mean the zone between ground surface
and the water table. Pore spaces in the unsaturated zone contain water
at pressures less than atmospheric.
WATER TABLE — Shall mean the surface in an unconfined aquifer or
confining bed at which the pore water pressure is atmospheric.
WELL INTERFERENCE — Shall mean the result of two or more
pumping wells, the drawdown cones of which intercept. At a given
location, the total well interference is the sum of the drawdowns due to
each individual well.
e. Aquifer Test and Analysis.
1. The testing procedures for a subdivision of two or more new lots
and all site plans shall be based on a hydrogeologic analysis and a
minimum of one aquifer test. The hydrogeologic analysis shall
include the review of available information including but not
limited to published maps and reports depicting Hopewell
Township and surrounding municipalities, stereo pairs of aerial
photographs, New Jersey Geological Survey (NJGS) Geology of the
Groundwater Resources of Mercer County Geologic Report Series
No. 7 and the M2 Associates report entitled "Evaluation of
Groundwater Resources of Hopewell Township, Mercer County,
New Jersey". In addition, the hydrogeologic analysis will include
the design, execution and analysis of aquifer test(s). The data
collection shall be designed and evaluated by a qualified
hydrogeologist. A geologic and hydrogeologic report containing
appropriate maps, well logs, aquifer test data and observation well
data and complying with the requirements of section 17-149 of this
Article shall be prepared and submitted. Prior to conducting any
aquifer test, a preliminary hydrogeologic evaluation and the design
of the aquifer test(s) shall be submitted for review and approval by
the township planning board or Board of Adjustment hereinafter
referred to as board.
§ 17-149 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-149
AO:509
2. The aquifer test shall consist of at least one constant-rate pumping
test conducted at a sufficient rate and duration to be able to
determine aquifer characteristics such as transmissivity and
storage coefficient. As part of the aquifer test, observation wells
are to be monitored to determine and evaluate the cone of
depression and aquifer parameters, and predict the effect of long
term pumping on existing and future wells.
f. Aquifer Test and Analysis Submission Requirements.
1. Submission Requirements.
(a) Aquifer Test Plan.
(b) Property Owner Notification.
(c) Hydrogeologic Report.
2. Aquifer Test Plan.
(a) Prior to conducting an aquifer test, the applicant shall submit
the design of such aquifer test and qualifications of the persons
and firm who will be performing the test, to the board.
(b) The design of the aquifer test shall be developed using the
applicable guidance from "Guidelines for Preparing
Hydrogeologic Reports for Water Allocation Permit Application
with an Appendix on Aquifer-Test Analysis Procedures" NJGS
GSR 29 (1992 or most recent edition) or successor document.
(c) The aquifer test will be conducted in three phases: the
background phase, the pumping phase, and the recovery
phase.
(1) The first phase will involve the collection of background
water levels prior to the start of the test. The second phase
will involve the pumping of water from the well and the
monitoring of water level drawdown in the observation
and pumping wells. The third phase will involve the
recovery of water levels in the observation and pumping
wells after the pump has been shut down. This third phase
of the test should be, at a minimum, the same length as the
pumping phase.
(2) The aquifer test (all three phases) shall not be conducted
during a precipitation event or events in which total
precipitation exceeds or equals 0.5 inches. Precipitation
must be recorded with a National Weather Service
acceptable rain gauge on site during all phases of testing
and measurements for each day must be included in the
hydrogeologic report. If precipitation occurs during the
test, the applicant should provide precipitation amounts
and sufficient data to show that the precipitation did not
§ 17-149 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-149
AO:510
recharge the aquifer during the test and adversely impact
the testing results. If precipitation amounts exceeding 0.5
inches are recorded, the test must be repeated.
(3) The pump must be installed in the pumping well at least 48
hours prior to the start of the background phase.
(4) Prior to starting the background phase, water levels in the
test well and observation wells must be permitted to
stabilize for a minimum of three days after all drilling
activities are complete.
(5) During the background phase, water levels should be
collected at a minimum once per hour for the twenty-fourhour
period prior to the start of pumping. It is the
applicant's responsibility to collect sufficient data to
determine background conditions and to ensure that
antecedent influences can be fully characterized.
Barometer measurements and additional water level
measurements can be made by the applicant to evaluate
the change in water levels resulting from barometric
pressure changes and/or influences from off-site pumping.
(6) On the day of the pumping phase, water levels shall be
collected from all wells to determine static water levels
prior to the start of pumping. Water levels in wells on
neighboring properties should be allowed to stabilize at or
near static water level prior to the start of pumping. For
any observation well which has been pumped within the 24
hours preceding the test, two depth to water
measurements at least one hour apart shall be collected to
show that the well has fully recovered prior to the start of
pumping.
(7) When the pump is started the flow rate shall be adjusted
immediately to a uniform pumping rate as required for a
constant-rate test and in accordance with the approved
aquifer test plan. The flow rate shall not vary more than
10% throughout the test. If the flow rate fluctuates more
than 10%, the test may be deemed invalid and the
applicant required to repeat the notification and testing
process.
(8) Water level measurements during the pumping phase of
the test shall be collected in accordance with Table 1. This
same schedule shall be followed for the recovery phase of
testing upon shutdown of the pump in the test well.
§ 17-149 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-149
AO:511
Table 1: Minimum Frequency of Water Level Measurements in Wells During Pumping
and Recovery Phases of Aquifer Test
Time Since Pumping Began
or Stopped Test Well Observation Wells
0 to 5 minutes 0.5 minutes 0.5 minutes
5 to 10 minutes 1 minute 1 minute
10 to 30 minutes 2 minutes 2 minutes
30 to 60 minutes 5 minutes 5 minutes
60 to 120 minutes 10 minutes 10 minutes
2 to 24 hours 30 minutes 30 minutes
(d) Rate and Duration. The rate and duration of the aquifer test
will depend upon the size of the proposed development and
expected average and peak daily demands for water.
(1) The average daily and average yearly water demand for
human consumption within the subdivision or site plan
must be determined according to the guidelines in N.J.A.C.
7:10-12.6. Demand calculations must include irrigation
systems if proposed and water usage for filling of
swimming pools and all other demands. Demand is to be
determined based on N.J.A.C. 7:10-12.6. The peak-day
demand is twice the average daily demand. For
nonresidential developments, peak-day demand must
include seasonal factors.
(2) The pumping phase will be equal to the greater time
duration of the following: i) the volume of water removed
from the aquifer is equal to the peak-day demand; or ii)
eight hours.
(3) The pumping phase must simulate peak-day demand and
therefore, the pumping phase duration is not to extend
more than 24 hours. The minimum pumping rate is
calculated by dividing the peak-day demand by 1,440
minutes per twenty-four-hour period.
(4) If the demand exceeds 100,000 gallons per day, a New
Jersey Water Allocation Permit must be obtained from the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
(5) For mixed developments containing both residential and
nonresidential properties, each portion will be tested
separately. Wells installed for the residential portion must
be used as observation wells for the nonresidential testing
and wells installed for nonresidential use must be used as
observation wells for the residential testing.
§ 17-149 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-149
AO:512
(6) The pumping rate will be determined by equipping the
discharge pipe with an orifice/manometer apparatus and
calibrated flow meter to instantaneously measure flow rate
and determine total volume pumped from the well.
(7) The discharge shall be directed so that it leaves the site
without infiltrating to the aquifer. Any and all permits
required by the NJDEP for the discharge of water must be
obtained prior to starting the test.
(e) Location. The aquifer test shall be conducted at a location most
representative of site geologic conditions.
(1) For residential subdivisions and site plans, biasing of
testing toward areas of increased fracture density may
result in the township requiring additional testing in areas
of lower fracture density to ensure that adequate yield is
available throughout the proposed subdivision.
(2) If the proposed site is underlain by two or more geologic
formations, then an aquifer test will be required for each
portion of the site underlain by each formation. The test
requirements for each formation will depend on the
number of lots and size of units per formation.
(3) In the event that the preliminary hydrogeologic evaluation
indicates that a surface-water and/or groundwater divide
separates the subdivision, an aquifer test will be required
for each side of the divide.
(f) Observation Wells.
(1) The number of observation wells required per aquifer test
will depend on the number of dwelling units and/or
commercial units. New and existing observation wells may
be located such that they can be used as future watersupply
wells but they shall be located in such a manner
that will yield the most accurate information concerning
the aquifer.
(2) Observation wells should be completed to similar depths
as the pumping well.
(3) Observation wells must be located parallel and
perpendicular to strike of the primary regional fractures
and those intersected by the tested well. Additional
observation wells should be located to evaluate potential
secondary fractures and impacts to adjacent properties.
(4) A fracture trace analysis showing the location and
orientation of fractures beneath the site must be included
with the aquifer test plan. This same analysis with
§ 17-149 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-149
AO:513
additional information regarding septic system locations
must be included in the hydrogeologic report. This
fracture trace analysis must be used to identify all
observation wells on the site and should be used to identify
neighboring property owner wells to be monitored during
the test.
(5) All wells must be located in accordance with the minimum
distances required by N.J.A.C. 7:10-12.12.
(6) One observation well should be located within 200 feet but
no more than 500 feet of the pumping well. If required, a
second observation well must be within 1,000 feet of the
pumping well.
(7) For nonresidential developments with an expected
average daily demand less than 800 gallons per day, one
observation well is required. For residential subdivisions
of two lots, on which one new single-family residence will
be constructed, one observation well is required.
(8) For residential developments of two new residential units
or more, the number of observation wells shall be as
shown in Table 2.
Table 2: Number of Observation Wells Required for Residential Subdivisions/Site
Plans
No. of Proposed New Units No. of Observation Wells
2 to 5 3 (minimum of 1 new well within proposed development)
6 to 25 3 (minimum of 2 new wells within proposed development)
26 to 49 6 (minimum of 4 new wells within proposed development)
50 or more Test proposal submitted to Board and NJDEP for review and
approval
(9) For nonresidential developments with anticipated daily
demands exceeding 800 gallons per day, the number of
observation wells shall be as shown in Table 3.
Table 3: Aquifer Test Requirements for Nonresidential Developments.
Average Demand
(gallons per day) No. of Observation Wells
800 to 1,999 3 (minimum of 1 new well within proposed development)
2,000 to 9,999 3 (minimum of 2 new wells within proposed development)
10,000 to 99,999 6 (minimum of 2 new wells within proposed development)
100,000 or more Obtain NJDEP Water Allocation Permit
§ 17-149 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-149
AO:514
(10) The observation wells and pumping well must have a
geologic log describing the depth and types of soils and
rocks encountered and the depth and yields of all waterbearing
fracture zones. Furthermore, the logs must
include static water level measurements and total yield
estimates for each well.
(g) Water Quality Evaluation.
(1) Groundwater samples must be collected during the
pumping phase from the pumping well.
(2) The samples must be collected in accordance with the
NJDEP Field Procedures Manual.
(3) At a minimum, the samples shall be analyzed by a NJDEPcertified
laboratory for hardness, Gross Alpha Particle
Activity, arsenic, iron, manganese, copper, lead, nitrate,
and total and fecal coliform bacteria. The samples shall
also be analyzed for volatile organic compounds for which
the USEPA or NJDEP has determined maximum
contaminant levels using USEPA Method 524.2.
(4) Field measurements of pH, conductivity, and total
dissolved solids shall be made with calibrated instruments.
(5) If site conditions indicate potential historic use of
pollutants such as heavy metals, pesticides, herbicides, or
other volatile or semivolatile organic compounds at or
near the site, these analyses must be conducted.
(6) Based on past historical operations at the site or at nearby
properties, the board, at its discretion, may require
additional analyses of groundwater to assess potential
future and current impacts.
(7) The results of the water sample analyses will be used to
assess background water quality.
(h) Property Owner Notification.
(1) Notice.
(i) Owners of existing wells on lots located within 500
feet of the subdivision/site plan boundary shall be
given an opportunity to have their wells monitored
during the aquifer test.
(ii) Such opportunity shall be given by the applicant by
notice via certified mail and shall give the time and
place of the aquifer test.
§ 17-149 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-149
AO:515
(iii) A notice acceptable to Hopewell Township is included
in Appendix A.66 This notice may be modified with
approval of the township attorney and the local
enforcement officer. If the application is pending
before a board, the board with jurisdiction must also
approve the change.
(iv) The notice shall indicate that such existing well may
be monitored if agreed to by the well owner provided
the well is readily accessible. Such notice shall
indicate that the existing well owner must respond
within seven days and the applicant's responsibility is
to monitor up to three wells on properties within 500
feet of the subdivision boundaries.
(v) The applicant shall provide a certificate of insurance
for itself and all contractors utilized and pay all costs
associated with the monitoring of any existing
residential well.
(vi) Prior to monitoring, all buried wells must be raised to
a minimum of 12 inches above grade to allow access
and retrofitted with pitless well adapters, etc. per
N.J.A.C. 7:10-12.20 well head requirements.
(vii) All wells shall be chlorinated each time they are
opened for service or monitoring, unless the owner
specifically waives the requirement of chlorination in
writing. Bottled water shall be provided to the
homeowners during the monitoring period and while
the chlorine is detected above the acceptable limits of
chlorination in the public water standards.
(viii) The costs of extending, restoring or replacing a well
damaged as a result of testing shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
(ix) The applicant shall indemnify and hold the Township
and its consultants and representatives harmless from
any liability in connection with these testing
requirements.
(2) Response.
(i) If the owner of the lot within 500 feet of the
subdivision boundaries decides to participate by
agreeing to have their existing well monitored, they
shall notify the applicant by certified mail.
66.Editor's Note: Appendix A, referred to herein, is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 17-149 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-149
AO:516
(ii) Such response shall be provided within seven days of
receipt of the certified notice from the applicant.
(iii) If the applicant receives no response within the time
provided, the response shall be deemed to be
negative.
(i) Protection of Monitored Wells. All reasonable efforts must be
made to protect the potability of water from the monitored
well.
(j) Selection of Wells for Monitoring.
(1) In the case when more than three property owners within
500 feet of the subdivision boundaries decide to
participate and to have their existing wells monitored, only
three must be monitored.
(2) However, if any of the property owners requesting
monitoring have wells completed to a depth less than 100
feet, these wells must also be monitored in addition to the
three other wells.
(3) A map depicting the location of all wells to be monitored
and a list of all property owners within 500 feet of the
subdivision boundary that requested monitoring is to be
submitted to the board for review and approval prior to
implementing the test.
(4) The observation wells on neighboring properties should be
selected to assess if the cone of depression from the
pumping well will extend beyond the subdivision boundary
in any direction.
(5) The board reserves the right to retain a professional
hydrogeologist to review the proposed monitoring
locations and to make recommendations to revise the
locations to be monitored.
(k) Hydrogeologic Report.
(1) A hydrogeologic report must be submitted with each
application for subdivision of two or more lots and all site
plans.
(2) The report shall document the design and implementation
of the aquifer test.
(3) The report shall include all water level data collected
during the three phases of testing.
(4) The report must include calculations of aquifer
characteristics such as transmissivity and storage
§ 17-149 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-149
AO:517
coefficient, calculations of the cone of influence, potential
impacts to adjacent well owners, and the long-term
sustained yield for the wells.
(5) All water level measurements obtained during the aquifer
test shall be included with the report in electronic format
acceptable to the township.
(6) The report shall include a detailed hydrogeologic
description of the aquifers encountered beneath the site
and adjacent properties.
(7) The report must include a detailed evaluation of the water
supply demand for an average and peak day, and this
demand should be supported with information on
anticipated population, expected unit density, and size of
units.
(8) An inventory of all wells within 1,000 feet of the proposed
subdivision/site plan boundaries should be appended. This
inventory should be submitted in electronic format
acceptable to the township.
(9) Figures depicting site geology, topography, water level
elevations, groundwater flow, and development plans shall
be included.
(10) In addition, all water quality sampling data shall be
tabulated and summarized in the report. Only one copy of
the laboratory reports is necessary for filing with the
township.
(11) The report should include a detailed evaluation of
potential impacts from subsurface sewage disposal
systems on groundwater quality. A site plan depicting well,
septic leach field, and fracture trace locations at a
minimum scale of one inch equals 200 feet should be
included. For any and all locations where a fracture or set
of fractures intersects one or more wells and/or septic
leach fields, a detailed assessment of treatment
technologies should be included. The treatment
technologies should provide adequate assurances that any
and all groundwater pumped from the wells will satisfy
Federal and New Jersey Drinking Water Standards and will
not be adversely impacted by the septic leach field
discharges.
(12) The hydrogeologic report shall be prepared and signed by
a qualified hydrogeologist using applicable sections of
GSR 29 or successor document as a guide. A qualified
hydrogeologist shall be an individual who has received a
minimum of a bachelor's degree in geology at an
§ 17-149 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-149
AO:518
accredited institution or has completed an equivalent of
30 semester hours of geological education while obtaining
a bachelor's or master's degree in a related field of
engineering or science at an accredited institution. Such
a person must also demonstrate five years of professional
work experience in the practice of applying geologic
principals to interpretation of groundwater conditions.
The individual shall provide a resume or curriculum vitae
to document education and experience requirements.
(13) The hydrogeologic report shall include the name and
license number of the well driller and pump installer. The
report shall include the names of the persons and firm
responsible for collecting the water level measurements.
In addition, the report shall include copies of the
completed NJDEP Well Records.
(l) Evaluation of Results.
(1) Precipitation. A test conducted during a period in which
0.5 inches or more of precipitation are recorded at or near
the site must be repeated.
(2) Background Phase. Antecedent influences must be
determined, and, if necessary, pumping phase and
recovery phase data must be corrected. Insufficient data to
assess these influences will require repetition of all three
phases of the aquifer test.
(3) Pumping Phase.
(i) If the pumping rate does not exceed the average daily
demand by 120% or the peak-day demand cannot be
pumped within a twenty-four-hour period, the aquifer
beneath the site will be deemed insufficient to meet
the proposed demands and the applicant must reduce
site demands and development units.
(ii) If the pumping rate varies by more than 10% of the
average flow rate, the entire test shall be repeated.
(iii) If the pump shuts down during the pumping phase, the
entire test must be repeated.
(iv) If water levels in the pumping and/or observation
wells exceed the measurement capacity of the devices
used for measuring changes in water levels and
measurements are not recorded with other devices in
§ 17-149 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-149
AO:519
accordance with the schedule listed in Table 1,67 the
test must be repeated.
(v) If the pumping data indicate a change in aquifer
transmissivity as a result of fracture dewatering, all
analyses of the potential radius of influence and
impacts to neighbors, streams, and wetlands must be
conducted using the lowered aquifer transmissivity. If
this lowered transmissivity indicates that the
anticipated demand cannot be supported by the
aquifer beneath the site, the applicant must reduce
the site demand and development units.
(4) Recovery Phase.
(i) For purposes of evaluating water level recovery, the
recovery phase duration will be equal to the pumping
phase duration. For example, if the pumping phase is
eight hours in duration, water levels eight hours after
the pump has been turned off will be compared to the
prepumping static water level to assess recovery rates
and residual drawdown.
(ii) If residual drawdown in the pumping well or any
observation wells exceeds 10% but is less than 20% of
the total drawdown at the end of the recovery phase,
the applicant must show through standard/recognized
aquifer test analytical procedures and calculations
that the well or wells are capable of full recovery. If
full recovery cannot be shown or groundwater mining/
dewatering has occurred, the applicant must reduce
site demands and development units.
(iii) If residual drawdown in the pumping well or any
observation well exceeds 20% of the total drawdown
at the end of the recovery phase, the aquifer will be
deemed insufficient to meet the proposed site
demands and the applicant must reduce site demands
and development units.
(5) Neighboring Wells.
(i) If the drawdown is measured or projected to be more
than one foot at any existing adjacent property well or
along the subdivision boundary, the applicant's
hydrogeologist must evaluate long-term potential
impacts to adjacent properties based on the actual
condition of wells in that zone or along that portion of
the subdivision/site plan boundary.
67.Editor's Note: Table 1, referred to herein, may be found in paragraph f2(c) of this
subsection.
§ 17-149 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-149
AO:520
§ 17-150. through § 17-158. (RESERVED)
(ii) If a drawdown of five feet or more is noted in any
existing adjacent property well, or is projected at any
property boundary, then the aquifer will be deemed to
have insufficient transmissivity to support the
proposed subdivision/site plan. The applicant must
reduce demand and development units to ensure that
drawdown will not exceed five feet at any site
boundaries.
(6) Impacts to Streams and Wetlands. If drawdown is
measured or projected to induce leakage from streams or
wetlands such that baseflow in these streams will be
reduced or wetlands partially or entirely dewatered, then
the demand and development units must be reduced to
prevent adverse impacts to streamflow and wetlands.
(7) Additional Testing. Any test that must be repeated,
restarted, or reconducted at a reduced demand, must
satisfy all the requirements of this ordinance including but
not limited to renotification of all property owners within
500 feet and resubmission of an aquifer test plan for board
approval prior to implementation of the test.
§ 17-149 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-150
AO:521

ARTICLE IX
ZONING DISTRICTS68
§ 17-159. RESIDENTIAL: R-150, R-100, R-75, R-50, R-5 AND R-6.
[Ord. #94-971; Ord. #94-978, §§ 4, 5; Ord. #94-1009, § 3; Ord.
#94-995; Ord. #96-1044, § 1; Ord. #96-1048, §§ 24; Ord. #97-1078;
Ord. #97-1084, §§ 1, 3; Ord. #98-1095; Ord. #00-1155, §§ 2, 3, 5;
Ord. #00-1156, § 1; Ord. #00-1162, § 3; Ord. #00-1164, § 1; Ord.
#00-1170, § 1; Ord. #01-1206, § 9; Ord. #01-1218, §§ 1, 2; Ord.
#02-1268; Ord. #03-1297, § 2; Ord. #04-1325, §§ 3 - 7]
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to recognize the existing pattern
of detached dwellings, to preserve environmentally critical areas as
identified in the adopted master plan and the natural resources
inventory, and to allow the township to provide a variety of housing,
including lower income housing in the identified areas. The selection of
dwelling unit types in the R-5 District should provide a balance of
housing choices attractive to all income and age segments of the
community as part of the township's fair share of the regional housing
needs. The criteria are intended to provide flexibility in the design of
developments to aid in reducing housing costs, encouraging lower
income housing, allowing construction to avoid environmentally critical
areas, and removing residences from busy highways and other potential
nuisances created by noise and visual blight.
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Residences. Single family dwellings and other dwellings, as
provided in the sections relating to specific zoning districts, are
permitted as principal uses. (For conversions, see section 17-145.)
2. Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill and community residences for
persons with head injuries shall be a permitted use in all residential
districts of the township, and the requirements shall be the same as
for single-family dwelling units located within such districts.
3. Cemeteries; golf courses with accessory club house, eating
facilities, tennis courts, swimming pools and similar usual
accessory structures; public library, public parks and playgrounds;
municipal buildings including school bus shelters; fire houses.
4. Farm and agricultural uses including, as accessory uses, horse
riding lessons and a farm stand offering facilities for seasonal sale
68.Editor's Note: Former subsection 17-3.2 a-m was renumbered as Article IX, sections
17-159-17-170. Sources contained herein include Ordinance Nos. 528, 551-80, 566-80,
576-80, 685-85, 686-85, §§ 17-29, 687-85, 690-85, § 1, 707-86, § 1, 723-86, §§ 14-29,
789-88, §§ 1-4, 6, 7, 791-88, §§ 2-7, 801-89, §§ 2, 4-7, 815-89, § 4, 90-837, § 2, 90-841,
§§ 1-3, 90-851, § 1, 90-853, § 5, 90-857, § 1, 91-882, § 1, 91-894, § 1, 91-904, § 1, 92-910,
§§ 2, 3, 92-916, §§ 2-5.
§ 17-159 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-159
AO:523
of products or produce in accordance with the township's Right-to-
Farm Ordinance. (Chapter 22 of the Township Code).
5. Model homes are permitted to be used as a sales office within a
residential development only during the period necessary for the
sale of new homes within that development. In addition to the
model homes, the developer of a property with more than 10
dwelling units may be permitted to use one trailer, or manufactured
home, or modular building, or similar structure as a sales office.
Where a development contains a mix of dwelling unit types
(dwelling unit types are defined as single family homes, and/or
townhouses, and/or apartments), the developer may be permitted
one sales office, as described above, for each housing type as
defined above provided there are more than 10 dwelling units of
each housing type, but in any event no more than three such sales
offices shall be permitted in any one development regardless of
how many dwelling unit types are in the development. Site plan
review and approval shall be required for the sales operation
area(s) in order to review parking, access, landscaping, the
placement of the structures, and plans and guarantees to remove
any temporary structures and/or pavement or parking areas upon
completion of the sales operation.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Private garages, swimming pools, parking areas, tennis courts,
trellises, fences, walls, lamp posts, storage structures and animal
shelters and similar facilities, which in total occupy less than 10%
of the lot, are permitted provided they are accessory and
subordinate to the principal use of the lot.
2. One earth terminal antenna with an associated reflector (or dish) is
permitted on a residential lot only if located either in the rear yard,
or on the roof of a residence positioned below the ridge of the roof,
both locations to be such as to have the antenna and reflector
screened from view from the street. The dishes shall be an
appropriate color to match the background. The setbacks shall
conform to the setbacks for principal buildings for the zone in
which it is located. If necessary to screen the antenna and reflector
from the street, additional planting of shrubs, trees or other plants
shall be required. Said plantings shall be of a type and be located so
as to provide sufficient year-round foliage to provide the yearround
screen. Servicing wires and cables shall be installed
underground. The main reflector shall not exceed a diameter of
eight feet and the overall height of the reflector, the base, and other
associated installation equipment shall not exceed 10 feet.
3. Home Occupation. Structures in which not more than 25% of the
net floor area of the structure is used in the conduct of the home
occupation; there is no change in the exterior appearance of the
structure or premises as a dwelling and no external visible
§ 17-159 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-159
AO:524
evidence of the conduct of the occupation; no sales may be made at
the premises; no part of the home occupation may be conducted in
any accessory building; no person may be employed who is not both
a member of the family of the person conducting the occupation
and an actual resident of the dwelling; no traffic may be generated
by the occupation beyond that normally generated by the use of the
premises as a single family dwelling; no machinery, equipment or
process may be used which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes,
odors or electrical interference detectable at the property lines or
which causes any interference with radio or television reception by
neighboring residences or fluctuation in line voltages beyond the
premises.
4. Tennis Courts. One tennis court is permitted as an accessory use on
a single family dwelling subject to the following restrictions:
(a) To be constructed only on a lot with a minimum area of 60,000
square feet containing a single family dwelling.
(b) The allowable maximum percentage of lot coverage may be
increased only by the area of the tennis court, provided,
however, said increase does not impact any public stormwater
management system.
(c) Fencing around the tennis courts is permitted and shall not
exceed 12 feet in height.
(d) Site plan approval by the planning board is required for
construction of any tennis court in front of the principal
structure.
(e) No tennis court, fencing, or lighting may be constructed within
the setback requirements.
(f) Illumination of any tennis court shall be prohibited except
under the following conditions:
(1) The lot area shall be at least five acres.
(2) Lighting fixtures shall be full cutoff.
(3) Lighting fixture height shall not exceed 20 feet, and shall
be located on the side of the court 30 feet from the
centerline.
(4) Average maintained horizontal illumination on grade shall
not exceed 50 fc. Maximum to minimum uniformity ratio
shall not exceed 4:1.
(5) No light trespass shall be generated from any fixture used
to illuminate the tennis court. Contribution to vertical
illuminance at any point along all property lines shall be
zero at grade and all points above.
§ 17-159 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-159
AO:525
(6) Lighting fixtures must be turned off between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
5. Family day care homes providing child care services to no less than
three and no more than five children at any one time, exclusive of
family members, for no less than 15 hours a week, and registered
as a family day care home pursuant to the "Family Day Care
Provider Registration Act," shall be permitted as an accessory use
to a single family dwelling unit. The zoning requirements shall be
the same as for a single family dwelling unit.
d. Permitted Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted as a
conditional use:
1. Low and Moderate Income Housing Project. In addition, in any R-5
or R-100 District, a low and moderate income housing development
approved prior to the effective date of this section69 erected by a
nonprofit, limited-profit, or for-profit sponsor is permitted in
accordance with, but not limited to programs administered by
State, Federal, and/or other governmental programs conditioned
on the following: The project shall comply with all applicable
building design, construction, and other requirements and
guidelines of the sponsoring governmental agency or, if the
sponsoring agency has no building design and construction
requirements or guidelines, then the project shall follow those in
effect at the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
("NJ HMFA") as certified to the approving authority by the project
architect; no project contains more than 150 units; all the units are
dedicated to occupancy by qualifying low and moderate income
households, except one on-site manager's or superintendent's
apartment unit is permitted; the minimum period of affordability
shall be 40 years instead of 30 years set forth in section 17-92c2;
public water supply and public sanitary sewer service are required;
the density shall not exceed 16 units per gross acre for
developments exclusively for residents age 62 and over, or for
developments exclusively for residents age 62 and over, but where
not more than 20% of the units may be for non-age restricted,
handicapped persons as "handicapped" is defined under State and/
or Federal programs; and the density shall not exceed 10 units per
gross acre for other, non-age restricted developments. Other
design criteria shall meet the bulk and design requirements of
section 17-92d.
2. Pumping stations, transformers and similar utility facilities which
are needed in order to provide utility services directly to the
consumer, but not repair facilities, offices, open storage, work
areas or other aspects of utility operations. Such facilities shall be
landscaped and screened to be appropriately integrated into a
residential neighborhood in accordance with section 17-89 and,
69.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 02-1268, codified herein was adopted on December 19, 2002.
§ 17-159 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-159
AO:526
where safety dictates, shall be enclosed with landscaped fencing.
Communications and wireless telecommunications towers,
antennas, facilities and equipment are not included as a conditional
use herein, and are specifically governed by section 17-148 of this
chapter.
3. Conversion of Existing Accessory Buildings to Residences. In an
effort to preserve the existing character of these rural areas and to
pre serve old farm buildings and old materials, accessory buildings
existing as of July 1, 1986 in the MRC, VRC, and R-150 Districts
may be converted to a residence, with or without subdividing the
lot so as to create a separate lot for each dwelling provided the
following conditions are met:
(a) The maximum number of dwelling units allowed in a converted
building shall be one so that the maximum number of dwelling
units on a lot as a result of the conversion shall be two, e.g. the
original principal dwelling unit plus the conversion. Any
further conversions of additional accessory buildings shall be
permitted only following an approved subdivision that places
each additional residence on a separate lot.
(b) The original lot on which both buildings are located shall be at
least twice the minimum lot size required for the district in
which it is located to assure the conversion does not exceed the
maximum density of the development permitted under the
zoning provisions.
(c) If the converted building is not subdivided into a separate lot,
the original dwelling shall be occupied by the owner of the
tract.
(d) Because original farm accessory buildings may not have been
spaced to meet current setback requirements, any subdivision
that will place these structures on a separate lot may be
approved provided the minimum front, side or rear yards,
individually or in some combination, are not less than half the
setback distance required for the zone in which the property is
located, except that in any event no building shall be converted
that is either closer than 25 feet to a street right-of-way or
another building on the site, or within a required sight triangle,
whether being subdivided on a separate lot or not.
(e) No building intended for conversion shall be in the 100-year
flood plain and the building being converted shall be located in
an area where slopes and other physical conditions permit
proper access to the site, where there is proper sight distance
at the driveway intersection with the street right-of-way, and
where there is sufficient area for adequate off-street parking.
(f) The converted building shall be designed to meet the definition
of a dwelling unit, including all area, space, health and
§ 17-159 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-159
AO:527
construction requirements set forth in other codes and
ordinances.
(g) The converted building shall have an approved well and septic
system prior to a certificate of occupancy.
4. A nursery outlet offering facilities for the sale of farm products
from trees and ornamental shrubs provided the nursery is on a
parcel used for agricultural purposes and meets the minimum
requirements of subsection 17-159g (standards for an agricultural
lot).
5. Public and private nonprofit schools and churches shall be
permitted provided such uses have access from a primary local,
collector, secondary arterial, or primary arterial road as identified
on the adopted circulation plan or, if constructed on a new street
system not shown on the circulation plan, shall have access from a
road having design standards meeting one of these road
classifications. Such uses shall be permitted only when the site can
be designed so the recreational facilities, parking areas, and other
yard spaces which would be used for groups of people or cars shall
be buffered from adjoining residences via environmental
conditions, topography, densely landscaped areas, distance, or
similar design criteria to protect adjoining residential
neighborhoods, meeting at least the minimum requirements of
subsection 17-159g and section 17-89. Primary access to these uses
shall not be through local streets in residential neighborhoods.
6. Resident professional offices in which not more than 25% of the net
floor area of the structure is used for office purposes and there is
no alteration visible from the street or adjacent property lines, and
not more than one person may be employed at one time in addition
to residents of the dwelling and members of the family of the
resident professional.
7. Nonresidential Services in the R-6 District. In the R-6 District, the
development of nonresidential uses shall be conditioned on: (a) a
conceptual plan being prepared and submitted for the entire
development, including all business, market housing, affordable
housing, and other uses, including accessory uses; (b) all
subsequent preliminary and final plans being consistent with the
approved concept plan, as it may be amended, whether or not the
development will be constructed at one time or in phases; (c) the
business portion of the site abutting a primary arterial or
secondary arterial road as set forth in the Circulation Plan of the
Master Plan but being designed so that no driveway serving any
individual use (residential or nonresidential) shall directly access
the abutting arterial road(s); (d) any nursery school or day care
center being located adjacent to, and with access to, an on-site
service road that provides access to the abutting arterial road; (e)
having not more than 30% of the overall development tract acreage
§ 17-159 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-159
AO:528
(residential and nonresidential) devoted to nonresidential uses
which are limited to either a nursery school or day care center
and providing a mix of the following convenience services such
as, but not limited to, banking, professional offices, restaurant
and retail sale of food, pharmaceuticals, and general merchandise.
The provision for nonresidential uses in the development shall be
conditioned on receiving subdivision and site plan approval, which
approval(s) shall require the execution of a developer's agreement
and appropriate restrictions on the nonresidential lots and all
remaining land in order to reasonably guarantee the actual
construction and the phasing in of the low and moderate income
housing obligation in accordance with section 17-92 as an integral
part of the requirements of this zoning district: and, because any
permitted nonresidential use is located on property that is
permitted to be used for residential density as well as the
nonresidential floor area, the nonresidential development shall be
conditioned on the nonresidential portion of the development being
obligated to pay the required affordable housing fee as set forth in
the development fee ordinance, section 10-7c. Any nursery school
or day care center shall be conditioned on meeting the licensing
requirements of the State of New Jersey.
The development of any nonresidential uses in the R-6 District
shall conform to the following zoning standards which shall be
considered general bulk standards for the R-6 District, not specific
standards or "conditions" for a conditional use:
Min. Lot Size 2 acres
Min. Lot Width 275 feet
Min. Lot Depth 300 feet
Min. Front Yard 100 feet from Rt. 31
50 feet from interior streets
Min. Side Yard 50 feet
Min. Rear Yard 50 feet
Min. Distance between Bldgs. 20 feet
Max. Building Height 2 stories, 35 feet
Max. Lot Coverage 65%
Max. Floor Area Ratio 0.2
Min. Off-Street Parking See § 17-95j.
Min. Landscaped Buffer along Rt.
31
25 feet
8. Airport Hazard Area. In recognition of the existing airports located
adjacent to the Pennington-Lawrenceville Road in the VRC District
and the Mercer County Airport off Scotch Road in Ewing Township,
§ 17-159 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-159
AO:529
these existing airports shall be considered a permitted use in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 16:62-2.1(e). Additional buildings,
additions to existing buildings, runway extensions, additions to
parking areas and other improvements serving to increase the
capacity of these airports with respect to the number of aircraft
able to be parked at the airports, or the number of takeoffs and
landings resulting from the increased number of aircraft, shall
be permitted as a conditional use. The conditions for approval of
any airport operations located in Hopewell Township shall be as
follows:
(a) No building located within the runway subzone and the runway
end subzone shall have a building height higher than permitted
under the "Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act." In addition,
no building may have a building height higher than 40 feet, or
one foot of vertical height for each seven feet of horizontal
distance when measured from any property line, whichever is
lower.
(b) The end of the runway shall be no closer than 400 feet to the
property line of the airport.
(c) For each aircraft parking space, there shall be at least one offstreet
parking space for a motor vehicle. Said vehicular
parking spaces shall be located at least 100 feet from the
property line.
(d) Additional structures for the purpose of mechanical repairs
may be approved provided they are located at least 400 feet
from any property line.
(e) Takeoffs and landings shall be limited to daylight hours and no
beacons, runway lights or other lighting in support of night
flying shall be permitted.
(f) Development Limitations in Airport Hazard Areas. In
recognition of the existing airport located adjacent to
Pennington-Lawrenceville Road in the VRC District and the
portion of the airport hazard area extending into Hopewell
Township from the Mercer County Airport located in Ewing
Township, and in accordance with the requirements of N.J.A.C.
16:62 et seq., notwithstanding the permitted uses, building
heights, and other area, yard and bulk requirements permitted
in this section, development in the airport hazard area
surrounding the airport shall be as follows:
(1) The "airport hazard area" is any area of land or water, or
both which may create a dangerous condition for persons
or property in or about an airport or aircraft during
landing or take-off at an airport. It consists of the following
areas surrounding the airport runway:
§ 17-159 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-159
AO:530
[a] The "runway subzone" is that rectangular area along
both sides of the runway extending 1,175 feet from the
centerline along both sides of the runway. No
structures, buildings or trees within this area shall be
so high as to penetrate a plane having a slope that
rises from the side of the runway at a slope of seven
feet horizontal to one-foot vertical. The beginning
point shall be 125 feet off the side of, and parallel to,
the centerline of the runway. The beginning elevation
shall be the elevation of the runway.
[b] The "runway end subzone" is that trapezoid area at
both ends of the runway. Its length shall be 3,000 feet
from the end of the runway measured in a straight line
along an extension of the centerline of the runway. Its
width at the end of the runway shall be equal to the
width of the runway subzone as described above, and
then narrows uniformly to a width of 850 feet at the
far end located 3,000 feet from the runway. No
structures, buildings or trees within this area shall be
so high as to penetrate the lower elevation of either of
the following two planes. The elevations shall be
measured from the elevation of the runway and should
be measured from, or along the extension of, the
centerline of the runway: (i) a plane rising along both
sides of the extension of the runway centerline having
a slope that rises one foot vertically for each seven
feet moved horizontally moving away from one side of
the extended centerline of the runway. The beginning
point shall be 125 feet off to the side of, and parallel
to, the centerline of the runway; (ii) a plane that rises
from the end of the runway that widens as the
distance from the end of the runway increases. The
slope of this plane follows the extended centerline of
the runway and rises one foot vertically for each 20
feet moved horizontally up to a maximum height of
150 feet located at the end of the "runway end
subzone." This plane shall begin with a width of 250
feet at the end of the runway (125 feet on either side
of the centerline of the runway) and widen uniformly
to 850 feet at the end of the "runway end subzone."
[c] The "clear zone" is that trapezoid area at both ends of
the runway. Its length shall be 1,000 feet from the end
of the runway measured in a straight line along an
extension of the centerline of the runway. Its width at
the end of the runway shall be 250 feet, then widens
uniformly to 450 feet at the end of the clear zone
located 1,000 feet from the end of the runway. Half its
§ 17-159 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-159
AO:531
width shall be on either side of the extension of the
centerline of the runway.
(2) Notwithstanding the permitted uses allowed within the
affected VRC, R-100 and R-5 Districts, uses permitted
within the "clear zone" of the airport hazard area shall be
limited to the yard areas of the permitted uses, highways,
open spaces and agriculture. Uses permitted in the airport
hazard area (but outside the clear zone) shall be
residences on lots of at least three acres, yard areas of
permitted uses, highways, open spaces and agriculture.
Applications submitted for permitted uses in the
applicable zoning district that are other than those noted
above shall be reviewed in the interest of eliminating, or at
worst minimizing, the intrusion into the airport hazard
area through the use of cluster zoning or similar design
techniques. For locating highways, they shall be
considered developments with vertical heights as follows:
interstate highways, 17 feet; other public roads, 15 feet;
private roads, 10 feet; and railroads, 23 feet. Where the
permitted development can only be achieved with an
intrusion into the airport hazard area, the township shall
grant only conditional approval, conditioned on the
applicant applying for and receiving a permit from the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation in
accordance with the procedures of N.J.A.C. 16:62 et seq. If
the commissioner denies the request, the township's
conditional approval shall be void and the application shall
have been considered to have been denied.
9. Child Care Centers. Child care centers serving six or more children
at any one time shall be permitted as a conditional use in the MRC,
VRC, R-150, R-100, R-75, R-50, and R-5 residential districts
conditioned on the facility being licensed by the State Department
of Human Services, Division of Youth and Family Services; the use
being a principal use on the lot and not part of a residential
property; the use having no more than 100 children at any one
time; the minimum lot area being the smaller of either six acres or
two times the minimum lot size required in the zoning district in
which the property is located; and the property shall have access
from either an arterial or collector street. The matters in
paragraphs (a) and (b) below shall be normal zoning and design
issues and are not conditions for the conditional use.
(a) The lot requirements shall be:
Min. Lot Width 250 feet
Min. Lot Depth 200 feet
§ 17-159 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-159
AO:532
Min. Front Yard 75 feet (Bldgs and recreation
areas)
Min. Side Yard 75 feet (Bldgs)
Min. Rear Yard 75 feet (Bldgs)
Max. Building Height 35 feet; 2 story
Max. Floor Area Ratio 0.05
Max. Lot Coverage (Bldg. &
Paving)
15%
Min. Setback for driveways
and parking areas from any
lot line
40 feet
Min. Setback for recreation
areas
50 feet from side and rear lot
lines. None permitted in front
yard
(b) Drop-Off Area. Each child care center shall designate at least
six parking spaces as "No Parking: Student Drop-Off and Pick
Up Only". No drop-off area shall be located so it requires
students to cross a street, driveway or aisle to get to the
sidewalk entering the building. Each space shall be located
adjacent to the sidewalk in front of the facility so a child may
exit or enter the vehicle either directly to or from the sidewalk,
such as from parallel parking spaces, or to or from the space
between vehicles in angled parking spaces.
(c) The space between the recreation area and the abutting lot
lines shall be planted with evergreen material spaced so as to
provide a dense visual screen. The recreation area shall be
enclosed with a fence at least five feet high. Access to the
recreation area from the building shall not require the children
to cross a street, driveway, aisle, or loading area.
e. Commercial Vehicle Parking in Residential Districts. No motor vehicle
bearing commercial registration plates shall be parked upon any lot
located in a residential district unless the following conditions are met:
1. Only one commercial vehicle per dwelling unit may be parked in
the open. Any additional commercial vehicles, or any trailers,
parked at the site shall be parked in a fully enclosed, permanent
garage; and
2. Parked commercial vehicles and trailers cannot be parked closer to
a street or other lot line than the minimum setback requirements
for the principal building; and
3. No commercial vehicle shall exceed 3/4 ton capacity;
§ 17-159 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-159
AO:533
4. Commercial vehicle(s) and any trailers shall be registered to or
used by a resident of the premises upon which it is parked and the
commercial vehicle(s) shall be the customary means of
transportation to and from work. No residential property shall be
used as a parking lot for commercial vehicles or trailers that are
used by employees other than the resident of the lot; and
5. Commercial vehicles shall not create a nuisance by reason of noise,
fumes, dust or otherwise; and
6. In the event the owner or resident of the lot constructs a garage, or
extends a driveway, or adds a parking area to accommodate
commercial vehicles and/or trailers, the maximum permitted lot
coverage (buildings and paving, including compacted stone areas)
shall not be exceeded; and
7. No body work or painting of commercial vehicles and trailers is
permitted. If oil changes and routine maintenance work is to be
performed on-site, it is only permitted if done in an enclosed
garage; and
8. Farm vehicles may be parked on farms.
f. Recreational Vehicles. Defined as boats, boat trailers; self-propelled
vehicles containing sleeping accommodations; non-self-propelled
vehicles containing sleeping accommodations which are less than 35
feet long and bear current vehicle registration and are ready for
highway use; camper-mounted bodies for pick-up trucks, when not
installed on a pick-up truck; other trailers, and other similar vehicles
may not be stored (October 16 through April 14) between the street and
front line of a building nor within one-half of the required minimum side
yard or rear yard, with the following exceptions and conditions:
1. Vehicles which are 35 feet long or longer shall be considered as
structures and not as recreational vehicles;
2. Pick-up trucks with camper-mounted bodies, vans and motor homes
shall be considered as passenger vehicles and not as recreational
vehicles so long as they are not more than 25 feet long or 11 feet
high;
3. Not more than one boat, with or without trailer, and one other
recreational vehicle may be stored on any lot unless the additional
vehicles are stored within a totally-enclosed and roofed structure;
4. In R-50, R-75 and R-100 zones, recreational vehicles may be stored
closer to a side or rear property line than provided above so long as
the angle measured from predominant ground level at the property
line to the top of the vehicle is no greater than 45°.
5. If there is no residence on the property, no recreational vehicle may
be stored within any required yard setback area.
§ 17-159 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-159
AO:534
g. Lot, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements for Nonresidential Uses.
Minimum Lot Minimum Yard Maximum
Uses Area Width Depth Front
Each
Side Rear
Bldg.
Hgt.
Lot
Cover
Agriculture 5 ac. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 60 feet N.A.
Cemetery 3 ac. 250 feet 250 feet 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet N.A.
Church 3ac. 250 feet 250 feet 100 feet 50 feet 50 feet 35 feet 25%
School 15 ac. 400 feet 400 feet 100 feet 100 feet 100 feet 35 feet 20%
Golf Course 75 ac. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A.
Home
Occupation
(Same as detached dwelling)
Library 3 ac. 250 feet 250 feet 100 feet 50 feet 50 feet 35 feet 40%
Resident
Professional
Office
(Same as detached dwelling)
Utility
Service
20,000
square
feet
100 feet 125 feet 45 feet 25 feet 40 feet 35 feet 20%
h. Setback and Height Requirements for Accessory Structures on
Residential and Nonresidential Lots.
Minimum Distance to
Use Front Lot Line Side Lot Line Rear Lot Line Max. Hgt.2
Barn, Silo, Animal
Shelter
100 feet 100 feet 100 feet 60 feet
Farm Stand 20 feet 100 feet N.A. 14 feet
Nursery Outlet 65 feet 100 feet N.A. 14 feet
Swimming Pool Note 1 20 feet
(10 feet in the
R-5 District)
20 feet N.A.
Tennis Court:
Unlighted Note 1 20 feet 20 feet N.A.
Lighted Note 1 40 feet 40 feet N.A.
Garage Note 1 20 feet 20 feet 18 feet
Tool Shed Note 1 10 feet 10 feet 14 feet
Pro Shop, Club House
Restaurant
400 feet 400 feet 400 feet 35 feet
§ 17-159 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-159
AO:535
Note 1. Same as the front yard setback for the principal building.
Note 2. Any development located in an airport hazard area shall be limited to such lower height as
required in an airport hazard area. The maximum height allowed shall be dependent on the distance of
the structure or tree from the side or the end of the runway and shall be limited in height as defined in
section 17-159d8.
For other detached accessory structures to residences, the side and rear line requirements shall be onehalf
those specified for the principal structure and the front line requirement shall be the same as the
principal structure.
i. R-150 District: Residential Uses. Only single-family detached dwellings
and conversions (section 17-145) are permitted as residential uses in
this district. The minimum requirements shall be:
R-150 Non-Cluster Design
Cluster Design (Section
17-79)
Minimum Lot Area 60,000 square feet 40,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width 200 feet 150 feet
Minimum Lot Depth 200 feet1 200 feet1
Minimum Front Yard 75 feet 75 feet
Minimum Side Yard 50 feet ea. 40 feet ea.
Minimum Rear Yard 50 feet 50 feet
Maximum Building Height 35 fee2 35 feet2
Maximum Lot Coverage 15% 15%
Minimum Open Space — 25%3
Note: 1. All lots requiring reverse frontage along arterial and collector streets have an
additional 25 feet of depth to allow for the establishment of the buffers outlined in subsection
17-89j.
Note: 2. Any developer located in an airport hazard area shall be limited to such lower height
as required in an airport hazard area. The maximum height allowed shall be dependent on the
distance of the structure or tree for the side or the end of the runway and shall be limited in
height as defined in section 17-159d8.
Note: 3. The open space requirement is only applicable to cluster designs.
The maximum density of units per gross acre of land in the R-150 District shall be 0.6 unit per
acre.
j. R-100 District: Residential Uses.
1. Single family detached dwellings are permitted in this district.
2. Maximum Number of Dwelling Units. The maximum number of
dwelling units permitted on a lot shall be calculated as specified in
the following table:
§ 17-159 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-159
AO:536
R-100 District With Sanitary Sewer and Water Distribution Systems
Minimum Cluster
Conventional
Development
With Wells and/or
Septic
Lot Area 7,000 square feet 20,000 square feet 80,000 square feet
Lot Width 70 feet 100 feet 150 feet
Lot Depth1 100 feet 125 feet 200 feet
Front Yard2 30 feet 45 feet 75 feet
Side Yard 10 feet ea. 20 feet ea. 40 feet ea.
Rear Yard 25 feet 40 feet 50 feet
Open Space 55% N/A N/A
Maximum Cluster
Conventional
Development
With Wells and/or
Septic
Building Height3 35 feet and 2 sty. 35 feet and 2 sty. 35 feet and 2 sty.
Lot Coverage 30% 20% 15%
Density: Single Family 2.0/acre4 2.0/acre4 0.5/acre
NOTES:
Note 1. All lots requiring reverse frontage along arterial and collector streets shall have an
additional 25 feet of depth to allow for the establishment of the buffers outlined in section
17-89j.
Note 2. Whenever a pattern of existing building setbacks or front yards, involving 4 or more
dwellings adjacent to and located on each side of the proposed structure are established at less
than the minimum front yard required above, a new structure may be built no closer to the
street line than the average setbacks of such existing buildings.
Note 3. Any development located in an airport hazard area shall be limited to such lower height
as required in an airport hazard area. The maximum height allowed shall be dependent on the
distance of the structure or tree from the side or the end of the runway and shall be limited in
height as defined in section 17-159d8.
Note 4. Any development in the R-100 District exceeding a density of 1.0 unit/acre shall be
permitted only when the property is served by both water and sewer and when the developer
contributes to the township's lower income housing fund established to assist the development
of lower income housing. For each additional detached single family dwelling unit in excess
of 1.0 unit/acre, the developer shall make a payment to the lower income housing fund in the
amount and manner set forth in Chapter 10.
§ 17-159 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-159
AO:537
In residential developments with sewer service from ELSA, or the Stony Brook system serving
Hopewell Borough or Pennington Borough, where at least 50% of the tract being served is set
aside in wetlands, wetland buffers, or other permanent open space (public or private and which
open space area may include detention basins), the maximum lot coverage on any individual
lot shall be 30% of the lot area provided (1) the maximum size of any lot used for calculation
purposes is 50,000 square feet including easements, and (2) that the maximum average lot
coverage among all lots in the development shall be 20% of the total lot area, using a maximum
area of 50,000 square feet for any single lot, including easements.
3. Adult Housing. Higher density single family homes, apartments,
townhouses or similar forms of multi-family housing are permitted
in the R-100 District conditioned on the overall development as
well as each unit within the development having a deed restriction
limiting the units to occupancy by at least one person 55 years of
age or older per unit and prohibiting children under age 18. The
development shall also be conditioned on a maximum density of six
units per acre and the following zoning standards:
Standard Adult Housing Convenience Business
Min. Lot Width 300 feet 275 feet
Min. Lot Depth 300 feet 300 feet
Min. Front Yard 50 feet 100 feet
Min. Side Yard 25 feet 50 feet
Min. Rear Yard 25 feet 50 feet
Distances Between Buildings 30 feet 30 feet
Maximum Building Height 2 story, 30 feet 1 story, 20 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage 55% 65%
Maximum Floor Area Ratio None 0.20
Minimum Off-Street Parking See section 17-95
§ 17-159 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-159
AO:538
The development shall be conditioned further on the site abutting a primary arterial or
secondary arterial road as set forth in the Circulation Plan of the Master Plan but being
designed so that no driveway serving any individual use (residential or nonresidential) shall
directly access the abutting arterial road(s): having both public water and sanitary sewer
services; having a minimum tract size of seven contiguous acres if the development is all
residential, or at least 15 contiguous acres if containing any permitted business uses; and
having 10% of the units in the development restricted to households of moderate income as set
forth in section 17-92. An adult housing development may have up to 15% of the area of the
lot devoted to businesses which are limited to providing convenience services such as, but not
limited to, banking, professional offices, restaurant and the retail sale of food, pharmaceuticals,
and general merchandise provided the minimum lot area devoted to businesses is two acres and
the maximum lot area is five acres and conditioned further on the businesses being designed
as an integral part of an adult housing development; the businesses being located along the
abutting arterial road(s) both with their driveway access intersecting the main entrance road
to the adult housing development and not intersecting the abutting arterial road; and with the
acreage devoted to business uses, including parking, loading, and setbacks, being deducted
from the area of the total tract so the residential density is based on the remaining acreage of
the tract.
k. R-75 and R-50 Districts: Residential Uses.
1. Only single-family detached dwellings are permitted as residential
uses in these districts.
The minimum requirements shall be:
Requirement R-75 R-50
Minimum Lot Area 11,250 square feet 6,250 square feet
Minimum Lot Width 75 feet 50 feet
Minimum Lot Depth 125 feet 125 feet
Minimum Front Yard 40 feet 40 feet
Minimum Side Yard 10 feet ea. 10 feet
Minimum Rear Yard 25 feet 25 feet
Maximum Building Height 35 feet and 2 sty. 35 feet and 2 sty
Maximum Lot Coverage 25% 40%
Maximum Density 3.0 units/acre 5.5 units/acre
2. Minimum Front Yard. Whenever a pattern of existing building
setbacks or front yards, within 200 feet of a lot on the side of the
street, is established at less than the minimum front yard required
by section 17-159k1 above, a new structure may be built no closer
to the street line than the average setbacks of such existing
buildings.
l. R-5 District: Residential Use.
§ 17-159 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-159
AO:539
1. The purpose of this district is to create a district with reasonable
access to major highways and utility services in which the density
can be increased sufficiently to provide for the construction of low
and moderate income housing.
2. The permitted uses, design standards, density and other
requirements shall be as set forth in section 17-92, Lower Income
Housing.
m. R-6 District: Residential Use.
1. The purpose of this district is to provide for an expansion of agerestricted
housing under the provisions of the Fair Housing Act
limiting the units to occupancy by at least one person 55 years of
age or older per unit and prohibiting children under the age of 18.
The exception to the age restriction is the requirement for
affordable housing units constructed after January 1998 which
shall be non-age restricted rental units.
2. The permitted housing types are limited to higher density
apartments, townhouses, quadplexes or similar forms of multifamily
housing conditioned on each unit within the development,
other than the low and moderate income units constructed after
January 1998, having a deed restriction limiting the units to
occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit
and prohibiting children under the age of 18.
3. The housing development shall meet the following zoning
standards:
Standard
Min. Lot Width 300 feet
Min. Lot Depth 300 feet
Min. Setback from the
Perimeter of the Tract
50 feet
Min. Front Yard 50 feet
Min. Side Yard 25 feet
Min. Rear Yard 25 feet
Min. Distance between Bldgs. 30 feet or a distance equivalent
to the height of the taller
building, whichever is greater,
except that where the facades
of 2 buildings are opposite 1
another for a distance greater
than 75 feet, the distance
between buildings shall be at
least 50 feet.
Max. Building Height 3 stories; 35 feet
§ 17-159 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-159
AO:540
§ 17-160. MOUNTAIN RESOURCE CONSERVATION (MRC) AND
VALLEY RESOURCE CONSERVATION (VRC) DISTRICTS. [Ord.
#02-1268 § 6; Ord. #03-1282, § 1; Ord. #04-1325, §§ 8- 14; Ord.
#04-1329, § 1]
Standard
Max. Lot Coverage 55%
Max. Floor Area Ratio None
Max. Density 6 units/gross acre1
Note 1: Where the development contains business uses, the
business uses shall conform to the conditional use provisions in
section 17-159d7 but the acreage devoted to the business uses
may also be used in calculating the number of housing units
allowed in the overall development. The maximum density of 6
units/acre shall apply to the total of all residential and
nonresidential acreage combined. The housing generated by the
nonresidential acreage shall be transferred to the residential
portion of the development so that the density on the net
residential portion of the development is increased above 6 units/
acre to accommodate the units generated from the nonresidential
acreage.
4. The housing development shall be required to provide at least 15%
of the units as affordable housing units (half low income and half
moderate income) consistent with the provisions of section 17-92.
Each of these units constructed after January 1998 shall be rental
units and be non-age restricted. Each of the low and moderate
income units constructed before January 1998 shall remain as they
were approved, i.e., owner-occupied and age-restricted as set forth
in paragraph m1 above. Any rental credits permitted under NJ
COAH's70 rules and generated as a result of the construction of
rental units after January 1998 shall be credited against the
Township's affordable housing obligation, not the developer's
obligation.
5. The development shall be conditioned on receiving subdivision and
site plan approval, which approval(s) shall require the execution of
a developer's agreement and appropriate restrictions on the entire
tract in order to reasonably guarantee the actual construction and
the phasing in of the low and moderate income housing obligation
in accordance with section 17-92 as an integral part of the
requirements of this zoning district.
a. Purpose. The purpose of these districts is to implement the goals,
objectives and principles of the 2002 Master Plan relative to protecting
70.Editor's Note: New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
§ 17-159 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-160
AO:541
environmentally sensitive areas, recognizing development capacity
limitations established by natural resource capabilities, maintaining
the rural character and providing for sustainable development. These
districts have been designed to comprehensively address the
interrelated goals of protecting groundwater quantity and quality,
maintaining surface water resources, conserving the scenic rural
character, addressing limiting soil conditions and promoting continued
agricultural use opportunities, while also providing a range of
development opportunities that offer alternatives for the landowner.
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Single-family dwellings and conversions (for conversions, see
section 17-145), including housing for low and moderate income
households.
2. All permitted principal uses in section 17-159b2 to 5.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses. Any accessory use permitted in section
17-159c is permitted in the VRC and MRC Districts.
d. Permitted Conditional Uses. Conditional uses permitted in section
17-159d2 to 6, 8 and 9.
e. Commercial vehicle parking in accordance with the standards of
section 17-159e.
f. Recreation vehicles in accordance with the standards of section
17-159f.
g. The lot, yard, height and coverage requirements for nonresidential uses
as specified in section 17-159g shall govern nonresidential uses in the
VRC and MRC Districts.
h. The setback and height requirements for accessory structures on
residential and non-residential lots as specified in section 17-159h shall
govern accessory structures in the VRC and MRC Districts.
i. Development Standards for Conventional Subdivisions, Lot Averaging,
Cluster and Open Lands Designs. The minimum requirements are as
follows:
VRC MRC
Requirement
Conventional
Subdivision
Lot Averaging,
Cluster or Open
Lands Design
Conventional
Subdivision
Lot Averaging,
Cluster or Open
Lands Design
Minimum lot area 6 acres 80,000 square feet 14 acres 80,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 300 feet 200 feet 400 feet 200 feet
Minimum lot depth 400 feet1 200 feet1 500 feet1 200 feet1
§ 17-160 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-160
AO:542
VRC MRC
Requirement
Conventional
Subdivision
Lot Averaging,
Cluster or Open
Lands Design
Conventional
Subdivision
Lot Averaging,
Cluster or Open
Lands Design
Minimum front
yard2
100 feet 75 feet 150 feet 75 feet
Minimum side yard 60 feet ea. 50 feet ea. 75 feet ea. 50 feet ea.
Minimum rear yard 60 feet 50 feet 75 feet 50 feet
Maximum building
height
35 feet3 35 feet3 35 feet 35 feet
Maximum lot
coverage
10% 15% 6% 15%
Minimum open
space
— 60%4 — 75%4
Note 1. All lots requiring reverse frontage along arterial and collector streets shall have an additional 25
feet of depth to allow for the establishment of the buffers outlined in subsection 17-89j.
Note 2. Lots fronting on Route 31 shall have a minimum front yard setback of 200 feet.
Note 3. Any developer located in an airport hazard area shall be limited to such lower height as required
in an airport hazard area. The maximum height allowed shall be dependent on the distance of the
structure or tree for the side or the end of the runway and shall be limited in height as defined in section
17-159d8.
Note 4. The open space requirement is only applicable to cluster designs. See section 17-160i2, 3, 4 and
5 for additional standards relating to open lands, clustering, lot averaging and conventional subdivision
designs.
1. The maximum density of units per gross acre of land in the VRC
District shall be 0.17 unit per acre, and in the MRC District shall be
0.075 unit per acre.
2. Open lands subdivisions are permitted on tracts of 18 acres or
more in the VRC District and 40 acres or more in the MRC District.
This option is intended to promote the retention of large contiguous
wooded tracts and large farm tracts, and to promote the
aggregation of smaller wooded and farm parcels. It is also intended
to encourage and promote flexibility, economy and environmental
soundness in subdivision layout and design. The following
standards shall apply to open lands subdivisions.
(a) The open lands development plan shall not result in a greater
dwelling unit yield than if the property in question were
developed as a conventional subdivision. In order to determine
the maximum number of lots for an open lands subdivision, a
conforming plan of a conventional subdivision shall be
submitted, based on minimum lot areas of 5.9 acres in the VRC
District and 13.3 acres in the MRC District. The concept plan
§ 17-160 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-160
AO:543
shall be in sufficient detail to permit the planning board to
make an informed decision as to the subdivision satisfying
all ordinance requirements and in a form that would be
acceptable to the planning board as a conventional subdivision
without the need for any lot area or lot dimension variances
or exceptions to subdivision design standards. The number of
lots on the concept plan shall be the maximum number of lots
permitted under an open lands subdivision.
(b) At least 60% of the tract, if located in the VRC District, and
75% of the tract, if located in the MRC District, shall be
designated as "open lands" and shall, as a condition of approval
of the development, be deed restricted for agricultural or
conservation use. Lots qualifying as open lands shall be
permitted a primary residence and other accessory building or
uses as provided in this section.
(c) At least 60% of designated "open lands" shall be some
combination of unconstrained land area, or prime soils or soils
of statewide importance, or prime forested area. On tracts in
areas which are predominantly active agricultural lands or
consist of prime agricultural soils or soils of statewide
importance, the preservation of agricultural lands and soils
shall take precedence. On tracts in areas which are
predominantly prime forested areas, the preservation of
forested areas shall take precedence.
(d) For tracts of 100 acres or less, the open lands shall be
contained in one deed-restricted contiguous parcel; for tracts
greater than 100 acres, the open lands may be composed of
noncontiguous parcels, provided that each open lands area
shall contain at least 50 contiguous acres.
When noncontiguous parcels of at least 50 acres are provided,
each parcel may have a residence, provided that the total
density is not exceeded.
(e) All lots created under this subdivision option shall be deed
restricted against further subdivision for the purpose of
creating an additional lot or lots.
(f) The design of the development utilizing this option shall foster
the following objectives: retention of large contiguous
farmland areas; retention of large contiguous prime forested
areas; stream corridor and wetlands preservation; aquifer
recharge protection; steep slope protection; overall site
design; reduction of impervious coverage; traffic circulation;
and, sensitivity to the site's natural features, topography and
relationship to open lands on neighboring parcels.
(g) In forested areas, the design of the development shall include a
200-foot buffer along existing roads, which shall either
§ 17-160 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-160
AO:544
maintain existing woodlands or establish new forested areas
for those areas that are disturbed during site development or
are currently cleared. The intent of this provision is to maintain
the scenic roadside views in the township.
(h) Development on hillsides shall be located at an appropriate
point in the foreground to midground of the hill so that the
development does not create a barrier visible from the existing
road.
(i) Natural features such as trees, hilltops and views, natural
terrain, open waters and natural drainage ridge lines shall be
preserved wherever possible in designing any development
containing such features. As part of the subdivision or site plan
review process, development should be designed to preserve
scenic vistas and views of cultural/historic landmarks and of
unique geologic and topographic features. On hillsides,
development should be sited below the ridgeline and the
height and location of development should protect
unobstructed views of the ridges from public roadways.
(j) The applicant is advised to submit a concept plan of the open
lands subdivision for review and comment in accordance with
this chapter.
3. Cluster subdivisions on tracts of 18 acres or more in the VRC
District and 40 acres or more in the MRC District are permitted in
accordance with the following standards:
(a) The cluster subdivision development plan shall not result in a
greater dwelling unit yield than if the property in question
were developed as a conventional subdivision. In order to
determine the maximum number of lots for a cluster
subdivision, a conforming plan of a conventional subdivision
shall be submitted, based on minimum lot areas of 5.9 acres in
the VRC District and 13.3 acres in the MRC District. The
concept plan shall be in sufficient detail to permit the planning
board to make an informed decision as to the subdivision
satisfying all ordinance requirements and in a form that would
be acceptable to the planning board as a conventional
subdivision without the need for any lot area or lot dimension
variances or exceptions to subdivision design standards. The
number of lots on the concept plan shall be the maximum
number of lots permitted under a cluster subdivision.
(b) The minimum open space shall be 60% of the total tract in the
VRC District, and 75% of the total tract in the MRC District.
(c) Areas reserved as permanent open space shall have a
minimum contiguous area of not less than five acres and no
portion thereof shall be less than 50 feet in width. At least 50%
of the open space shall be unconstrained lands. The open space
§ 17-160 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-160
AO:545
area(s) shall be contiguous to open space on adjoining parcels,
where applicable, and shall include areas identified in the
township's open space and recreation or conservation plans, if
any, including greenways.
(d) On tracts in areas which are predominantly active agricultural
lands or consist of prime agricultural soils or soils of statewide
importance, the preservation of agricultural lands and soils
shall take precedence. On tracts in areas which are
predominantly prime forested areas, the preservation of
forested areas shall take precedence.
(e) The open space shall be reserved in perpetuity either by
dedication for public use or for use by the residents of the
development by private covenant or deed restriction for one of
the following purposes:
(1) Undeveloped open space.
(2) Public or private recreational facilities.
(3) Conservation of environmentally sensitive features
including, but not limited to, steep slopes, wetlands,
aquifer recharge areas, floodplains and wooded areas.
(4) Agricultural use.
(f) The proposed development shall comply with the standards
contained in sections 17-160i2(f), (g), (h) and (i).
(g) Provision shall be made to ensure suitable maintenance of any
area to be reserved by private covenant or deed restriction by
the establishment of a property owners' association or other
appropriate organization.
(h) Nothing contained herein shall be construed to require the
planning board to approve any subdivision employing
clustering if said subdivision is in conflict with any provision of
the Hopewell Township Master Plan or if said subdivision will,
in any way, result in a land use pattern that will adversely
affect that portion of the township in which it lies.
(i) The applicant is advised to submit a concept plan of the cluster
subdivision for review and comment in accordance with the
ordinance.
4. Lot averaging subdivisions are permitted on tracts of 18 acres or
less in the VRC District and 40 acres or less in the MRC District in
accordance with the following standards:
(a) The lot averaging development plan shall not result in greater
dwelling unit yield than if the property in question were
developed as a conventional subdivision. In order to determine
§ 17-160 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-160
AO:546
the maximum number of lots for a lot averaging subdivision,
a conforming plan of a conventional subdivision shall be
submitted, based on a minimum lot size of 5.9 acres in the
VRC District and 13.3 acres in the MRC District. The concept
plan shall be in sufficient detail to permit the planning board
to make an informed decision as to the subdivision satisfying
all ordinance requirements and in a form that would be
acceptable to the planning board as a conventional subdivision
without the need for any lot area or lot dimension variances
or exceptions to subdivision design standards. The number of
lots on the concept plan shall be the maximum number of lots
permitted under a lot averaging subdivision.
(b) A lot averaging subdivision may be permitted when the
applicant proposes a distribution of lot areas within the
subdivision that results in at least 60% of the lots having a
minimum lot area between 80,000 square feet and 120,000
square feet, except in the case of a two lot subdivision, in which
case one of the two lots shall be 80,000 square feet to 120,000
square feet.
(c) The site design of lot averaging subdivisions should shift the
more intensive development toward those lands that can best
support the installation of the dwelling, well, septic system and
associated site improvements. Similarly, lot averaging should
seek to preserve those areas which exhibit sensitive
environmental features (i.e., water bodies, floodplains, steep
slopes, shallow bedrock, aquifer recharge areas, seasonal high
water table, etc.) or which contain active or prime agricultural
lands or prime forested areas.
(d) On tracts in areas which are predominantly active agricultural
lands or consist of prime agricultural soils or soils of statewide
importance, the preservation of agricultural lands and soils
shall take precedence. On tracts in areas which are
predominantly prime forested areas, the preservation of
forested areas shall take precedence.
(e) The proposed development shall comply with the standards
contained in sections 17-160i2(f), (g), (h) and (i).
(f) The deed for any lot created by lot averaging shall contain a
restriction against its further subdivision for the purpose of
creating an additional lot or lots.
(g) The applicant is advised to submit a concept plan of the lot
averaging subdivision for review and comment in accordance
with the ordinance.
5. Conventional subdivisions shall comply with the standards
contained in sections 17-160i2(f), (g), (h) and (i). Lots in
conventional subdivisions shall front on local streets.
§ 17-160 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-160
AO:547
j. Noncontiguous Cluster Development in the MRC and VRC Districts.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to provide a mechanism
for the transfer of development potential from properties in the
MRC and VRC Districts to municipally designated hamlets in the
VRC District. The intent of this provision is to provide an
opportunity to create an alternative development opportunity that
furthers the goals of resource conservation in the township, while
also providing a development form that supports the goals and
policies of the master plan.
2. Allocation of Standards for the Transfer of Development Potential.
(a) Land in the MRC District is allocated one dwelling unit per
seven acres for the transfer of development to a municipality
designated hamlet.
(b) Land in the VRC District is allocated one dwelling unit per
three acres for the transfer of development to a municipally
designated hamlet.
3. Limitations on the Use of Development Transfers. The owner of the
land from which development potential has been obtained shall
deed restrict the use of the land in perpetuity to those resource
conservation uses authorized and enumerated in the sale or
conveyance of the development potential.
k. Standards for the Municipal Designation of Hamlets in the VRC District.
1. Hamlets in the VRC District shall be municipally designated and
located in accordance with the following criteria:
(a) The hamlet shall be located on a county road as shown on the
circulation plan element in order to provide appropriate
transportation linkages.
(b) The hamlet shall be located in proximity to existing residential
development and community facilities, so that the area can
form a neighborhood and utilize these community resources.
(c) The hamlet shall be located where suitable soils for on-site
wastewater disposal exist so that a community wastewater
system can be developed. The wastewater treatment system
shall incorporate the best available technology as approved by
the N.J. Department of Environmental Protection; avoid the
discharge of untreated wastewater to the groundwater; and be
operated by a licensed and franchised utility regulated by the
Board of Public Utility Commissioners.
(d) The hamlet shall be located on a tract with a mix of woodland
and open fields, so that the site design can take advantage of
these features and the development can be attractively
designed and shielded/screened.
§ 17-160 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-160
AO:548
(e) The hamlet shall be located where the Stockton/Passaic
formations underlie the site.
(f) The hamlet is permitted only in the VRC District, although
development may be transferred to the hamlet from the MRC
District as well as the VRC District.
(g) The hamlet shall be located in an area where aquifer testing
demonstrates that sufficient water supplies are available to
sustain the proposed development, in accordance with
township ordinances or where public water supply provided by
a water utility regulated by the Board of Public Utilities is
available.
2. The hamlet shall be designated only when contiguous and/or
noncontiguous parcels are preserved from development through
the transfer of development potential.
3. The hamlet shall be designated by the planning board upon the
approval of a planned development incorporating the above
features and meeting the standards of section 17-1601 below.
l. Development Standards for Hamlets in the VRC District.
1. Tract Size. The hamlet shall have a minimum size of 60 acres and a
maximum size of 85 acres.
2. Density. The minimum density shall be 2.5 units per acre and the
maximum density shall be 3 units per acre.
3. Minimum Lot Size and Lot Development Standards for Residential
Uses. The minimum lot size for single family residential lots shall
be 7,500 square feet, with a minimum frontage and width of 50
feet, a minimum front yard of 20 feet, minimum side yards of 10
feet, minimum rear yard of 25 feet, maximum building height of 35
feet and a maximum lot coverage of 35%. Atrium homes, patio
homes, townhouses, duplexes and quadplexes are permitted in
accordance with the standards in section 17-92d3.
4. Office and Retail Commercial Development. The hamlet shall
include nonresidential uses consisting of retail shops for the
convenience of the residents and/or offices for professionals and
telecommuters, which may include residential uses in combination
with the nonresidential uses. The nonresidential development shall
be provided at a maximum ratio of 75 square feet of commercial/
office space per residential unit. The design of nonresidential
development shall respond to the specific location and needs of the
planned community. In some cases the appropriate location for
nonresidential development is the interior of the hamlet, so that
pedestrian linkages are increased and motor vehicle movements
reduced. In other cases the nonresidential development should be
located at the edge of the hamlet in order to provide services to the
§ 17-160 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-160
AO:549
surrounding community. A design that integrates both functions
may be the most appropriate in certain locations.
The minimum lot size for nonresidential lots, or lots with a mix of
nonresidential and residential uses, shall be 20,000 square feet,
with a minimum frontage and width of 90 feet, a minimum front
yard of 30 feet, minimum side yards of 15 feet, minimum rear yard
of 35 feet, maximum building height of 35 feet and a maximum lot
coverage of 60%.
5. Public and Quasi-Public Uses. The hamlet shall include at least 40%
of the tract in open space and parks, including a greenbelt around
the hamlet, and may include public uses such as community
buildings and quasi-public uses such as a house of worship.
m. "Grandfathering" of Nonconforming Properties in the MRC and VRC
Districts.
1. A single family detached dwelling located in the MRC and VRC
Districts, which has received a certificate of occupancy or
temporary certificate of occupancy prior to September 20, 2001,
may be enlarged without an appeal to the approving authority, even
though the dwelling may be on a nonconforming lot, provided that:
(a) For properties located in the MRC District:
(1) The proposed enlargement conforms with the use, area,
yard, building height and lot coverage requirements of the
former R-250 Zoning District; and
(2) The proposed enlargement does not increase the
nonconformity of any dimensional setback violations
existing prior to September 20, 2001; or
(b) For properties located in the VRC District:
(1) The proposed enlargement conforms with the use, area,
yard, building height and lot coverage requirements of the
former R-200 Zoning district; and
(2) The proposed enlargement does not increase the
nonconformity of any dimensional setback violations
existing prior to September 20, 2001;
(c) The area, yard, building height and lot coverage requirements
for the former R-250 and R-200 Zoning Districts are as follows:
Requirements R-250 District R-200 District
Minimum Lot area 3 acres 80,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 250 feet 200 feet
Minimum lot depth 300 feet 200 feet
§ 17-160 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-160
AO:550
§ 17-161. C-1; NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL COMMERCIAL. [Ord.
#96-1048 § 5; Ord. #99-1133, § 1; Ord. #02-1268]
Requirements R-250 District R-200 District
Minimum front yard 100 feet 100 feet
Minimum side yard 60 feet each 50 feet each
Minimum rear yard 60 feet 50 feet
Maximum building height 35 feet 35 feet
Maximum lot coverage 10% 10%
2. Accessory buildings or structures may be added to single family
detached dwellings on nonconforming lots located in the MRC or
VRC Zoning District, without an appeal to the approving authority,
provided that:
(a) The dwelling received a certificate of occupancy or temporary
certificate of occupancy prior to September 20, 2001; and
(b) If the property is located in the MRC Zoning District, then:
(1) The accessory building or structure, by itself, conforms
with all requirements of the former R-250 Zoning District;
or
(c) If the property is located in the VRC Zoning District, then:
(1) The accessory building or structure, by itself, conforms
with all requirements of the former R-200 Zoning District.
3. A lot located in the MRC or VRC Zoning Districts may be developed
with a single-family dwelling without an appeal to the approving
authority, provided that:
(a) For properties located in the MRC District, the lot is an existing
isolated vacant lot with an area measuring at least three acres
and the setbacks and other requirements of the former R-250
Zoning District can be satisfied; or
(b) For properties located in the VRC District, the lot is an existing
isolated vacant lot with an area measuring at least 80,000
square feet and the setbacks and other requirements of the
former R-200 Zoning District can be satisfied; or
(c) The lot had received final subdivision approval from the
planning board prior to September 20, 2001.
Any lot that qualifies for development in accordance with the
standards of this section 17-160m3 shall also be entitled to
receive the benefits referenced in section 17-160m1 and 2, as
set forth above.
§ 17-160 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-161
AO:551
a. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to recognize patterns of existing,
isolated retail uses (single lots or two adjoining uses) as identified in the
master plan. Because the master plan and this chapter intend to
prevent strip commercial patterns from continuing to emerge, this
special zone is intended to recognize existing uses. It is also intended
that the provisions for assisting in the development of lower income
housing as set forth below be a required portion of any new
development in the District.
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Retail sale of consumable products, wearing apparel,
pharmaceuticals, hardware, appliances, household goods,
confections and general merchandise.
2. The sale of personal services such as the repair of appliances,
furniture and shoes; cleaners; tailors; barber shops; and beauty
salons.
3. Offices, banks, medical clinics and veterinary hospitals.
4. Restaurants and bars.
5. Commercial recreational establishments.
6. All uses permitted under paragraphs b1 through b5 above and b7
below shall be required to participate in the township's efforts to
produce lower income housing as set forth in section 17-92.
7. Child Care Centers:
(a) All facilities shall be licensed by the N.J. Department of Human
Services and shall also adhere to the following application
regulations. Where the following regulations conflict with
regulations of the Department of Human Services, the
Department of Human Services regulations shall prevail.
(b) Zoning and Design Requirements:
"Child Care Centers" for six or more persons shall adhere to
the following regulations:
(1) The lot requirements for a child care center as a principal
use: Min. Lot size: 1.0 acre for up to the first 40 children,
but in any event such larger area as may be required to
accommodate on-site wells and/or septic systems where
public utilities are not available, plus 0.25 acre for each
group, or part of a group, of 10 children above 40, but
need not exceed 2 1/2 acres unless a larger area is
required to accommodate on-site wells and/or septic
systems.
§ 17-161 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-161
AO:552
Min. lot width 150 feet
Min. lot depth 200 feet
Min. front yard 75 feet
Min. side yard 30 feet
Min. rear yard 40 feet
Max. building height 35 feet
Max. floor area ratio 0.20
Max. lot coverage 50%
Min. setback for driveways and
parking areas from any lot line
25 feet
(2) Recreation Areas: The setbacks for recreation area for
child care centers constructed as a principal use shall be
at least 40 feet from the street right-of-way, at least 25 feet
from nonresidential parking and loading driveways, and
internal roads both on-site and on adjacent sites, and at
least 40 feet from any abutting residential property in a
residential zone.
(3) Where a center is part of a complex which shares parking
spaces with other uses, the floor area of the center need
not be included in calculating the number of parking
spaces to be constructed, but the site plan shall show the
location of the parking spaces that are not required to be
constructed, but which are generated by the gross floor
area of the center, in the event the square footage of the
center is occupied by some other use in the future. Where
a child care center has its own parking facilities, the
number of spaces shall be based on the schedule in section
17-95j.
(4) Child care centers may also be located within a building
whose principal use(s) is, or are, permitted nonresidential
uses provided the building and lot meet all the area,
dimensional, setback, floor area ratio and other bulk
criteria for the district in which the building is located.
Notwithstanding a building having more than one use, the
site with a child care center shall be required to provide a
drop-off area for the center consistent with paragraph (5)
below. The off-street parking required to be constructed
shall be based on the gross floor area of the nonresidential
building, excluding the area for the center, but the site
plan shall show the location of the parking spaces that are
not required to be constructed, but which are generated
by the gross floor area of the center, in the event the
§ 17-161 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-161
AO:553
square footage of the center is occupied by some other use
in the future.
(5) Drop-Off Area. Each child care center shall provide at least
six parking spaces in addition to the off-street parking
requirements. These six spaces shall be identified as "No-
Parking: Student Drop-Off and Pick Up Only". No drop-off
area shall require a student to cross a street, driveway,
aisle, or loading area. Each space shall be located adjacent
to the sidewalk in front of the facility so a child may exit or
enter the vehicle either directly to or from the sidewalk,
such as from parallel parking spaces, or to or from the
space between vehicles in angled parking spaces.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. The residence of the proprietor of the commercial use, provided the
lot size is 50% larger than required for the commercial use and the
residence is in the same structure as the commercial use.
2. One earth terminal antenna and one associated reflector (or dish)
are permitted on a lot provided they are located within the setback
lines required for the principal use and are located to be screened
from view from residences and public streets by plantings
providing a year-round screen, parapet walls, building facades,
walls, or similar effective device. The antenna and dish may be
located on a roof, or attached to a building, or on the ground.
Servicing wires and cables shall be installed underground. The
highest point of the antenna and dish facility shall be 15 feet above
the height of a building, or 10 feet above the maximum building
height permitted, whichever is less.
d. Conditional Uses.
1. Pumping stations, transformers and similar utility facilities which
are needed in order to provide utility services directly to the
consumer, but not repair facilities, offices, open storage, work
areas or other aspects of utility operations. Such facilities shall
meet the minimum requirements of subsection 17-159g and shall
be landscaped or otherwise appropriately integrated into the site
design by special architectural treatment in accordance with
section 17-89 and, where safety dictates, shall be enclosed with
fencing.
e. Lot, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements.2
Requirement
Min. Lot Size 80,000 square feet
Min. Lot Width 250 feet
Min. Lot Depth 250 feet
§ 17-161 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-161
AO:554
§ 17-162. SC: SHOPPING CENTER. [Ord. #96-1048, § 6; Ord.
#99-1133, § 2; Ord. #02-1268; Ord. #04-1325, § 15]
Requirement
Min. Front Yard 100 feet
Min. Side Yard 50 feet ea.
Min. Rear Yard 70 feet
Max. Building Height 30 feet1
Max. Lot Coverage 65%
Max. Floor Area Ratio 0.20
Notes:
Note 1. With residence as accessory use, 35 feet.
Note 2. Notwithstanding the maximum floor area ratio and other
design controls set forth above, the maximum intensity of development
permitted on those lots not connected to public sewage collection
and public sewage treatment systems or not located in a designated
sewer service area as shown on the Hopewell Township Wastewater
Management Plan shall be the smaller of either the maximum
development permitted by ordinance or the amount of development
which would generate a design influent sewage flow of less than
2,000 gallons per day as determined in accordance with the prevailing
design standards and policies of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to establish areas for shopping
which have major highway access, shared off-street parking, controlled
access to adjoining streets, and an overall compatible design. It is also
intended that the provisions for assisting in the development of lower
income housing as set forth below be a required portion of any new
development in the SC District.
b. Permitted Principal Uses. All uses shall be in a shopping center design
containing at least six separate businesses.
1. The retail sale of consumable products, wearing apparel,
pharmaceuticals, hardware, appliances, household goods,
confections and general merchandise.
2. The sale of personal services such as appliance and shoe repair
shops, cleaners, tailors, barber shops and beauty salons.
3. Offices, medical clinics and banks.
4. Theater, bowling alleys, gymnasiums, library, night club, bar,
restaurant.
5. Motel.
§ 17-161 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-162
AO:555
6. In the SC District, all uses permitted under paragraphs b1 through
b5 above and b7 below shall be required to participate in the
township's efforts to produce lower income housing as set forth in
section 17-92.
7. Child care centers shall be a permitted use and shall meet all the
criteria set forth in subsection 17-161b7.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses. One earth terminal antenna and one
associated reflector (or dish) are permitted on a lot provided they are
located within the setback lines required for the principal use and are
located to be screened from view from residences and public streets by
plantings providing a year-round screen, parapet walls, building
facades, walls, or similar effective device. The antenna and dish may be
located on a roof, or attached to a building, or on the ground. Servicing
wires and cables shall be installed underground. The highest point of
the antenna and dish facility shall be 15 feet above the height of a
building, or 10 feet above the maximum building height permitted,
whichever is less.
d. Permitted Conditional Uses.
1. (Reserved)
2. Pumping stations, transformers and similar utility facilities which
are needed in order to provide utility services directly to the
consumer, but not repair facilities, offices, open storage, work
areas or other aspects of utility operations. Such facilities shall
meet the minimum requirements of section 17-159g and shall be
landscaped or otherwise appropriately integrated into the site
design by special architectural treatment in accordance with
section 17-89 and, where safety dictates, shall be enclosed with
fencing.
e. Lot, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements.1
Requirement
Min. Lot Size 5 ac.
Max. Lot Size 18 ac.
Min. Lot Width 300 feet
Min. Lot Depth 300 feet
Min. Front Yard 150 feet
Min. Side Yard 75 feet
Min. Rear Yard 75 feet
Max. Building Height 35 feet
Max. Lot Coverage 60%
Max. Floor Area Ratio 0.20
§ 17-162 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-162
AO:556
§ 17-163. HBO DISTRICT: HIGHWAY BUSINESS AND OFFICE. [Ord.
#96-1048, §§ 6, 7; Ord. #99-1133, § 3; Ord. No. 02-1268; Ord.
#04-1325, §§ 16 - 19]
Any site proposed for development as a shopping center shall be
submitted with an overall plan for the entire property. The plan may
provide for segments of the development to be completed in stages,
provided the approving authority determines that each stage
constitutes an appropriate use and layout of the property should the
project not proceed further.
Note 1: Notwithstanding the maximum floor area ratio and other
design controls set forth above, the maximum intensity of development
permitted on those lots not connected to public sewage collection
and public sewage treatment systems or not located in a designated
sewer service area as shown on the Hopewell Township Wastewater
Management Plan shall be the smaller of either the maximum
development permitted by ordinance or the amount of development
which would generate a design influent sewage flow of less than
2,000 gallons per day as determined in accordance with the prevailing
design standards and policies of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide areas along arterial
streets where these uses would be compatible with highway safety and
efficiency. It is also intended that the provisions for assisting in the
development of lower income housing as set forth below be a required
portion of any new development in the HBO district.
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Nursery and garden center outlets.
2. (Reserved)
3. Shopping centers with uses permitted in the SC District and
motels, provided the lot area exceeds 10 acres and the
development meets all other standards of the SC District.
4. Offices, medical clinics and banks.
5. (Reserved)
6. Mortuary.
7. Veterinary hospital.
8. All uses permitted under paragraphs b1 through b7 above and b9
below shall be required to participate in the township's efforts to
produce lower income housing as set forth in section 17-92.
9. Child care centers shall be a permitted use and shall meet all the
criteria set forth in subsection 17-161b7.
§ 17-162 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-163
AO:557
c. Permitted Accessory Uses. One earth terminal antenna and one
associated reflector (or dish) are permitted on a lot provided they are
located within the setback lines required for the principal use and are
located to be screened from view from residences and public streets by
plantings providing a year-round screen, parapet walls, building
facades, walls, or similar effective device. The antenna and dish may be
located on a roof, or attached to a building, or on the ground. Servicing
wires and cables shall be installed underground. The highest point of
the antenna and dish facility shall be 15 feet above the height of a
building, or 10 feet above the maximum building height permitted,
whichever is less.
d. Permitted Conditional Uses.
1. (Reserved)
2. (Reserved)
3. Pumping stations, transformers and similar utility facilities which
are needed in order to provide utility services directly to the
consumer, but not repair facilities, offices, open storage, work
areas or other aspects of utility operations. Such facilities shall
meet the minimum requirements of section 17-159g and shall be
landscaped or otherwise appropriately integrated into the site
design by special architectural treatment in accordance with
section 17-89 and, where safety dictates, shall be enclosed with
fencing.
e. Lot, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements.1
Requirement Motel
New Car/
Truck
Dealer,
Gymnasium,
Car Wash,
Nursery &
Garden
Center
Office,
Mortuary,
Bank,
Medical
Center
Service
Station
Building
(for island
see 17-102)
Swim Club/
Tennis/Golf
Driving
Range/
Miniature
Golf/Par-3
Golf,
Theater,
Bowling
Veterinary
Hospital
Min. Lot
Area
5 ac. 2 ac. 3 ac. 1 ac. 4 ac. 1 ac.
Min. Lot
Depth
300 feet 250 feet 300 feet 200 feet 250 feet 200 feet
Min. Lot
Width
300 feet 250 feet 250 feet 200 feet 250 feet 150 feet
Min. Front
Yard
80 feet 100 feet 80 feet 65 feet 80 feet 80 feet
Min. Side Yd.
(ea.)
80 feet 50 feet 50 feet 30 feet 50 feet 50 feet
§ 17-163 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-163
AO:558
§ 17-164. O/CC: OFFICE AND COMMERCIAL CONVERSION. [Ord.
#96-1048, § 6; Ord. #99-1133, § 4; Ord. No. 02-1268]
Requirement Motel
New Car/
Truck
Dealer,
Gymnasium,
Car Wash,
Nursery &
Garden
Center
Office,
Mortuary,
Bank,
Medical
Center
Service
Station
Building
(for island
see 17-102)
Swim Club/
Tennis/Golf
Driving
Range/
Miniature
Golf/Par-3
Golf,
Theater,
Bowling
Veterinary
Hospital
Min. Rear
Yard
80 feet 70 feet 60 feet 40 feet 80 feet 80 feet
Max. Bldg.
Hgt.
35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 20 feet 35 feet 35 feet
Max. Lot
Cover
50% 50% 50% 65% 50% 40%
Max. Floor
Area Ratio
0.15 0.10 0.15 0.10 0.15 0.20
Notes:
Note 1. Notwithstanding the maximum floor area ratio and other design controls set forth above, the
maximum intensity of development permitted on those lots not connected to public sewage collection
and public sewage treatment systems or not located in a designated sewer service area as shown
on the Hopewell Township Wastewater Management Plan shall be the smaller of either the maximum
development permitted by ordinance or the amount of development which would generate a design
influent sewage flow of less than 2,000 gallons per day as determined in accordance with the prevailing
design standards and policies of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide an office and
commercial conversion district on Route 31 where office uses now exist
and the available vacant lots and few residences would be appropriately
developed for office and limited commercial uses. The standards are
intended to avoid narrow, strip frontage development, and require
controlled access points to Route 31 by merging adjoining parking lots.
It is intended to permit residential uses with low intensity commercial
and office exceptions, but no intensive commercial uses such as service
stations, car washes, fast food restaurants, and food stores.
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Offices and banks.
2. Medical clinic.
3. Single-family home and conversions (section 17-145).
§ 17-163 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-164
AO:559
4. Farms and agriculture in accordance with the standards for the
VRC District.
5. Business/residence meeting the standards of subsection 17-159c3,
except that sales may be made from the premises; no more than
two persons may be employed at one time from the property who
are not members of the family conducting the occupation and not
an actual resident of the dwelling; traffic other than that normally
generated by a single-family dwelling is permitted; and the
equivalent of the first floor area of the structure may be used to
conduct the home occupation.
6. Child care centers shall be a permitted use and shall meet all the
criteria set forth in subsection 17-161b7.
7. All uses permitted under paragraphs b1 through b3, b5 and b6
shall be required to participate in the township's efforts to produce
lower income housing as set forth in section 17-92.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Home occupations in accordance with subsection 17-159c3.
2. Parking and loading.
3. Storage buildings.
4. One earth terminal antenna and one associated reflector (or dish)
are permitted on a lot provided they are located within the setback
lines required for the principal use and are located to be screened
from view from residences and public streets by plantings
providing a year-round screen, parapet walls, building facades,
walls, or similar effective device. The antenna and dish may be
located on a roof, or attached to a building, or on the ground.
Servicing wires and cables shall be installed underground. The
highest point of the antenna and dish facility shall be 15 feet above
the height of a building, or 10 feet above the maximum building
height permitted, whichever is less.
d. Conditional Uses. Pumping stations, transformers and similar utility
facilities which are needed in order to provide utility services directly to
the consumer, but not repair facilities, offices, open storage, work areas
or other aspects of utility operations. Such facilities shall meet the
minimum requirements of subsection 17-159g and shall be landscaped
or otherwise appropriately integrated into the site design by special
architectural treatment in accordance with section 17-89 and, where
safety dictates, shall be enclosed with fencing.
e. Lot, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements.1
§ 17-164 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-164
AO:560
§ 17-165. SI DISTRICT: SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL. [Ord. #96-1048, § 6;
Ord. #97-1074, § 2; Ord. #99-1133, § 5; Ord. #01-1208, § 4; Ord.
#02-1268]
Requirement Office, Bank Medical Clinic Single Family
Min. Lot Area 1 ac. 1 ac. 20,000 square feet
Min. Lot Width 200 feet 200 feet 100 feet
Min. Lot Depth 200 feet 200 feet 125 feet
Min. Front Yard 80 feet 80 feet 45 feet
Min. Side Yard 80 feet 80 feet 20 feet
Min. Rear Yard 80 feet 80 feet 40 feet
Max. Bldg. Hgt. 30 feet 30 feet 30 feet
Max. Lot Coverage 50% 60% 20%
Max. Floor Area Ratio 0.15 0.15 NA
Notes:
Note 1. Notwithstanding the maximum floor area ratio and other design controls set forth
above, the maximum intensity of development permitted on those lots not connected to public
sewage collection and public sewage treatment systems or not located in a designated sewer
service area as shown on the Hopewell Township Wastewater Management Plan shall be
the smaller of either the maximum development permitted by ordinance or the amount of
development which would generate a design influent sewage flow of less than 2,000 gallons per
day as determined in accordance with the prevailing design standards and policies of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to implement the master plan by
providing an area with a diverse assortment of uses, in recognition of
the existing character of offices, warehouses, flex space and residences,
with good transportation service and influenced by major utility
corridors. It is also intended that the provisions for assisting in the
development of lower income housing as set forth below be a required
portion of any new development in the SI District.
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Farms and agriculture.
2. Single-family homes and conversions (section 17-145). However,
any single family home development on a lot of sufficient size to
meet the minimum number of units required in section 17-92 shall
also be required to participate in meeting the lower income
housing obligation of the township.
3. Business/residence meeting the conditions of subsection 17-159c3,
as modified by subsection 17-164b5.
4. Offices.
§ 17-164 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-165
AO:561
5. Industrial/office park.
6. Research facility.
7. Manufacturing and assembly.
8. Packaging; printing; warehousing.
9. Hospitals; veterinary hospital.
10. Restaurant.
11. All principal uses permitted in the RO (Research/Office) District.
12. Child care centers meeting the requirements of subsection
17-161b7.
13. All uses permitted under paragraphs b2 through b12 above shall be
required to participate in the township's efforts to produce lower
income housing as set forth in section 17-92.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Parking and loading; supply and equipment storage; cafeteria.
2. Accessory uses permitted in the RO District.
d. Permitted Conditional Uses.
1. Automobile service stations provided access is either from Route
31 at an intersecting secondary arterial road as shown on the
adopted circulation plan, or is on an interior road designed as part
of an industrial/office park, except that no new automobile service
station shall be located along Route 31 if it is within 1,000 feet in
either direction of an existing station. A service station shall comply
with the minimum requirements for new car/truck dealers in
subsection 17-163e, and with the standards of section 17-102.
2. Gymnasiums, indoor tennis courts, similar court games, and
recreation centers shall be permitted provided they have access
from either a primary arterial or secondary arterial road as shown
on the adopted circulation plan or from an interior road in an
industrial/office park and which meet the minimum requirements
of subsection 17-163e.
3. Pumping stations, transformers and similar utility facilities which
are needed in order to provide utility services directly to the
consumer, but not repair facilities, offices, open storage, work
areas or other aspects of utility operations. Such facilities shall
meet the minimum requirements of subsection 17-159g and shall
be landscaped or otherwise appropriately integrated into the site
design by special architectural treatment in accordance with
section 17-89 and, where safety dictates, shall be enclosed with
fencing.
§ 17-165 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-165
AO:562
e. Lot, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements.
1. The lot, yard, height and coverage requirements for single-family
homes, conversions and business/residence within the SI District
shall be the same as those which govern development of singlefamily
homes in the R-100 District.
2. The lot, yard, height and coverage requirements for an office within
the SI District shall be the same as those which govern
development of an office in the OCC District.
3. The lot, yard, height and coverage requirements for all other
permitted uses within the SI District shall be as follows:
Requirement
Min. Lot Size 3 acres (See paragraph f below)
Min. Lot Width 300 feet (See paragraph f below)
Min. Lot Depth 300 feet (See paragraph f below)
Min. Front Yard 100 feet
Min. Side Yard 50 feet When adjoining another nonresidential
zone, but 100 feet when adjoining a
residential zone
Min. Rear Yard 50 feet When adjoining another nonresidential
zone, but 100 feet when adjoining a
residential zone
Max. Bldg. Height 40 feet Except the height may be increased
where the setbacks are greater than 100
feet based on a height equal to 40% of
the shortest setback from any property or
street line, but not to exceed a height of
60 feet
Max. Lot Coverage 50%
Max. Bldg. Coverage 20%
Max. Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 0.20
Note: Management Plan shall be the smaller of either the maximum development permitted
by ordinance or the amount of development which would generate a design influent sewage
flow of less than 2,000 gallons per day as determined in accordance with the prevailing design
standards and policies of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
f. Additional Requirements for Industrial/Office Park Designs. Any
proposal to develop an industrial/office park containing three or more
lots or to have three or more structures with separate tenants and
having a minimum tract size of 20 acres may adhere to the following
standards, provided a feasible road and lot configuration for the entire
tract is designed with the initial development proposal. Subsequent
modifications to this design may be made as other parcels are
§ 17-165 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-165
AO:563
§ 17-166. OP DISTRICT: OFFICE PARK. [Ord. #96-1048, § 6, 8; Ord.
#96-1051; Ord. #98-1096, §§ 7 — 17; Ord. #99-1133, § 7; Ord.
#00-1157, §§ 1 — 5; Ord. #01-1207, § 10 Ord. No. 02-1268; Ord.
#04-1326, §§ 3 — 6; Ord. #07-1402, § 1]
subdivided or leased but only if the modifications are a logical extension
of that portion already approved or constructed and the modifications
provide an adequate and comprehensive street system to limit
congestion and provide proper access for emergency vehicles (see
definition of Industrial/office park).
1. The average lot size shall not be less than 2.5 acres.
2. The minimum lot size shall be two acres.
3. No lots of less than 2.5 acres may be subdivided until a sufficient
number of lots in excess of 2.5 acres have been subdivided in order
to maintain the minimum average lot size of 2.5 acres over the
entire tract, except that in any event, no more than half the total
number of resulting lots may be less than 2.5 acres.
4. The minimum lot width and depth for parcels less than three acres
shall be 250 feet; the minimum yards shall be: front yard 100 feet;
each side yard 50 feet; and rear yard 50 feet, except the side and
rear yards shall be 100 feet if abutting a residential zone. The
minimum lot width, depth and minimum yards for parcels three
acres or more shall be as set forth in subsection 17-165e3.
5. All other coverage, parking, building height, and other provisions
of this district shall be as set forth in other provisions of this
chapter.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to establish an area where
office-oriented businesses not involved in retail sales may be located.
The location of the district identifies an area where employment centers
have begun to emerge as well as provide areas where highway access is
appropriate and a major tract of land is available for the development of
employment centers.
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Farms and agriculture.
2. Offices.
3. Office park.
4. Research facility.
5. Hospital; veterinary hospital.
6. Restaurant.
§ 17-165 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-166
AO:564
7. Child care centers shall be a permitted use and shall meet all the
criteria set forth in subsection 17-161b7.
8. Principal uses permitted in the RO District.
9. In the OP District, all uses permitted under paragraphs b2 through
b8 above shall be required to participate in the township's efforts to
produce lower income housing, as set forth in section 17-92. In
addition, developers in the OP District may exercise an additional
option of dedicating land outside the OP District, but south of
Washington Crossing-Pennington Road and south of Pennington-
Lawrenceville Road, provided the land would be suited to lower
income housing development. This additional land shall be of equal
size as the parcel being considered in the OP District with suitable
highway access and utility services.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Parking; supply and equipment storage; cafeteria.
2. Conference centers for uses on tracts of 100 or more acres.
3. One earth terminal antenna and one associated reflector (or dish)
are permitted on a lot provided they are located within the setback
lines required for the principal use and are located to be screened
from view from residences and public streets by plantings
providing a year-round screen, parapet walls, building facades,
walls, or similar effective device. The antenna and dish may be
located on a roof, or attached to a building, or on the ground.
Servicing wires and cables shall be installed underground. The
highest point of the antenna and dish facility shall be 15 feet above
the height of a building, or 10 feet above the maximum building
height permitted, whichever is less.
4. Accessory uses permitted in the RO District.
d. Conditional Uses in the OP District.
1. Automobile service station provided access is from an interior road
designed as part of an office park. A service station shall comply
with the minimum requirements for new car/truck dealers in
subsection 17-163e, and with the standards of Section 17-102.
2. Gymnasiums, indoor tennis courts, similar court games, and
recreation centers shall be permitted provided they have access
from either a primary arterial or secondary arterial road as shown
on the adopted circulation plan or from an interior road in an office
park and which meet the minimum requirements of subsection
17-163e.
3. Pumping stations, transformers and similar utility facilities which
are needed in order to provide utility services directly to the
consumer, but not repair facilities, offices, open storage, work
§ 17-166 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-166
AO:565
areas or other aspects of utility operations. Such facilities shall
meet the minimum requirements of subsection 17-159g and shall
be landscaped or otherwise appropriately integrated into the site
design by special architectural treatment in accordance with
section 17-89 and, where safety dictates, shall be enclosed with
fencing.
e. Lot, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements for Nonpark Designs.1
Requirement
Min. Lot Size 5 acres (See paragraph f below)
Min. Lot Width 300 feet (See paragraph f below)
Min. Lot Depth 300 feet (See paragraph f below)
Min. Front Yard 100 feet
Min. Side Yard 50 feet When adjoining another nonresidential
zone, but 100 feet when adjoining a
residential zone
Min. Rear Yard 50 feet When adjoining another nonresidential
zone, but 100 feet when adjoining a
residential zone
Max. Bldg. Hgt. 40 feet Except the height may be increased
where the setbacks are greater than
100 feet based on a height equal to
40% of the shortest setback from any
property or street line, but not to
exceed a height of 60 feet
Max. Lot Coverage 50%
Max. Bldg. Coverage 20%
Max. Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 0.20
Note 1. Notwithstanding the maximum floor area ratio and other design controls set forth
above, the maximum intensity of development permitted on those lots not connected to public
sewage collection and public sewage treatment systems or not located in a designated sewer
service area as shown on the Hopewell Township Wastewater Management Plan shall be
the smaller of either the maximum development permitted by ordinance or the amount of
development which would generate a design influent sewage flow of less than 2,000 gallons per
day as determined in accordance with the prevailing design standards and policies of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
f. Requirements of Office Park Designs. Any proposal to develop an office
park containing three or more lots or to have three or more structures
with separate tenants and having a minimum tract size of 20 acres may
adhere to the following standards, provided a feasible road and lot
configuration for the entire tract is designed with the initial
development proposal. Subsequent modifications to this design may be
made as other parcels are subdivided or leased but only if the
§ 17-166 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-166
AO:566
modifications are a logical extension of that portion already approved
and/or constructed and the modifications provide an adequate and
comprehensive street system to limit congestion and provide proper
access for emergency vehicles. (See definition of Industrial or Office
Park.)
1. The average lot size shall not be less than 3.5 acres;
2. The minimum lot size shall be two acres;
3. No lots of less than 3.5 acres may be subdivided until a sufficient
number of lots in excess of 3.5 acres have been subdivided in order
to maintain the minimum average lot size of 3.5 acres over the
entire tract, except that in any event no more than half the total
number of resulting lots may be less than 3.5 acres.
4. The minimum lot width and depth for parcels less than five acres
shall be 250 feet; the minimum yards shall be: front yard 100 feet;
each side yard 50 feet; and rear yard 50 feet, except the side and
rear yards shall be 100 feet if abutting a residential zone. The
minimum lot width, depth and minimum yards for parcels five acres
or more shall be as set forth in subsection 17-166e. In the case of a
general development plan submitted pursuant to subsection
17-166g, the setbacks from the perimeter of the tract shall be met,
but the following minimum yard requirements shall apply to any lot
or portion thereof internal to the tract: front yard — 75 feet for a
principal building and 15 feet for accessory buildings and
structures; each side yard — 25 feet for a principal building, and 15
feet for accessory buildings or structures except parking garages,
including associated uses contained in or attached to such garages,
may overlap lot lines to serve abutting properties; and rear yard —
25 feet for a principal building and 15 feet for accessory buildings
and structures.
5. All other coverage, parking, building height, and other provisions
of this district shall be as set forth in other provisions of this
chapter; provided, however, in the case of a general development
plan submitted pursuant to subsection 17-166g, the maximum floor
area ratio, maximum lot coverage and maximum nonresidential
building height requirements shall be as set forth in subsection
17-166g. The maximum floor area ratio and lot coverage
requirements set forth in subsection 17-166g4 shall be applied to
the tract as a whole and not to individual lots therein. The parking
requirements and other provisions of this district not otherwise
provided for in this subsection 17-166e or subsection 17-166g shall
be set forth in other provisions of this chapter.
g. General Development Plan in OP District. Notwithstanding the previous
provisions of this section, in OP District the developer of a tract whose
original acreage was at least 150 acres and having a development
period of at least five years may submit a general development plan to
§ 17-166 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-166
AO:567
the approving authority for review and approval prior to submitting a
preliminary plat. The submission shall be in accordance with section
17-126. The design standards for required improvements shall comply
with the approved general development plan and the provisions of
this ordinance that have not been modified by the approved general
development plan.
1. Purpose. The opportunity to submit a general development plan is
intended to provide opportunities for long range public and private
planning in conjunction with the protection that an approved
general development plan gives to developers under the Municipal
Land Use Law in return for commitments by that developer to
making various improvements and/or contributions toward
infrastructure and other community services.
2. For general development plans, in addition to the principal and
accessory uses permitted under subsections 17-166b and c above,
the principal and accessory uses permitted in the RO District shall
be permitted, and the plan shall contain the elements required in
section 17-126 to address related housing, if applicable, and
services to the businesses, the employees, and any residents in the
proposed development.
3. A housing component shall be provided in compliance with the
applicable portions of section 17-92. Where the applicant chooses
to make the monetary contributions, the payments shall be made
for each building in the development in accordance with the
Hopewell Township Development Fee Ordinance.
4. The principal nonresidential permitted uses shall be oriented to
employment centers consisting of offices and research facilities.
Service uses to the offices and research uses shall be limited to no
more than 20% of the gross floor area of the nonresidential uses in
the development and shall be limited to the sale of supplies,
furniture, and equipment to support the office and research uses,
together with related equipment repair and service uses. Other
retail and service uses permitted in the plan shall be limited to 5%
of the gross floor area of the nonresidential uses in the
development and shall be limited to such uses as restaurants,
delicatessens, banks, pharmacies, and such retail uses as individual
clothing and shoe stores, gift shops, flower shops, and personal
services such as barber shops, beauty salons, cleaners, tailors, and
shoe repair. Where there is more than 500,000 square feet of office
and/or research uses in the development, one conference center
and one hotel shall also be permitted. The maximum floor area ratio
of nonresidential uses shall be 0.18 throughout the tract, subject to
an increase in floor area as provided by section 17-92. Certain uses
noted below shall not be counted in the floor area ratio of the total
tract. The development may be shifted from one portion of the tract
to another in order to maximize open space, or to add flexibility in
designing the site. The maximum lot coverage in the nonresidential
§ 17-166 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-166
AO:568
portion of the plan shall be 50%, including buildings, driveways,
parking and loading areas, and sidewalks, but excluding streets
and sidewalks in public or private rights-of-way and also excluding
the building and pavement coverage of freestanding buildings
which are specifically excluded from the floor area ratio as set forth
herein.
5. As part of a general development plan, temporary uses limited to
serving on-site construction during the period of development may
be permitted provided site plan review and approval of the
temporary uses have been granted. The purpose of these uses is to
minimize the volume of traffic going to the site by vehicles such as
construction vehicles, lumber, brick, and other supply and
maintenance vehicles. These temporary uses shall be located at
least 400 feet from the perimeter of the site and be shielded from
view by such things as evergreen plantings, berms or natural
contours, or existing wooded areas. The design and location of
these temporary facilities shall be such as to minimize the potential
nuisances to any nearby residents. The temporary uses to be
permitted shall include such uses as brick, stone and lumber yards;
construction offices; vehicle maintenance and vehicle storage
areas; and warehousing and supply storage buildings. These
temporary uses serving each category of use shall be phased out as
the development nears completion and shall all be removed from
the site prior to the certificate of occupancy being issued for any
part of the last 5% of each category of use.
6. The overall plan shall include provisions for nursery school and/or
child/day care in conjunction with the employment uses. If located
on the site, the floor area devoted to this use under a general
development plan shall not be counted in the floor area ratio. The
design standards shall meet the requirements set forth in
subsection 17-161b7.
7. The overall plan shall include at least 15% of the area of the tract in
open space and provide recreation uses. These recreation uses
shall contain improvements for active recreation uses as delineated
on a plan (such as but not limited to ball fields, court games, pool,
or buildings housing exercise rooms). The plan shall contain
provisions for park settings and passive areas as well (such as but
not limited to a park with benches located to have a scenic view, or
directed toward views of statues or other works of art, or directed
toward views of flower gardens or similar areas.) The requirement
for open space and recreation uses in the overall plan may be
satisfied by including any land dedicated by the applicant to the
township for open space and recreation purposes, provided such
land is adjacent to the planned development site. The land
dedicated by the applicant need not be in the OP Zone.
8. A plan resulting in more than one million square feet of
nonresidential floor area on-site shall require a specific community
§ 17-166 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-166
AO:569
facilities plan as part of the agreement. In the event the community
facilities are to be of site, then said agreement shall set forth the
developer's participation and the manner of satisfying same. If the
community facilities are on-site, then the floor area devoted to this
use shall not be counted in the floor area ratio.
9. Nonresidential uses may have building heights of: (1) not more
than 45 feet and three stories when located at least 75 feet from
the perimeter of the tract; (2) not more than 60 feet and four
stories when located at least 150 feet from the perimeter of the
tract, or 75 feet and five stories when located at least 150 feet from
the perimeter of the tract and within 1,400 feet of an interstate
highway and 1,400 feet of a railroad right-of-way; (3) not more than
70 feet and five stories when located (a) at least 500 feet from an
interstate highway or railroad right-of-way, or (b) at least 800 feet
from any other perimeter boundary of the tract; and, (4) not more
than 110 feet and seven stories when located at least 500 feet from
an interstate highway or railroad right-of-way and within 1,400 feet
of an interstate highway and 1,400 feet of a railroad right-of-way.
Sloping roofs which enclose or screen uninhabitable space or
equipment shall not be included in the foregoing building height
limitations and shall not be higher than an additional 30 feet above
the maximum allowable building height as defined above. Any other
rooftop structures shall not exceed more than 25% of the maximum
allowable building height set forth above. In no instance shall the
total height of the building plus uninhabitable space and equipment
exceed 110 feet. All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be
screened from view. If the design of the development includes one
or more buildings higher than 35 feet, the applicant shall include in
the development schedule some provision for a proportionate share
of future emergency services able to serve taller buildings.
10. Adequate provision shall be made for water storage, but the
location of any elevated storage tank shall be at least 1,000 feet
from the perimeter of the tract.
11. The perimeter of the tract along existing streets and property lines
shall be designed to provide a buffer area which averages 100 feet
in width but is not less than 75 feet in width in any one location.
The buffer area shall have various shaped berms averaging at least
five feet in height where the adjacent street or property is at grade
with or higher than the site in order to enhance visual buffer
intended. These berms and the entire buffer area shall be planted
with a mixture of evergreens, deciduous trees and shrubbery of
different species to assure that off-street parking and loading areas
within 400 feet of the perimeter property lines are screened from
view. Elsewhere, the buffer area shall be planted to lessen the
visual impact of development through combinations of densities,
color, and different plant materials. The other buffer requirements
of the ordinance shall be met. The approving authority may grant
§ 17-166 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-166
AO:570
waivers from these berming and planting standards if, in the
opinion of the approving authority, the existing contours or the
wooded nature of the existing conditions within the buffer area
meet the objectives of the ordinance.
12. The minimum spacing between nonresidential buildings shall be at
least equal to the height, excluding sloped roofs and penthouse
structures, of the tallest adjacent building. Where roads, but not
driveways, pass between buildings that are closer than 100 feet to
one another, the space between the buildings shall be increased up
to another 25 feet, but the space between buildings need not be
increased beyond 100 feet. Unless modified by approval of the
planning board, buildings shall be set back from any interior road,
but not driveways, at least 50 feet and shall be set back at least 25
feet from any parking spaces. Truck loading docks are specifically
excluded from this requirement. If a parking garage is constructed
as part of a building complex, the garage may be as close to any
other building as the height of the garage and if the parking garage
has more than two stories, an elevated walkway from the garage
into the building(s) in addition to the ground floor entrance(s)
should be considered.
13. Detention basins shall be designed as part of a lawn, or part of a
park or recreation area, or as an aesthetic attraction as part of a
garden, or be designed in some similar fashion to be an aesthetic
part of the plan, but detention basins, unless they are designed to
permanently retain water as a pond, and are approved as a
recreational or aesthetic amenity by the planning board at the time
of site plan approval, shall not count as part of the required 15%
requirement in subsection 17-166g7.
14. Where there is more than 1,000,000 square feet of nonresidential
floor area in the development plan, the plan shall provide a site and
a building for either a fire house or rescue squad as a supporting
community facility for the plan. The floor area devoted to this use
shall not be counted in the floor area ratio.
15. The plan may incorporate not more than one helistop located at
least 500 feet from any street or property line and at least 2,000
feet from any residential use, located in a manner complying with
the flight patterns from other airports, and located so the approach
pattern is not over residential areas.
16. Section 12 of the Mercer County Transportation Development
District Ordinance, as amended from time to time (the "TDD
Ordinance") provides that developers submitting a transportation
demand management plan shall be eligible for trip reduction
credits, with such credits specified in a TDD Fee Binder Agreement,
and with trip reduction credits accruing at specified rates with
respect to flex time and staggered work hours and with respect to
actual removal of single occupancy vehicles from the
§ 17-166 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-166
AO:571
§ 17-167. IC DISTRICT; INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL. [Ord.
#00-1157, § 2; Ord. #01-1210, § 1; Ord. No. 02-1268; Ord.
#04-1325, §§ 20, 21]
§ 17-168. RO-1, 2 AND 3 DISTRICTS: RESEARCH/OFFICE
DISTRICTS. [Ord. #93-932, § 1, Ord. #93-955, § 1; Ord. #96-1048,
§§ 6, 9; Ord. #99-1133, § 8; Ord. #01-1223, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #02-1268;
Ord. No. 2017-1670 §§ 1, 2, 4; Ord. No. 2018-1690]
transportation system. Section 6G of the TDD Ordinance provides
that any credits available under Section 12 of the TDD Ordinance
shall be rescinded upon the alteration or termination of the activity
or condition on account of which such credit was applicable. The
developer shall provide to the township a copy of any submissions
to Mercer County pursuant to the TDD Ordinance seeking credits
for a traffic demand management plan, together with a copy of any
reports thereon.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide wider employment
opportunities in proximity to expanding residential areas. This district
has good highway access, is separated from residential areas, and has
an existing development characteristic similar to what is permitted.
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Uses permitted in the HBO District meeting the HBO regulations.
2. Uses permitted in the OP District meeting the OP regulations.
3. Warehousing, meeting the lot, yard, height, coverage and other
bulk requirements of the OP District (subsection 17-166e).
4. Manufacturing and assembly.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses. The same as the HBO and OP Districts.
d. Conditional Uses.
1. Conditional uses permitted in the HBO District.
2. Automobile car wash provided it has access from Route 31, the
vehicular entrance to the facility is at the rear of the property, the
on-site stacking of vehicles waiting to enter the facility is around
the periphery of the lot and at least two lanes wide, and the
stacking lanes have a capacity for at least 20 vehicles.
e. Lot, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements. The same as the HBO
and OP Districts with the more restrictive provisions applying in those
instances where conflicting standards may exist.
a. Purpose. The purpose of these districts is to provide for research/office
uses by single owners with one or more tenant occupants on large
parcels within the township. A neighborhood of inclusionary housing is
§ 17-166 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-168
AO:572
also deemed appropriate in the RO-1 District when arranged on
undeveloped portions of the property, and adequately buffered from
manufacturing buildings and activities. It is also intended that the
provision for assisting in the development of lower income housing as
set forth below be a required portion of any new development in the
RO-1 District.
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Offices.
2. Uses devoted to research, experimentation, design, education, and
development in medicine, pharmacology, chemistry, physics,
engineering, and similar fields.
3. Farms and agriculture in accordance with the standards for the
VRC District.
4. In the RO Districts, all uses permitted under paragraphs b1 and b2
above shall be required to participate in the township's efforts to
produce lower income housing including the dedication of land and
development of lower income housing as set forth in section 17-92.
5. Child care centers shall be a permitted use and shall meet all the
criteria set forth in section 17-161b7.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Parking and loading.
2. Cafeterias, first aid and recreational facilities for employees and
guests.
3. Helistop located at least 500 feet from any street or property line
and at least 2,000 feet from any residential use, and which shall not
be used between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
4. Not more than three dwellings located on the premises and
occupied by full-time employees and their families only.
5. Maintenance facilities and centralized service facilities serving the
uses on the tract.
6. Conference center as part of the operations of a permitted use
provided it is subordinate to the principal use, has less square
footage than the principal use, and is designed to accommodate
fewer personnel than the principal use. In conjunction with the
conference center, such activities as swimming pools, tennis
courts, golf courses, and other recreational facilities are permitted
provided they are available as an activity associated with the
accessory conference center and not operated as a commercial
facility open to the general public.
§ 17-168 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-168
AO:573
7. One earth terminal antenna and one associated reflector (or dish)
are permitted on a lot provided they are located within the setback
lines required for the principal use and are located to be screened
from view from residences and public streets by plantings
providing a year-round screen, parapet walls, building facades,
walls, or similar effective device. The antenna and dish may be
located on a roof, or attached to a building, or on the ground.
Servicing wires and cables shall be installed underground. The
highest point of the antenna and dish facility shall be 15 feet above
the height of a building, or 10 feet above the maximum building
height permitted whichever is less.
d. Conditional Uses.
1. Pumping stations, transformers and similar utility facilities which
are needed in order to provide utility services directly to the
consumer, but not repair facilities, offices, open storage, work
areas or other aspects of utility operations. Such facilities shall
meet the minimum requirements of subsection 17-159g and shall
be landscaped or otherwise appropriately integrated into the site
design by special architectural treatment in accordance with
section 17-89 and, where safety dictates, shall be enclosed with
fencing.
2. Inclusionary affordable housing development pursuant to the
requirements in § 17-168g.
e. Lot, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements.1
Requirement
Min. Lot Area 100 contiguous acres (all of which shall be
located within the township).
Min. Lot Width 1,000 feet
Min. Lot Depth 1,000 feet
Min. Setback from Public Street 200 feet
Min. Setback from Interior Street Equivalent to building height
Min. Distance between Buildings Equivalent to height of tallest building
Max. Building Height 40 feet except the height may be increased
where the setbacks are greater than 100 feet
based on a height equal to 40% of the shortest
setback from any property or street line, but
not to exceed a height of 60 feet
Max. Lot Coverage 25%
Max. Building Coverage 10%
§ 17-168 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-168
AO:574
Requirement
Max. Floor Area Ratio 0.15 in the RO-1 District 0.13 in the RO-2
District 0.05 in the RO-3 District, provided
that if all development is clustered on 1 side of
Carter Road a floor area bonus of 2.5% to a
maximum floor area ratio of 0.05125 is
permitted
Notes:
Note 1. Notwithstanding the maximum floor area ratio and other design controls set forth
above, the maximum intensity of development permitted on those lots not connected to public
sewage collection and public sewage treatment systems or not located in a designated sewer
service area as shown on the Hopewell Township Wastewater Management Plan shall be
the smaller of either the maximum development permitted by ordinance or the amount of
development which would generate a design sewage flow of less than 2,000 gallons per day as
determined in accordance with the prevailing design standards and policies of the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection
f. General Development. Plan in the RO Districts. Notwithstanding the
previous provisions of this section, in the RO Districts the developer of a
tract whose original acreage was at least 250 acres and having a
development period of at least five years may submit a general
development plan to the approving authority for review and approval
prior to submitting a preliminary plat. The submission shall be in
accordance with section 17-126. The design standards for required
improvements shall comply with the approved general development
plan and the provisions of this chapter that have not been modified by
the approved general development plan.
1. Purpose. The opportunity to submit a general development plan is
intended to provide opportunities for long range public and private
planning in conjunction with the protection that an approved
general development plan gives to developers under the Municipal
Land Use Law in return for commitments by that developer to
making various improvements and/or contributions towards
infrastructure and other community needs and services.
2. In addition to the principal uses permitted under subsection
17-168b above, the plan shall contain the elements required in
section 17-126 to address related housing and services to the
businesses, the employees, and any residents in the proposed
development.
3. A housing component shall be provided in compliance with the
applicable portions of section 17-92. Where the applicant chooses
to make the monetary contributions, the payments shall be made as
building permits are issued for each phase of the development.
4. The principal nonresidential permitted uses shall be oriented to
employment centers consisting of offices and research facilities.
§ 17-168 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-168
AO:575
Service uses to the offices and research uses shall be limited to no
more than 20% of the gross floor area of the nonresidential uses
in the development and shall be limited to the sale of supplies,
furniture, and equipment to support the office and research uses,
together with related equipment repair and service uses. Other
retail and service uses for employees and residents permitted in
the plan shall be limited to 15% of the gross floor area of the
nonresidential uses in the development and shall be limited to such
uses as restaurants, banks, pharmacies, and such retail uses as
individual clothing and shoe stores, gift shops, flower shops, and
personal services such as barber shops, beauty salons, cleaners,
tailors, and shoe repair. Where there is more than 1,000,000 square
feet of office and/or research uses in the development, the plan
shall provide at least one restaurant. The development may be
shifted from one portion of the tract to another in order to generate
acreage for the housing requirement, or to maximize open space,
or to add flexibility in designing the site. The maximum lot
coverage in the nonresidential portion of the plan shall be 50%,
including buildings, streets, driveways, parking and loading areas,
and sidewalks, but excluding the building and pavement coverage
of free standing buildings used exclusively for uses excluded from
the floor area ratio as set forth below.
5. As part of a general development plan, temporary uses limited to
serving on-site construction during the period of development may
be permitted provided site plan review and approval of the
temporary uses has been granted. The purposes of these uses is to
minimize the volume of traffic going to the site by vehicles such as
construction vehicles, lumber, brick, and other supply and
maintenance vehicles. These temporary uses shall be located at
least 400 feet from the perimeter of the site and be shielded from
view by such things as evergreen plantings, berms or natural
contours, or existing wooded areas. The design and location of
these temporary facilities shall be such as to minimize the potential
nuisances to any nearby residents. The temporary uses to be
permitted shall include such uses as brick, stone and lumber yards;
construction offices; vehicle maintenance and vehicle storage
areas; and warehousing and supply storage buildings. These
temporary uses shall be phased out as the development nears
completion and shall all be removed from the site prior to the
certificate of occupancy being issued for any part of the last 5% of
the dwelling units and/or the last 5% of the gross floor area of
nonresidential uses in the development.
6. The approving authority may require that the overall plan include
provisions for nursery school and/or child care/day care facilities in
conjunction with the employment uses. The floor area devoted to
this use under a general development plan shall not be counted in
the floor area ratio. The design standards shall meet the
requirements set forth in subsection 17-161b7.
§ 17-168 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-168
AO:576
7. The overall plan shall include at least 15% of the area of the tract in
open space and recreation uses, at least half of this space shall be
designed in relation to any on-site residential uses, with the other
areas to be convenient to the office uses. These recreation areas
shall contain improvements for active recreation uses as delineated
on a plan (such as but not limited to ball fields, court games, pool,
or buildings housing exercise rooms). The plan shall contain
provisions for park settings and passive areas as well (such as but
not limited to a park with benches located to have a scenic view, or
directed toward views of statues or other works of art, or directed
toward views of flower gardens or similar areas).
8. A plan resulting in more than 1,000,000 square feet of
nonresidential floor area on-site shall require a specific community
facility's plan as part of the agreement. In the event the community
facilities are to be off-site, then said agreement shall set forth the
developer's participation and the manner of satisfying same. If the
community facilities are on-site, then the floor area devoted to this
use shall not be counted in the floor area ratio.
9. Maximum building heights shall be as follows:
(a) Notwithstanding the definition of "height" in this chapter,71 the
maximum building height of residential structures shall be 35
feet, but not more than two stories above grade, except that if
constructed on slopes greater than 10%, the structure may be
no higher than two stories, or 30 feet measured on the uphill
side, and no higher than three stories, or 45 feet when
measured on the downhill side.
(b) The maximum building height of nonresidential structures
shall be 40 feet when located within 800 feet of the perimeter
of the site and 60 feet when set back farther than 800 feet from
the perimeter of the site. However, should an RO tract, in
single ownership, be greater than 400 acres, then structures
no taller than 60 feet in height (including penthouse and roof
structures for containing equipment) may be permitted and the
setback from the site perimeter for said structures can be
reduced to 500 feet where each of the applicable criteria set
forth below is met. Structures between 61 feet and 75 feet in
height (including penthouse and roof structures for containing
equipment) may be permitted and the setback from the site
perimeter for said structures can be reduced to 500 feet where
each of the applicable criteria set forth below is met. However,
structures between 61 and 75 feet in height shall comprise no
more than 12% of the total floor area of the entire site at full
build-out granted by a General Development Plan. The criteria
are as follows:
71.Editor's Note: For definitions, see section 17-181, Words Defined.
§ 17-168 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-168
AO:577
(1) The tract shall not abut a local street.
(2) Said structures must be contiguous to each other.
(3) Any sixty-foot tall structures shall be farther than 900 feet
from the nearest point of intersection with any local street,
and any structures between 61 and 75 feet shall be farther
than 1,500 feet from the nearest point of intersection with
any local street.
(4) Said structures must be no less than 500 feet from the
perimeter of the site, and no less than 200 feet but no
more than 700 feet from any land which was permanently
preserved as open space as of January 1, 2001. The
location of said structure(s) shall be delineated on the
General Development Plan, and shall be acceptable to and
approved by the planning board. The location of said
structure(s) shall also be made part of the Developer's
Agreement, which shall be acceptable to and approved by
the township committee.
(5) Not less than 50% of the total parking demand for the
entire site at full build-out shall be accommodated in
parking structures; and not less than 95% of the parking
demand generated by such structures shall be
accommodated in parking structures, the balance to be
used for handicapped or visitor parking.
(6) The ground floor for any structure between 61 and 75 feet
in height shall not exceed 65,000 square feet.
(7) The elevation of the first floor of any structure between 61
and 75 feet in height, which floor is at or above finished
grade, shall be at least 10 feet lower than the elevation of
the street which is closest thereto, measured at right
angles from such street to the closest portion of such
structure.
(8) For purposes of this subparagraph (b), the classification of
streets shall be deemed to be those classifications in effect
as of the adoption of this subparagraph, notwithstanding
any later classification.
(9) The developer shall perform a test demonstrating the
visual impact(s) of such structure(s), the results of which
shall be acceptable to and approved by the planning board.
(c) If the design of the development includes one or more
structures higher than 35 feet, the applicant shall include in
the development some provision for a proportionate share of
future emergency services able to serve taller buildings. The
level of participation shall be a proportion of the projected
§ 17-168 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-168
AO:578
future needs to serve the development(s) generating the need.
Such calculations shall be based on a study of emergency
services needed to serve taller buildings.
10. Adequate provisions shall be made for water storage, but the
location of any above ground storage tank shall be at least 1,000
feet from the perimeter of the tract.
11. The perimeter of the tract along existing streets and property lines
shall be designed to provide a buffer area at least 100 feet in width.
The buffer area shall have various shaped berms at least five feet in
height where the adjacent street or property is at grade with or
lower than the site in order to enhance the visual buffer intended.
These berms and the entire buffer area shall be planted with a
mixture of indigenous vegetations including evergreens, deciduous
trees and shrubbery of different species to assure that off-street
parking and loading areas within 400 feet of the perimeter property
lines are screened from view. Elsewhere, the buffer area shall be
planted to lessen the visual impact of development through
combinations of densities, color, and different plant materials. The
other buffer requirements of the chapter shall be met. The
approving authority may grant waivers from these berming and
planting standards if, in the opinion of the approving authority, the
existing contours or the wooded nature of the existing conditions
within the 100 feet buffer area meet the objectives of the chapter.
12. The minimum spacing between nonresidential buildings shall be at
least that required by all applicable building codes. Buildings shall
be set back from any interior loop circulation road, but not
driveways, at least 50 feet and shall be set back at least 25 feet
from any parking spaces. If a parking garage is constructed as part
of a building complex, the garage may be as close to the building(s)
it is serving as is permitted by all applicable building codes. If the
parking garage has more than two stories, there shall be an
elevated walkway from the third story into the building(s) in
addition to the ground floor entrance(s).
13. Detention basins shall be designed as part of a lawn, or part of a
park or recreation area, or as an aesthetic attraction, as part of a
garden, or be designed in some similar fashion to be an aesthetic
part of the plan, but detention basins shall not count as part of the
required 15% requirement in subsection 17-168f7.
14. The plan shall provide a site and a building for either a fire house or
rescue squad as a supporting community facility for the plan. The
floor area devoted to this use shall not be counted in the floor area
ratio.
15. The plan may incorporate not more than one helistop located at
least 500 feet from any street or property line and at least 2,000
feet from any residential use, located in a manner complying with
§ 17-168 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-168
AO:579
the flight patterns from other airports, and located so the approach
pattern is not over residential areas.
16. The plan shall include a traffic management plan which shall
provide for one or more methods of reducing peak hour traffic and
which shall require all occupants to participate in the program. The
traffic management plan shall include such methods as staggered
work hours, flex-time, van pooling, corporate sponsored
transportation, provision for locating a passenger station adjacent
to the railroad when the site abuts the railroad, and such other
techniques approved by the approving authority. Where the general
development plan is to be implemented in phases, a condition of
approval of the general development plan shall be a requirement to
update the traffic data and the traffic management plan at each
phase.
g. Conditional Use Inclusionary Development in the RO-1 District.
1. Principal Permitted Uses.
(a) Garden apartments.
(b) Townhouses.
2. Permitted Accessory Uses.
(a) Off-street parking.
(b) Any use or structure customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use.
(c) Private garages and carports.
(d) Recreational and cultural facilities for the sole use of the
residents of the community and their guests, including but not
limited to a clubhouse, jogging and bike trails, swimming pool,
library, media center, court games, picnic areas and other
typical active and passive recreation facilities.
(e) Sales office of a temporary nature not to extend beyond the
occupancy of the last dwelling.
3. Area and Yard Requirements - Relief required by this section shall
be considered according to the standards in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c):
(a) The following bulk standards apply to all tracts proposed for
inclusionary residential development within the RO-1 District:
(1) Minimum tract size: 30 contiguous acres.
(2) Maximum tract size: 50 contiguous acres.
(3) Minimum front yard for townhouse structures: 25 feet to
private road/100 feet to public road.
§ 17-168 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-168
AO:580
(4) Minimum front yard for apartment buildings: 75 feet to
private road/100 feet to public road.
(5) Minimum tract width: 750 feet.
(6) Minimum setbacks to tract. boundary - Principle
Structure:
[a] Minimum Side Yard: 50 feet.
[b] Minimum Rear Yard: 100 feet.
(7) Minimum distance between apartment buildings: 50 feet.
(8) Minimum distance between townhouse buildings: 25 feet.
(9) Minimum setbacks to tract boundary - Accessory
Buildings:
[a] Minimum Side Yard: 25 feet.
[b] Minimum Rear Yard: 50 feet.
(10) Maximum coverage: 60%, including private roadways.
(11) Maximum building height: within the ring road; three
stories and 40 feet, if constructed outside the ring road.
(b) Multi-Family Building Setbacks.
(1) Building face to local street curb or pavement: 25 feet.
(2) Building face to collector street curb or pavement: 40 feet.
(3) Building face to arterial street curb or pavement: 50 feet.
(4) Building face to common parking area:
[a] Front building face: 20 feet.
[b] Rear or side building face: 15 feet.
(c) Multi-Family Building Spacing. The following separation of
buildings shall be provided:
Dimension Separation of Buildings (feet)
Long side to long side 75
Front to rear 50
Front to end 45
Rear to rear 50
Rear to end 40
End to end 30
§ 17-168 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-168
AO:581
(d) Multifamily Building Requirements.
(1) Garden apartments.
[a] The maximum length of structures shall be 200 feet.
Maximum density shall be 25 dwelling units per acre.
[b] Garden apartment structures should be grouped in
clusters, with architectural design consistent in each
cluster.
[c] Recreation facilities, such as swimming pools and
tennis courts, should be encouraged but carefully
located to avoid problems of noise, light and similar
nuisance elements affecting residential units. They
shall be located not less than 100 feet from any tract
boundary.
[d] No front yard shall be used for service such as clothes
drying and/or outdoor storage.
[e] Where townhouses or garden apartments abut a
residential zone or use, there shall be a landscaped
strip not less than 15 feet in width or depth, which
strip shall not be utilized for roadway or parking and
which shall be so planted as to form an effective visual
screen.
[f] All utilities and their service lines, including electric
and telephone, shall be installed underground and
subject to approval of the appropriate utility.
Wherever the utility is not installed in a public rightof-
way, an appropriate utility easement shall be
provided.
[g] All streetlights and all lighting along pedestrian walks
and in parking areas shall be downward-directed and
shaded and installed on ornamental standards of the
appropriate utility. They shall be of a style and design
compatible with the architectural style of the project
and shall be approved by the Planning Board and the
utility company.
[h] Adequate provision shall be made for the storage,
recycling and removal of garbage, which shall be at
the sole cost and expense of the owner.
[i] Adequate provision shall be made for snow removal on
all sidewalks, streets, roads, driveways and parking
areas within the project, which shall be at the sole cost
and expense of the owner.
§ 17-168 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-168
AO:582
[j] Minimum roof pitch shall be 4:12 unless flat roofs are
employed, in which case green roof design or solar
collectors shall be employed.
[k] Landscape or rooftop screening shall be provided for
all a/c units, meters, connections, etc.
(2) Townhouses.
[a] Maximum of eight units in a single row. Minimum
width of unit, 18 feet. Offset of at least four feet
between every two units.
[b] Townhouses should be grouped in clusters, with a
maximum of 30 per cluster. Private parking areas
should be located near the unit entrances and outdoor
living areas or patios adjoining open space or paths
leading to open space.
[c] Townhouses in each cluster should be consistent in
terms of architectural style and major design elements
such as materials, windows, rooflines, roof designs,
etc. Design approval shall rest with the Planning
Board.
[d] Each dwelling unit in a townhouse building shall be
completely separated from all other dwelling units in
the same building by a fire wall subject to the
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
[e] Adequate safe and sanitary provisions shall be made
for the recycling and storage of solid waste and
garbage in compliance with all applicable ordinance
requirements of the Township of Hopewell.
[f] Minimum roof pitch shall be 4:12.
[g] Landscape or rooftop screening shall be provided for
all a/c units, meters, connections, etc.
4. Development Requirements for Inclusionary Housing in the RO-1
District:
(a) Infrastructure. All development shall be connected to public
sewers and public water.
(b) Residential Use.
(1) There shall be a maximum of 250 dwelling units.
(2) Pursuant to COAH's second round rules at N.J.A.C. 5:93-1,
et seq., at least 15% of all rental units and 20% of all forsale
units shall be deed-restricted for occupancy by low
and moderate income households and the affordable
§ 17-168 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-168
AO:583
housing units shall be dispersed among the residential
buildings rather than concentrated in a few buildings.
(3) Low and moderate income units shall meet the following
bedroom distribution requirements:
[a] The combination of efficiency and one bedroom units
shall be at least 10% and no greater than 20% of the
total low and moderate income units;
[b] At least 30% of all low and moderate income units
shall be two bedroom units; and
[c] At least 20% of all low and moderate income units
shall be three bedroom units.
(4) Residential units shall be afforded the following activities
within the redevelopment area: fitness room, community
room, convenient recycling and trash receptacle area and
multipurpose pedestrian/bicycle trail.
(5) At least 50% of all affordable units shall be made available
to low income households of which at least 13% shall be
available to very low income households as required by
P.L. 2008, c.46.
(c) Site Design. Relief required by this section shall be considered
according to the standards in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c)
(1) The location and arrangement of buildings, uses, parking
areas and street setbacks shall be designed to minimize
conflicts with non-residential uses in the RO-1 District.
(2) The buildings shall be located, arranged and designed to
maximize opportunities for active and/or passive solar
energy collection.
(3) Each dwelling unit and combined complex of dwelling
units shall have a compatible architectural theme with
variations in design to provide attractiveness to the
development which shall include consideration of
landscaping techniques, building orientation to the site
and to other structures, topography, natural features and
individual dwelling unit design such as varying unit
widths, staggering unit setbacks, providing different
exterior materials, changing roof lines and roof designs,
altering building heights and changing types of windows,
shutters, doors, porches, colors and vertical or horizontal
orientation of the facades, singularly or in combination for
each dwelling unit.
§ 17-168 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-168
AO:584
(4) The dwelling unit mix shall be such that no more than 65%
of the total number of dwelling units shall have the same
number of bedrooms.
(5) No townhouse building shall contain more than eight
dwelling units.
(6) A minimum of 20% of the total land area of the
inclusionary development tract, shall be designated as
active and passive open space. Pedestrian and bike paths,
ball fields, playgrounds and other areas for active or
passive recreation shall be included in the calculation of
required open space.
(7) A dense landscape buffer screen of 75 feet in width shall
be installed where the development abuts any nonresidential
use or public street.
(8) Pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall be provided and
shall be separated from motor vehicle circulation
wherever possible, and, where applicable, shall be
consistent with the Township's master plan for bikeways,
utilizing the connections to the Lawrence Hopewell Trail
and other existing trails.
(9) Pedestrian facilities shall include a perimeter loop
pathway around the inclusionary development.
(10) An integrated sidewalk system shall be provided
throughout the development which encourages pedestrian
movements.
(11) Residential uses shall be located within the existing ring
road. Residential uses may be located between the ring
road and site perimeter only if the developer demonstrates
to the planning board that environmental constraints
preclude residential development within the ring road.
Any development located between the ring road and site
perimeter, if the planning approves said demonstration,
shall protect existing views from the perimeter through
site grading, landscaping or other means acceptable to the
planning board.
(12) Any residential development constructed on the site shall
also include a requirement that the Owner relinquish a
portion of its development rights under previously
authorized General Development Plan approvals, to
compensate for the intensification of development for both
on-site and off-site impacts. The Owner, by way of written
declaration to the Planning Board at the time of
application for such residential development, shall
relinquish 1,000 Square Feet of Gross Floor Area of Office
§ 17-168 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-168
AO:585
§ 17-169. QUARRY DISTRICT. [Ord. #99-1133, § 9; Ord. #00-1157,
§ 2; Ord. #02-1268]
and Research Development for each residential unit
proposed.
(13) The stormwater management designs shall employ
naturalized/green infrastructure techniques to promote
water quality, minimize maintenance and provide for
ground water recharge.
(d) Parking. Relief required by this section shall be considered
according to the standards in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c):
(1) Parking facilities shall be at least 75 feet from the right-ofway
line of any public road, and at least 50 feet from any
private road.
(2) Parking facilities and driveways shall be at least 10 feet
from District lines.
(3) Bicycle racks shall be provided on site at a rate of one
bicycle storage space for every 30 automobile parking
spaces.
(4) Where abutting a residential zone or residential use,
accessory buildings, accessory structures or accessory
uses shall not be closer than 75 feet to any side or rear
property line.
(e) Traffic.
(1) Traffic studies shall be prepared to project the
development-generated traffic volumes affecting the
roadways serving the development. In addition, an
updated study for on-site parking usage for each
development phase shall be submitted.
(2) Provisions for traffic improvements shall be made and
strategies for traffic control shall be provided to ensure
that the levels of service are maintained or improved.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to recognize the existence of the
quarry in operation with the standards under which it has been
operating.
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Quarrying, handling and processing of stone, sand and gravel
extracted from the premises, including transportation and storage,
crushing, grinding, pulverizing and mixing of the extracted raw
materials.
§ 17-168 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-169
AO:586
2. Uses as permitted and regulated in the MRC District upon
depletion of quarry material or cessation of operations, and upon
full rehabilitation of the site pursuant to the plan on file with the
township. The rehabilitation shall be approved by the township
engineer prior to use for any other purpose.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. All buildings, machinery and accessory facilities used to conduct
permitted uses.
2. Mixing or batching plant for concrete.
3. Manufacture of bituminous concrete, concrete mixes, and other
concrete products.
4. Buildings and facilities for the repair and storage of motor vehicles
and equipment used in permitted operations.
5. Administrative and sales offices.
6. Off-street parking space for vehicles used in permitted operations
and for vehicles of employees and visitors.
7. Warning signs wherever required and other signs as permitted for
industrial uses.
8. One earth terminal antenna and one associated reflector (or dish)
are permitted on a lot provided they are located within the setback
lines required for the principal use and are located to be screened
from view from residences and public streets by planting providing
a year-round screen, parapet walls, building facades, walls, or
similar effective device. The antenna and dish may be located on a
roof, or attached to a building, or on the ground. Servicing wires
and cables shall be installed underground. The highest point of the
antenna and dish facility shall be 15 feet above the height of a
building, or 10 feet above the maximum building height permitted,
whichever is less.
d. Conditional Uses.
1. Pumping stations, transformers and similar utility facilities which
are needed in order to provide utility services directly to the
consumer, but not repair facilities, offices, open storage, work
areas or other aspects of utility operations. Such facilities shall
meet the minimum requirements of subsection 17-159g and shall
be landscaped or otherwise appropriately integrated into the site
design by special architectural treatment in accordance with
section 17-89 and, where safety dictates, shall be enclosed with
fencing.
§ 17-169 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-169
AO:587
§ 17-170. SC1: SHOPPING CENTER 1 DISTRICT. [Ord. #99-1133
§ 10; Ord. #02-1268]
e. Lot, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements. Any lot upon which
quarrying is conducted shall be subjected to the following
requirements:
1. Minimum lot area - 50 contiguous acres exclusive of private rightof-
way.
2. Minimum frontage - sufficient to enable access to a public road and
to enable compliance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35.
3. Minimum lot width - not less than 500 feet of lot width as measured
at the front setback line.
4. Minimum setbacks - no structure, use or operation, other than
required fencing, shall be located closer than 200 feet from any
public road or zone boundary except the actual excavation or
removal of rock which shall be no closer than 150 feet from any
public road or zone boundary.
5. Building height, percentage of lot coverage, building area. The
requirements of the OP District shall apply; provided, however, that
the approving authority may, as part of any required site plan
application or any amendment thereto, approve accessory
structures used in mining operations of greater height if no feasible
alternative structure is shown to exist.
6. Minimum floor area - all buildings or structures other than
mechanical or operational structures, such as crushers, batching
plants and the like, shall contain a minimum of 10,000 square feet
of floor area.
f. Additional Regulations.
1. Any person engaged in quarrying and any quarry shall be subject to
the provisions of Chapter 4, section 4-10, "Quarry License" of the
Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Hopewell (1978).
2. Any lot upon which quarry material has been depleted and which
shall have been fully rehabilitated shall be subject to all regulations
pertaining to the district to which it reverts.
a. Requirements. The purpose, permitted principal uses, lot, yard, height
and coverage requirements shall be the same as the Shopping Center
Zone, section 17-162, except that the minimum front yard shall be 100
feet.
b. Conditional Uses.
1. Pumping stations, transformers and similar utility facilities which
are needed in order to provide utility services directly to the
§ 17-169 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-170
AO:588
§ 17-171. OLI DISTRICT: OFFICE LIGHT INDUSTRIAL. [Ord.
#05-1359, § I]
consumer, but not repair facilities, offices, open storage, work
areas or other aspects of utility operations. Such facilities shall
meet the minimum requirements of subsection 17-159g and shall
be landscaped or otherwise appropriately integrated into the site
design by special architectural treatment in accordance with
section 17-89 and, where safety dictates, shall be enclosed with
fencing.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide an area with a variety
of uses, primarily oriented to the existing character established by
nearby uses of offices, light industry and restaurants. The district has
frontage on Route 31 and is intended to reduce the access points and
traffic congestion along this corridor. It is also intended that the
provisions for assisting in the development of lower income housing are
addressed by any new development or redevelopment in the OLI
District.
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Farms and agriculture.
2. Offices.
3. Research facility.
4. Manufacturing and assembly.
5. Hospitals; veterinary hospital.
6. Restaurant.
7. Medical clinic.
8. All principal uses permitted in the RO (Research/Office District).
9. Industrial/Office park.
10. Child care centers meeting the requirements of section 171-161b7.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Parking and loading; supply and equipment storage; cafeteria.
2. Accessory uses permitted in the RO District.
d. Permitted Conditional Uses.
1. Gymnasiums, indoor tennis courts, similar court games, and
recreation centers shall be permitted provided they have access
from either a primary arterial or secondary arterial road as shown
on the adopted circulation plan or from an interior road in an
§ 17-170 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-171
AO:589
industrial/office park and which meet the minimum requirements
of section 17-163e.
2. Pumping stations, transformers and similar utility facilities which
are needed in order to provide utility services directly to the
consumer, but not repair facilities, offices, open storage, work
areas or other aspects of utility operations. Such facilities shall
meet the minimum requirements of section 17-159g, and shall be
landscaped or otherwise appropriately integrated into the site
design by special architectural treatment in accordance with
section 17-89 and, where safety dictates, shall be enclosed with
fencing.
e. Lot, Yard, Height and Coverage Requirements.
1. Lot, yard, height and coverage requirements shall be as follows:1
Requirement
Min. Lot Size 3 acres (See paragraph f below)
Min. Lot Width 300 feet (See paragraph f below)
Min. Lot Depth 300 feet (See paragraph f below)
Min. Front Yard 100 feet
Min. Side Yard 50 feet When adjoining another non-residential
zone, but 100 feet when adjoining a
residential zone
Min. Rear Yard 50 feet When adjoining another non-residential
zone, but 100 feet when adjoining a
residential zone
Max. Bldg. Height 40 feet Except the height may be increased
where the setbacks are greater than 100
feet based on a height equal to 40% of
the shortest setback from any property or
street line, but not to exceed a height of
60 feet
Max. Lot Coverage 50%
Max. Bldg. Coverage 20%
Max. Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 0.20
Note 1: Notwithstanding the maximum floor area ratio and other design controls set forth
above, the maximum intensity of development permitted on those lots not connected to public
sewage collection and public sewage treatment systems or not located in a designated sewer
service area as shown on the Hopewell Township Wastewater Management Plan shall be
the smaller of either the maximum development permitted by ordinance or the amount of
development which would generate a design influent sewage flow of less than 2,000 gallons per
day as determined in accordance with the prevailing design standards and policies of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 17-171 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-171
AO:590
§ 17-172. VRC — HLI VALLEY RESOURCE CONSERVATION (VRC)
AND HAMLET LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (HLI) DISTRICT. [Ord.
#05-1361, § I]
f. Additional Requirements for Industrial/Office Park Designs. Any
proposal to develop an industrial/office park containing three or more
lots or to have three or more structures with separate tenants and
having a minimum tract size of 20 acres may adhere to the following
standards, provided a feasible road and lot configuration for the entire
tract is designed with the initial development proposal. Subsequent
modifications to this design may be made as other parcels are
subdivided or leased but only if the modifications are a logical extension
of that portion already approved or constructed and the modifications
provide an adequate and comprehensive street system to limit
congestion and provide proper access for emergency vehicles (See
definition of Industrial/office park).
1. The average lot size shall not be less than 2 1/2 acres.
2. The minimum lot size shall be two acres.
3. No lots of less than 2 1/2 acres may be subdivided until a sufficient
number of lots in excess of 2 1/2 acres have been subdivided in
order to maintain the minimum average lot size of 2 1/2 acres over
the entire tract, except that in any event no more than half the total
number of resulting lots may be less than 2 1/2 acres.
4. The minimum lot width and depth for parcels less than three acres
shall be 250 feet, the minimum yards shall be: front yard 50 feet;
each side yard 25 feet; and rear yard 25 feet, except the side and
rear yards shall be 100 feet if abutting a residential zone. The
minimum lot width, depth and minimum yards for parcels three
acres or more shall be as set forth in section 17-165e3.
5. All other coverage, parking, building height, and other provisions
of this district shall be as set forth in other provisions of this
chapter, except that the maximum building coverage in a planned
park development shall be 30%.
6. Industrial/office park designs meeting the above requirements are
permitted to include no more than 10% of the total floor area of the
park floor area in convenience retail and personal service
establishments. Convenience retail establishments shall include
breakfast/luncheon shops, and bakery and specialty stores,
excluding drive-in establishments. Personal service establishments
shall include barber and beauty salon shops, copy centers,
attended laundry and dry cleaning, tailors and repair and service
shops.
a. Purpose. The purposes of this district are to provide for the expansion
of a compatible, low-intensity manufacturing and assembly use and the
§ 17-171 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-172
AO:591
creation of a hamlet development district, which supports the master
plan goals and objectives by providing for nonintensive nonresidential
uses and a hamlet to which development can be transferred.
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Single family dwellings and conversions (For conversions, see
section 17-145).
2. All permitted principal uses in section 17-159b, to 5.
3. Manufacturing, assembly and offices on a maximum of 40 acres,
provided that the office uses shall be limited to 25% of the total
floor area.
4. Hamlets in accordance with the standards of section 17-172k,
section 17-160k1(c) and 17-160k1(g).
5. Planned developments in accordance with the standards of section
17-172m.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses. Any accessory use permitted in section
17-159c is permitted. For nonresidential uses, any accessory use
permitted in section 17-166c is permitted.
d. Permitted Conditional Uses.
1. Conditional uses for residential uses permitted in section 17-159d2
through 6, 8 and 9.
2. Pumping stations, transformers and similar utility facilities,
including solar arrays, in accordance with section 17-161d1.
e. Commercial vehicle parking in accordance with the standards of
section 17-159e.
f. Recreation vehicles in accordance with the standards of section
17-159f.
g. The lot, yard, height and coverage requirements for nonresidential uses
as specified in section 17-159g shall govern nonresidential uses in the
VRC-HLI District. For the nonresidential use of manufacturing,
assembly and office, the lot, yard, height and coverage requirements
are specified below in section 17-172l2. For nonresidential uses as part
of a hamlet development, the lot, yard, height and coverage for
nonresidential uses in section 17-172k4 shall apply.
h. The setback and height requirements for accessory structures on
residential and non-residential lots as specified in section 17-159h shall
govern accessory structures in this district.
i. Development standards for conventional subdivisions, cluster and open
lands designs. The minimum requirements are as follows:
§ 17-172 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-172
AO:592
Requirement Conventional Subdivision
Lot Averaging, Cluster or
Open Lands Design
Minimum Lot Area 4 acres 80,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width 300 feet 200 feet
Minimum Lot Depth 400 feet1 200 feet1
Minimum Front Yard 100 feet 75 feet
Minimum Side Yard 60 feet ea. 50 feet ea.
Minimum Rear Yard 60 feet 50 feet
Maximum Building Height 35 feet 35 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage 10% 15%
Minimum Open Space — 60%2
Notes:
Note 1. All lots requiring reverse frontage along arterial and collector streets shall have an
additional 25 feet of depth to allow for the establishment of the buffers outlined in section
17-89j.
Note 2. The open space requirement is only applicable to cluster designs. See section 17-160i2,
3, 4 and 5 for additional standards relating to open lands, clustering and conventional
subdivision designs.
1. The maximum density of units per gross acre of land in the VRCHLI
District shall be 0.23 unit per acre.
2. Open lands subdivisions are permitted on tracts of 18 acres or
more in the VRC-HLI District. This option is intended to promote
the retention of large contiguous wooded tracts and large farm
tracts, and to promote the aggregation of smaller wooded and farm
parcels. It is also intended to encourage and promote flexibility,
economy and environmental soundness in subdivision layout and
design. The following standards shall apply to open lands
subdivision.
(a) The open lands development plan shall not result in a greater
dwelling unit yield than if the property in question were
developed as a conventional subdivision. In order to determine
the maximum number of lots for an open lands subdivision, a
conforming plan of a conventional subdivision shall be
submitted, based on minimum lot area of four acres in the VRCHLI
District. The concept plan shall be in sufficient detail to
permit the planning board to make an informed decision as to
the subdivision satisfying all ordinance requirements and in a
form that would be acceptable to the planning board as a
conventional subdivision without the need for any lot area or
lot dimension variances or exceptions to subdivision design
standards. The number of lots on the concept plan shall be the
§ 17-172 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-172
AO:593
maximum number of lots permitted under an open lands
subdivision.
(b) At least 60% of the residential tract shall be designated as
"open lands" and shall, as a condition of approval of the
development, be deed restricted for agricultural or
conservation use. Lots qualifying as open lands shall be
permitted a primary residence and other accessory buildings
uses as provided in this section.
(c) At last 60% of designated "open lands" shall be some
combination of unconstrained land area, or prime soils or soils
of statewide importance, or prime forested area. On tracts in
areas which are predominantly active agricultural lands or
consist of prime agricultural soils or soils of statewide
importance, the preservation of agricultural lands and soils
shall take precedence. On tracts in areas which are
predominantly prime forested areas, the preservation of
forested areas shall take precedence.
(d) For tracts of 100 acres or less, the open lands shall be
contained in one deed-restricted contiguous parcel; for tracts
greater than 100 acres, the open lands may be composed of
noncontiguous parcels, provided that each open lands area
shall contain at least 50 contiguous acres. When
noncontiguous parcels of at least 50 acres are provided, each
parcel may have a residence, provided that the total density is
not exceeded.
(e) All lots created under this subdivision option shall be deed
restricted against further subdivision for the purpose of
creating an additional lot or lots.
(f) The design of the development utilizing this option shall foster
the following objectives: retention of large contiguous
farmland areas; retention of large contiguous prime forested
areas; stream corridor and wetlands preservation; aquifer
recharge protection; steep slope protection; overall site
design; reduction of impervious coverage; traffic circulation;
and, sensitivity to the site's natural features, topography and
relationship to open lands on neighboring parcels.
(g) In forested areas, the design of the development shall include a
200 foot buffer along existing roads, which shall either
maintain existing woodlands or establish new forested areas
for those areas that are disturbed during site development or
are currently cleared. The intent of this provision is to maintain
the scenic roadside views in the township.
(h) Development on hillsides shall be located at an appropriate
point in the foreground to midground of the hill so that the
§ 17-172 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-172
AO:594
development does not create a barrier visible from the existing
road.
(i) Natural features such as trees, hilltops and views, natural
terrain, open waters and natural drainage ridge lines shall be
preserved wherever possible in designing any development
containing such features. As part of the subdivision or site plan
review process, development should be designed to preserve
scenic vistas and views of cultural/historic landmarks and of
unique geologic and topographic features. On hillsides,
development should be sited below the ridgeline and the
height and location of development should protect
unobstructed views of the ridges from public roadways.
(j) The applicant is advised to submit a concept plan of the open
lands subdivision for review and comment in accordance with
the section.
3. Cluster subdivisions on tracts of 18 acres or more are permitted in
accordance with the following standards:
(a) The cluster subdivision development plan shall not result in a
greater dwelling unit yield than if the property in question
were developed as a conventional subdivision. In order to
determine the maximum number of lots for a cluster
subdivision, a conforming plan of a conventional subdivision
shall be submitted, based on minimum lot area of four acres in
the VRC-HLI District. The concept plan shall be in sufficient
detail to permit the planning board to make an informed
decision as to the subdivision satisfying all ordinance
requirements and in a form that would be acceptable to the
planning board as a conventional subdivision without the need
for any lot area or lot dimension variances or exceptions to
subdivision design standards. The number of lots on the
concept plan shall be the maximum number of lots permitted
under a cluster subdivision.
(b) The minimum open space shall be 60% of the total residential
tract.
(c) Areas reserved as permanent open space shall have a
minimum contiguous area of not less than five acres and no
portion thereof shall be less than 50 feet in width. At least 50%
of the open space shall be uplands. The open space area(s)
shall be contiguous to open space on adjoining parcels, where
applicable, and shall include areas identified in the township's
open space and recreation or conservation plans, if any,
including greenways.
(d) On tracts in areas which are predominantly active agricultural
lands or consist of prime agricultural soils or soils or statewide
importance, the preservation of agricultural lands and soils
§ 17-172 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-172
AO:595
shall take precedence. On tracts in areas which are
predominantly prime forested areas, the preservation of
forested areas shall take precedence.
(e) The open space shall be reserved in perpetuity either by
dedication for public use or for use by the residents of the
development by private covenant or deed restriction for one of
the following purposes:
(1) Undeveloped open space.
(2) Public or private recreational facilities.
(3) Conservation of environmentally sensitive features
including, but not limited to, steep slopes, wetlands,
aquifer recharge areas, floodplains and wooded areas.
(4) Agricultural use.
(f) The proposed development shall comply with the standards
contained in section 17-160i2(f), (g), (h) and (i).
(g) Provision shall be made to ensure suitable maintenance of any
area to be reserved by private covenant or deed restriction by
the establishment of a property owners' association or other
appropriate organization.
(h) Nothing contained herein shall be construed to require the
planning board to approve any subdivision employing
clustering if said subdivision is in conflict with any provision of
the Hopewell Township Master Plan or if said subdivision will,
in any way, result in a land use pattern that will adversely
affect that portion of the township in which it lies.
(i) The applicant is advised to submit a concept plan of the cluster
subdivision for review and comment in accordance with the
section.
4. Conventional subdivisions shall comply with the standards
contained in section 17-160i2(f), (g), (h) and (i). Lots in
conventional subdivisions shall front on local streets.
j. Noncontiguous Cluster Development in the VRC-HLI District.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this paragraph is to provide a mechanism
for the transfer of development potential from properties in the
MRC and VRC Districts to a designated hamlet in the VRC-HLI
District. The intent of this provision is to provide an opportunity to
create an alternative development opportunity that furthers the
goals of resource conservation in the township, while also
providing a development form that supports the goals and policies
of the master plan.
§ 17-172 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-172
AO:596
2. Allocation of/Standards for the Transfer of Development Potential.
(a) Land in the MRC District is allocated one dwelling unit per
seven acres for the transfer of development to a municipally
designated hamlet.
(b) Land in the VRC District is allocated one dwelling unit per
three acres for the transfer of development to a municipally
designated hamlet.
3. Limitations on the Use of Development Transfers. The owner of the
land from which development potential has been obtained shall
deed restrict the use of the land in perpetuity to those resource
conservation uses authorized and enumerated in the sale or
conveyance of the development potential.
k. Development Standards for Hamlets in the VRC-HLI District.
1. Tract Size. The hamlet shall have a minimum size of 60 acres and a
maximum size of 85 acres.
2. Density. The minimum density shall be 2 1/2 units per acre and the
maximum density shall be three units per acre.
3. Minimum Lot Size and Lot Development Standards for Residential
Uses. The minimum lot size for single family residential lots shall
be 7,500 square feet, with a minimum frontage and width of 50
feet, a minimum front yard of 20 feet (10 feet with rear access
garages), minimum side yards of 10 feet, minimum rear yard of 25
feet and a maximum building height of 35 feet. Individual lots may
have a maximum lot coverage of 50% provided the total maximum
coverage within the area of the entire residential development does
not exceed 35%. Where rear access from alleys to garages is
provided, a five-foot setback for the detached garage is permitted.
Atrium homes, patio homes, townhouses, duplexes and quadplexes
are permitted in accordance with the standards in section 17-92d3.
4. Office and Retail Commercial Development. The hamlet shall
include nonresidential uses consisting of retail shops for the
convenience of the residents and/or offices for professionals and
telecommuters, which may include residential uses in combination
with the nonresidential uses. The nonresidential development shall
be provided at a maximum ratio of 75 square feet of commercial/
office space per residential unit. The design of nonresidential
development shall respond to the specific location and needs of the
planned community. In some cases the appropriate location for
nonresidential development is the interior of the hamlet, so that
pedestrian linkages are increased and motor vehicle movements
reduced. In other cases the nonresidential development should be
located at the edge of the hamlet in order to provide services to the
surrounding community. A design that integrates both functions
may be the most appropriate in certain locations.
§ 17-172 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-172
AO:597
The minimum lot size for nonresidential lots, or lots with a mix of
nonresidential and residential uses, shall be 20,000 square feet,
with a minimum frontage and width of 90 feet, a minimum front
setback of 12 feet to 20 feet for sidewalk to curb, minimum side
yards of 15 feet, minimum rear yard of 35 feet, maximum building
height of 35 feet and a maximum lot coverage of 80%.
5. Public and Quasi-Public Uses. The hamlet shall include at least 35%
of the tract in open space and parks, including a buffer or to the
extent practicable a greenbelt around the hamlet, and may include
public uses such as community buildings and quasi-public uses
such as a house of worship.
l. Development Standards for the Nonresidential Tract.
1. The nonresidential tract shall consist of a maximum of 40 acres.
2. The bulk requirements for the nonresidential tract are as follows:
Requirement
Minimum lot size 5 acres
Minimum lot width 300 feet
Minimum lot depth 300 feet
Minimum front yard 100 feet
Minimum side yard 50 feet 100 feet when adjoining an abutting
residential zone on an off-tract property
Minimum rear yard 50 feet 100 feet when adjoining an abutting
residential zone on an off-tract property
Maximum building height 40 feet Except the height may be increased
where the setbacks are greater than 100
feet based on a height equal to 40% from
any property or street line, not to exceed
a height of 60 feet
Maximum lot coverage 45%
Maximum building coverage 20%
Maximum floor area ratio 20%
3. One parking space per 800 square feet of manufacturing and
assembly floor area and one parking space per 250 square feet of
office floor area are required.
m. Planned Development in the VRC-HLI District. The planned
development tract includes two areas, a hamlet district and a light
industrial district, comprising 100 acres. The standards for the two
districts follow.
1. Standards for the Hamlet Tract.
§ 17-172 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-172
AO:598
§ 17-173. INCLUSIONARY MULTI-FAMILY - 1 ZONE (IMF-1). [Ord.
No. 2017-1671 §§ 3, 4]
(a) The hamlet tract shall serve as a receiving area for tracts
located in the VRC and MRC Districts.
(b) The minimum tract area for the hamlet tract shall be 60 acres.
(c) The base density for the hamlet tract shall be calculated on the
basis of 60 acres minus 10% of the area for infrastructure, and
be based on a minimum lot size for residential development of
four acres/unit.
(d) The hamlet tract shall permit a density of 2 1/2 to three
dwelling units per gross acre.
(e) The hamlet tract shall permit residential and nonresidential
uses, and shall have an open space component, all in
accordance with the standards of section 17-172k.
2. Standards for the Manufacturing, Assembly and Office Tract.
(a) The maximum tract area for the manufacturing, assembly and
office tract shall be 40 acres.
(b) Development of the manufacturing, assembly and office tract
shall comply with the development standards of section
17-172l2.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide an opportunity for
inclusionary residential development in an appropriate location in order
to meet the constitutional obligation to provide for the Township's fair
share of the regional need for affordable housing. This zone advances
the dual master plan objectives of increasing the supply of affordable
housing and diversifying the types of housing available to meet the
changing demographics of the Township. This zone is also intended to
implement the terms of a certain Settlement Agreement, including the
Supplemental Settlement Agreement attached thereto, by and between,
inter alia, the Township and Fair Share Housing Center dated July 13,
2017, which Agreement was approved by the Court at a Fairness
Hearing held on August 28, 2017 in the action captioned In the Matter
of the Application of the Township of Hopewell, Docket No. MERL-
1557-15 (Mt. Laurel).
b. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Garden apartments.
2. Townhouses.
3. Stacked flats, in a multi-family dwelling building, which may
contain up to three dwelling units vertically provided each unit has
its own private entrance. Stacked flats may have rear loaded
§ 17-172 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-173
AO:599
driveways and garages with a rear access way of 24 feet in width
(excluding driveways) for two-way traffic or 18 feet in width
(excluding driveways) for one-way access.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Structures designed for recreation or community use as a part of
the multi-family dwelling development.
2. Private garages and carports.
3. Tot lots.
4. Walking paths.
5. Off-street parking facilities.
6. Community clubhouse with fitness room, club room and furnished
model.
7. Management and leasing offices.
8. Maintenance office/garage building not to exceed one story in
height and 1,500 square feet in floor area. The facade design shall
match the residential structures.
9. Solid waste facilities.
10. Monument signs located at entrance to be constructed of stone or
brick, not to exceed 100 square feet in area and eight feet in height.
11. Utility structures and facilities needed to provide the direct service
of gas, electricity, telephone, water, sewerage and cable television.
12. Temporary sales model homes within the respective home types,
including related direction signage to identify the home(s) as a
model.
13. One temporary construction and one temporary marketing/sales
trailers.
14. Patios and decks directly adjacent to the rear of any homes, which
shall also be permitted to be located within building setbacks.
15. Privacy fences separating the townhomes shall not exceed 10 feet
in length and shall not enclose a patio.
16. Such other accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses
permitted herein, however outdoor storage other than that which
can be accommodated on a deck or patio is not permitted. Free
standing or attached storage sheds outside of a patio or deck are
not permitted.
d. Overall or Entire Tract Bulk and Area Requirements.
§ 17-173 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-173
AO:600
1. Minimum Lot Area: 10 acres.
2. Minimum Lot Frontage: 150 feet.
3. Minimum Lot Width: 300 feet.
4. Minimum Lot Depth: 200 feet.
5. Minimum Building Setback.
(a) Front yard: 45 feet (for individual units: shall be 20 feet from
back of curb where no sidewalk provided, and 20 feet from
back of sidewalk).
(b) Side/Rear yard: 40 feet (for individual units: shall be 10 feet
from back of curb).
(c) Building to Building: 20 feet.
6. Maximum Building Coverage: 30%.
7. Maximum Impervious Coverage: 60%.
8. Maximum Density: 8 units/acre.
9. Maximum Building Height: 3 stories and 45 feet.
10. Drive Aisle Width: 24 feet for 2 way traffic/access.
11. Parking (excludes driveways for the purpose of setback and
distance).
(a) Spaces per unit: per RSIS.
(b) Setback from tract property line: 20 feet.
(c) Distance from building: 10 feet.
(d) Parking stall size nine feet by: 18 feet.
12. Minimum landscaped buffer: 25 feet front yard 20 feet side and
rear yards.
e. Very Low, Low and Moderate Income Housing Requirements.
1. A minimum set aside of 15% of all units must be deed restricted for
occupancy by very, low and moderate income households.
2. Very low, low and moderate-income housing shall be constructed
and rented in accordance with the Council on Affordable Housing
rules at N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq. and Uniform Housing Affordability
Controls (UHAC) at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq. including standards
for the split between very low, low and moderate income housing.
3. A minimum of 13% of the affordable units shall be very low income
units, affordable to households earning 30% of the median income;
§ 17-173 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-173
AO:601
and 37% of the affordable units shall be low income units. The
balance of units (50%) shall be moderate income units.
4. Affordable housing units shall be affordable family rentals (not agerestricted)
and shall be located in one or more buildings. A
certificate of occupancy for the affordable building must be issued
before the Township is obligated to issue more than 51% of the
certificates of occupancy for the market rate units. The Township
designated Affordable Housing Administrator shall be responsible
to affirmatively market, administer and certify the occupant of each
affordable unit, with all administrative costs to be paid by the
developer.
f. Other Requirements.
1. Building Design. The design of the buildings shall be residential
and not institutional and shall conform to the following:
(a) Architectural elevations and floor plans shall be provided for
each type of building.
(b) Maximum length of buildings shall not exceed 225 feet.
(c) Variations in setback, materials, colors and design including
breaks in the building facade shall be encouraged to reduce
and separate the building mass.
(d) Rooflines shall be pitched. If flat roofs are provided, they shall
incorporate design techniques to shield any roof mounted
equipment.
(e) All HVAC and mechanical equipment shall be located on the
side or rear of each home. If not so located then the HVAC and
mechanical equipment shall be adequately screened from view.
(f) All units shall be designed in a unified architectural style.
2. Circulation.
(a) A boulevard street entry shall be provided at the community
entrance.
(b) Pedestrian circulation systems shall be designed to extend
through the neighborhood and connect with open space and
common areas. Sidewalks shall be provided on at least one side
of the streets.
3. Open Space. A minimum of 20% of the tract shall be specifically set
aside for conservation, recreation and/or other open space.
4. Utilities/Services. All dwelling units within a structure shall be
connected to approved and functioning public water and sanitary
sewer systems prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy.
§ 17-173 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-173
AO:602
§ 17-174. IMF-C DISTRICT: INCLUSIONARY MULTIFAMILY AND
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. [Added 7-29-2019 by Ord. No. 19-1717]
5. Recreation. For a community less than 90 homes, recreation shall
be permitted as a system of walking paths or sidewalks and a tot lot
to service the subject property.
g. Review of Development Applications. The review of development
applications submitted hereunder shall be expedited and variances
other than "d"-type variances, waivers and/or exceptions necessary to
achieve approval of an inclusionary development of up to eight dwelling
units per acre shall be reviewed by the Planning Board.
a. Purpose and Vision.
1. The IMF-C District provides for a mixed-use community of
inclusionary, age-restricted housing and nonresidential commercial
and office uses. This district responds to the terms of a Settlement
Agreement between Deer Valley Reality, Inc., CF Hopewell CC&L,
LLC, their respective successors or affiliate companies, Fair Share
Housing Center, and Hopewell Township. This agreement requires
that the subject area will include a 20% set aside of all residential
units (up to 125 units) which will be deed-restricted affordable to
very-low-, low- and moderate-income households. A variety of
housing types are encouraged to meet the needs of a variety of
potential residents. The residential uses are primarily envisioned to
be located primarily toward the interior of the District with some
residential uses on the southern portion of Block 93, Lot 60.
2. Additionally, nonresidential opportunities along the District's
eastern roadway frontages are provided to capitalize on the area's
adjacency to minor (Scotch Road) and primary (Interstate Route
295) arterial roadways, and the pass-by trips those roadways
command. Potential customers will also be drawn from nearby
major employers as well as the planned new and existing
communities in the area. Neighborhood-scale uses are envisioned,
rather than regionally scaled facilities.
3. The intent of the section is to rezone Block 93, Lots 19, 20, 32, 44,
45.01, 46, 60 and Block 93.05, Lots 1 and 2, to IMF-C.
b. Permitted Residential Principal Uses/Unit Types.
1. A maximum 625 total age-restricted dwelling units are permitted in
the IMF-C District; a 20% affordable unit set-aside is required,
including a maximum of 125 affordable units.
2. Residential units are permitted on Lots 19, 20, 45.01, 46, and 60
(south of the existing pipeline easement that traverses the
property) in Block 93 in accordance with the IMF-C District
standards.
§ 17-173 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-174
AO:603
3. Single-family detached.
4. Single-family semiattached (duplexes).
5. Single-family attached (townhouses).
6. Multifamily buildings (stacked townhouses or stacked flats).
c. Permitted Nonresidential Principal Uses. The following uses are
permitted if, other than a hotel and conference center, they are
comprehensively planned in conjunction with an inclusionary housing
project and are wholly located, excluding stormwater management
facilities and required buffers, within 1,300 feet of Scotch Road. A
maximum 75,000 square feet of nonresidential space is permitted in the
District, not including hotel or a restaurant associated with a hotel.
1. Hotel with a minimum 100 rooms.
2. Conference center, or hotel/conference center with at least 100
hotel rooms.
3. Pharmacy.*
4. Bank.*
5. Restaurant associated with hotel, with no drive-through.
6. Restaurant.*
7. Convenience-oriented store; general retail store; retail sales and
services.
8. Office.
9. Health club; commercial recreation.
10. Same-day surgery center; medical clinic; veterinary clinic or
hospital.
11. Retail sales and services or office with residential units on upper
floors.
12. Municipal uses.
13. Farms and agriculture.
14. Financial institutions.
15. Indoor recreational facilities.
* Drive-through lanes are permitted provided they, including the
queuing lanes, are located at the side or rear of the building
and not in a front yard.
§ 17-174 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-174
AO:604
d. Additionally Permitted Nonresidential Principal Uses. The following
uses are permitted in addition to those nonresidential uses listed above
if they are wholly located within 525 feet of Scotch Road.
1. Motor fueling station, which shall mean an establishment offering
the sale of fuels and lubricants for motor vehicles, but not repair or
storage services, and which may be combined with the sale of
convenience items, including food and seating for food
consumption, to the general public.
2. Automobile service and repair within an enclosed building, not
including body shops or truck rental.
e. Permitted Residential Accessory Uses and Structures.
1. Customarily accessory uses and structures.
2. Facilities and structures designed for recreation or community use,
including solar canopies.
3. Patios and decks directly adjacent to the rear of any homes, which
shall be no greater than 144 square feet in area.
4. Privacy fences separating units shall not exceed 10 feet in length or
six feet in height and shall not enclose a patio or deck.
5. Outdoor storage other than that which can be accommodated on a
deck or patio is not permitted. Freestanding or attached storage
sheds outside of a patio or deck are not permitted.
6. Off street parking; private garages and carports.
7. Community amenities including the following:
(a) Swimming pools with outdoor dining areas.
(b) Tot lots; dog parks.
(c) Pedestrian and bicycle paths and outdoor stationary fitness
equipment and stations.
(d) Community clubhouse with fitness room, club room business
center and furnished model, not to exceed 35 feet in height.
(e) Management and leasing offices including directional signage
not exceeding five square feet each.
(f) Maintenance office/garage building not to exceed one story in
height and 1,500 square feet in floor area. The facade design
shall match the residential structures.
(g) Entry roads into residential sections may include a gate house
structure, set back no less than 200 feet from Nursery Road
and Scotch Road and not to exceed 160 square feet each and
15 feet tall.
§ 17-174 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-174
AO:605
(h) Monument signs located at an entrance to be constructed of
stone or brick, not to exceed 100 square feet in area total on
either side of the primary entrance driveway and eight feet in
height each.
8. Utility structures and facilities needed to provide the direct service
of gas, electricity, telephone, water, sewerage and cable television.
9. Temporary furnished sales model homes within the respective
home types, including related directional signage to identify the
home(s) as a model.
10. One temporary construction trailer and one temporary marketing/
sales trailer, each with associated parking and directional signage.
f. Permitted Nonresidential Accessory Uses and Structures.
1. Customarily accessory uses, facilities and structures.
2. Outdoor areas and structures such as gazebos for outdoor events
and dining.
3. Off-street parking.
4. Tot lots; dog parks.
g. Overall or Entire Residential Tract Bulk and Area Requirements.
1. Maximum residential density (gross, no deductions): five du/ac.
2. Minimum tract area (gross, no deductions): 100 acres.
3. Minimum tract frontage: 750 feet.
4. Minimum tract depth: 1,000 feet.
5. Minimum perimeter buffers:
(a) Where tract abuts existing residential lots/districts, and:
(1) Proposed lots within tract contain single-family dwellings:
25 feet.
(2) Proposed lots within tract contain multifamily dwellings:
50 feet.
(b) Where tract meets existing roads: 50 feet.
(c) Perimeter buffers may be established within the boundaries of
individual lots within the tract, or may be established as a
separate lot within the tract.
(d) All required building setbacks on lots containing perimeter
buffers shall be measured in addition to the required buffer.
(e) Proposed construction shall not encroach perimeter buffers.
§ 17-174 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-174
AO:606
(f) Landscape screening within the perimeter buffers shall be
provided at the Planning Board's discretion to supplement
existing vegetation.
6. All required perimeter buffers shall be contained within a
conservation easement as part of any site plan or subdivision plat
approval. The conservation easement shall restrict disturbance
within its boundaries other than what is required to establish the
vegetative screening required as a part of any approvals granted.
7. Minimum open space: 20%, which may include wetlands, wetland
buffers, riparian zone, stormwater management basins, and
outdoor recreation space. Perimeter buffers shall not be counted
towards minimum open space requirements.
8. Minimum width of boulevard right-of-way: 80 feet.
9. Minimum drive aisle width for privately owned streets: 24 feet for
two-way traffic/access.
10. Residential parking requirements shall be per RSIS.
11. Residential parking areas, not including driveways serving
individual units, shall be set back at least 20 feet from buildings
and 50 feet from streets.
12. Stormwater facilities, patios, first-floor decks, and fences are
permitted to be located within setbacks of individual lots, but shall
not encroach perimeter buffers.
13. Utility Plan. All dwelling units within a structure shall be connected
to approved and functioning public water and sanitary sewer
systems prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy.
14. Phasing Plan. Phasing shall be indicated for all project elements.
This shall include the phasing of construction of utilities, access
roads and key service components of the development, which may
occur independent and in advance of building construction.
h. Standards for Single-Family Detached Units.
1. Minimum setback to Scotch Road: 200 feet.
2. Minimum setback to Nursery Road: 75 feet.
3. Minimum lot area (gross, no deductions): 5,500 square feet.
4. Minimum lot width (interior lot): 50 feet.
5. Minimum lot width (corner lot): 60 feet.
6. Minimum lot depth: 110 feet.
7. Minimum front yard setback from back of curb if no sidewalk, or
back of sidewalk: 20 feet.
§ 17-174 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-174
AO:607
8. Minimum side yard setback: five feet for one side yard; 15 feet
combined.
9. Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet; 10 feet if lot contains a tract
perimeter buffer.
10. Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
11. Maximum building height: 35 feet/2.5 stories.
i. Standards for Single-Family Semiattached (Duplex) Units.
1. Minimum setback to Scotch Road: 200 feet.
2. Minimum setback to Nursery Road: 75 feet.
3. Minimum lot area (gross, no deductions): 4,675 square feet.
4. Minimum lot width (interior lot): 42.50 feet.
5. Minimum lot width (corner lot): 52.50 feet.
6. Minimum lot depth: 110 feet.
7. Minimum front yard setback from back of curb if no sidewalk, or
back of sidewalk: 20 feet.
8. Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet; may be zero feet if units are
connected horizontally.
9. Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet; 10 feet if lot contains a tract
perimeter buffer.
10. Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
11. Maximum building height: 35 feet/2.5 stories.
j. Standards for Single-Family Attached (Townhouse) Units.
1. Minimum setback to Scotch Road: 200 feet.
2. Minimum setback to Nursery Road: 200 feet.
3. Minimum lot width for individual unit: 16 feet.
4. Minimum lot depth: 60 feet.
5. Minimum front yard setback from back of curb if no sidewalk, or
back of sidewalk: 20 feet.
6. Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
7. Minimum side yard setback: zero feet.
8. Minimum distance to other buildings: 25 feet.
9. Maximum units per townhouse building: eight.
§ 17-174 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-174
AO:608
10. Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
11. Maximum building height: 35 feet/2.5 stories.
k. Standards for Multifamily Buildings (Stacked Townhouses or Stacked
Flats).
1. Minimum setback to Scotch Road: 200 feet.
2. Minimum setback to Nursery Road: 200 feet.
3. Minimum width of individual unit: 16 feet.
4. Minimum depth of individual unit: 60 feet.
5. Minimum front yard setback from back of curb if no sidewalk, or
back of sidewalk: 20 feet.
6. Minimum distance to other buildings:
(a) Front to front: 50 feet.
(b) Front to side: 40 feet.
(c) Side to side: 20 feet.
(d) Rear to rear: 50 feet.
(e) Rear to side: 30 feet.
7. Maximum units per market rate building: 18 (stacked townhomes);
24 (stacked flats).
8. Maximum units per affordable building: 27 (stacked townhomes);
45 (stacked flats).
9. Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
10. Maximum building height: 45 feet/three stories.
11. There shall be no parking between the building and Scotch Road.
l. Standards for Hotel and Hotel/Conference Center:
1. Minimum lot area (gross, no deductions): six acres.
2. Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
3. Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
4. Minimum front yard setback: 100 feet for buildings over 35 feet; 75
feet for buildings up to 35 feet.
5. Minimum side yard setback: 75 feet.
6. Minimum rear yard setback: 75 feet.
§ 17-174 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-174
AO:609
7. Maximum building height: 65 feet (35 feet within 100 feet of Scotch
Road).
8. Maximum lot coverage: 65%.
9. Minimum parking requirement: one space per room.
10. Minimum parking setback from streets: 50 feet.
11. There shall be no loading or storage in a front yard.
12. Minimum perimeter buffer to existing off-site residential lots: 200
feet.
m. Standards for Motor Fueling Station:
1. Minimum lot area (gross, no deductions): three acres.
2. Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
3. Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
4. Minimum front yard setback: 75 feet to building; 50 feet to canopy,
fueling dispensers, kiosks, air stations.
5. Minimum side yard setback: 50 feet.
6. Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
7. Maximum building height: 30 feet.
8. Maximum canopy height: 20 feet.
9. Maximum lot coverage: 65%.
10. Minimum parking requirement: one space per 300 square feet
convenience store/restaurant GFA plus one per employee on
maximum shift; plus at least three spaces for tractor trailers.
11. Maximum number of fueling dispensers: eight with two fueling
positions at each. There shall be no rapid-dispense diesel or other
fuel stations suitable for use by tractor-trailers.
12. Minimum parking setback from streets: 25 feet.
13. There shall be no loading or storage in a front yard.
n. Standards for All Other Nonresidential Uses and Mixed Use:
1. Minimum lot area (gross, no deductions): two acres.
2. Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
3. Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
4. Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet.
§ 17-174 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-174
AO:610
5. Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet.
6. Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
7. Maximum building height: 40 feet/two stories; 55 feet/four stories
if residential mixed use; 35 feet if within 100 feet of Scotch Road or
Nursery Road.
8. Maximum lot coverage: 65%.
9. Minimum parking requirement: three spaces per 1,000 square feet
GFA plus residential parking minimums per RSIS; parking
requirement may be reduced by the Board if shared parking
arrangements are found acceptable.
10. Minimum parking setback from streets: 25 feet.
11. There shall be no loading or storage in a front yard.
12. Minimum perimeter buffer to existing off-site residential lots: 200
feet.
o. Age Restriction. All units shall be age-restricted. In accordance with the
provisions of the federal Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq., as
amended by the Housing for Older Persons Act of 1995, 42 U.S.C.
§ 3607(b)(2)(C), the applicable zoning provisions of the Township of
Hopewell and the requirements of the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs, 80% of the units must be occupied by at least one
person age 55 or older (the "age-qualified occupant") and no person
under the age of 19 may reside in any of the units on a full-time basis,
except for any occupant who is the widow or widower or life partner of
a deceased age-qualifying occupant may continue to occupy a unit so
long as at least 80% of the occupied units are each occupied by at least
one age-qualifying occupant.
p. Affordable Housing Requirements.
1. Very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing shall be constructed
and rented in accordance with the Council on Affordable Housing
rules at N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq.72 and Uniform Housing Affordability
Controls (UHAC) at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq. including standards
for the split between very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing
except as more particularly specified in Subsection p3 below.
2. Twenty percent of the total residential units are to be set aside as
affordable housing (very-low-, low- and moderate-income units) up
to a maximum of 125 units.
3. A minimum of 13% of the affordable units shall be very-low-income
units, affordable to households earning 30% of the median income;
72.Editor's Note: In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:14B-5.1b, Chapter 93, Substantive Rules of
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing for the Period Beginning June 6, 1994,
expired on 10-16-2016.
§ 17-174 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-174
AO:611
and 37% of the affordable units shall be low-income units. The
balance of units (50%) shall be moderate-income units.
4. The affordable housing units may be located in 100% affordable
buildings (multifamily stacked townhouses or stacked flats),
however, the buildings shall be integrated into, and not segregated
from, the market rate project to the extent feasible.
5. Unless the developer elects at its sole expense to act as
administrative agent for the affordable units after a demonstration
to the Township that it is qualified to do so, and to be overseen by
the Township's Municipal Housing Liaison, the Townshipdesignated
administrative agent shall be responsible to
affirmatively market, administer and certify the occupant of each
affordable unit, with all administrative costs to be paid by the
developer.
6. The production of deed-restricted affordable units and market units
shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
Minimum Percentage of
Deed-Restricted Affordable
Units Completed
Percentage of Market Units
Completed
0% 25%
10% 25% + 1 unit
50% 50%
75% 75%
100% 90%
7. All affordable residential units shall be subject to a control period
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11 of not less than 40 years.
q. Additional Requirements. Any application for development shall include
at least the following elements:
1. Site design demonstrating the features of a human-scale, compact,
walkable and bicycle-compatible community, which encourages the
conservation of environmental features and the creation of open
spaces and improved neighborhood recreation areas.
2. Architectural elevations of all elevations by unit type, renderings
and floor plans.
3. For a development including any of Lots 32, 44, 60, 20, 46, 19 or
45.01, a circulation and streetscape plan, indicating the overall
design with a roundabout at Nursery Road, located between 400
feet and 600 feet from the Scotch Road intersection, and a
boulevard street entry into the main portion of the site. The plan
shall also provide the locations and types of materials to be used,
including pavement and crosswalk types, trees and other plantings
§ 17-174 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-174
AO:612
and any street furniture. Pedestrian and/or bicycle-compatible
circulation systems shall be designed to extend throughout the
development and connect with open space and common areas.
4. Parking, Loading and Vehicular Access Plan. A traffic circulation
analysis shall analyze traffic conditions in the project vicinity and
identify existing traffic problem areas as well as the cumulative
effect of traffic from the project on adjacent and affected roadways.
Shared parking arrangements are permissible, subject to the
demonstration of parking sufficiency.
5. Landscape Plan. Indigenous and noninvasive species shall be used
to the greatest extent practicable. There shall also be provisions for
the shading/screening of parking areas.
6. Stormwater Management Plan. Stormwater designs shall use as
naturalized designs and shall promote water quality, minimize
maintenance and provide for groundwater recharge. Low-impact
development design techniques shall be used to the greatest extent
practicable. Where possible, geologic formations shall be used to
enhance groundwater recharge.
7. Building Design. An integrated architectural theme shall be utilized
throughout the project, including principal and accessory buildings
and structures and all signage.
(a) Maximum building length shall not exceed 225 feet unless a
four-foot offset is provided in the facade. Variations in setback,
materials, colors and design including breaks in the building
facade shall be encouraged to reduce and separate the
building mass.
(b) Rooflines shall be pitched. If flat roofs are provided, they shall
incorporate decorative devices such as a parapet wall. If
feasible, flat roofs shall incorporate either green-roof
vegetation or solar collection and shall be designed to shield
any roof-mounted equipment.
(c) All HVAC and mechanical equipment on nonresidential
structures shall be adequately screened from view.
(d) Building design shall include spare electrical conduit to permit
future installation of rooftop-mounted solar.
r. Severability. The various parts, sections, and clauses of this section are
hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph,
section, or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the section shall not be
affected thereby.
s. Repealer. Any ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions
of this section are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 17-174 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-174
AO:613
§ 17-175. through § 17-180. (RESERVED)
t. Effective Date. This section shall take effect upon final passage and
publication pursuant to law, but not before 45 days after complete
execution of the Settlement Agreement in the matter of the Application
of the Township of Hopewell [Docket No. MER-L-1557-15 (Mount
Laurel)], Deer Valley Realty, LLC v. Township of Hopewell, et. al.
(Docket No. MER-L-2326-17), and Appellate Docket No. A-2665-17-T01,
approval of the Settlement by the Superior Court, and issuance of a
Final Judgement of Compliance and Repose by the Superior Court that
is no longer subject to appeal.
§ 17-174 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-175
AO:614
ARTICLE X
DEFINITIONS
§ 17-181. WORDS DEFINED. [Ord. #528; Ord. #566-80; Ord.
#654-84, § 3; Ord. #662-84, § 1; Ord. #674-85, § 1; Ord. #686-85,
§ 30; Ord. #723-86, §§ 30, 31; Ord. #788-88, § 2; Ord. #798-88, § 5;
Ord. #817-89, § 3; Ord. #90-851, § 2; Ord. #90-853, § 6; Ord.
#91-985, § 1; Ord. #91-901, § 1; Ord. #94-978, § 6; Ord. #97-1074,
§ 1; Ord. #97-1079; Ord. #98-1086, §§ 18 — 20; Ord. #00-1171, § 2;
Ord. #01-1218, § 3; Ord. #02-1268; Ord. #03-1298, § 4; Ord.
#04-1325, § 22; Ord. #04-1328, § 5]
NOTE: Any word or term not defined herein or in the Municipal Land Use
Law shall be used with a meaning of standard usage for the context in which
the word is used.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Shall mean the structure or building in which
a permitted accessory use is conducted in association with a separate
building on the same premises in which the primary permitted use is
conducted.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — Shall mean, for stream corridor permits
pursuant to Chapter 12, Section 12-3 entitled "Stream Corridor Protection",
the zoning officer.
ADVERSE EFFECT — Shall mean development designs, situations, or
existing features on a developer's property, or any nearby property,
creating, imposing, aggravating or leading to impractical, unsafe,
unsatisfactory or non complying conditions such as a layout inconsistent
with the zoning regulations; insufficient street width; unsuitable street
grade; unsuitable street location; inconvenient street system; inadequate
utilities such as water, drainage, shade trees, and sewerage; unsuitable size,
shape and location of any area reserved for public use or land for open
space in a planned development; infringement upon land designated as
subject to flooding; and the creation of conditions leading to soil erosion by
wind or water from excavation or grading; all as set forth in 40:55D-38 and
measured against the design and performance standards of this chapter.
AGRICULTURAL USE/PURPOSE — Shall mean land which is devoted to
the production for sale of plants and animals, including but not limited
to: forages and sod crops; grain and feed crops, dairy animals and dairy
products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef, cattle,
sheep, horses, ponies, mules or goats, including the breeding and raising
of any or all such animals; bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees
and forest products; or when devoted to and meeting the requirements
and qualifications for payments to other compensation pursuant to a soil
conservation program under an agreement with an agency of the Federal
government. For purposes of this chapter, agricultural use does not include
a dwelling. See definition of "Farm."
AGRICULTURE — Shall mean the growing and harvesting of crops and/
or the raising and breeding of poultry and livestock including dairies,
§ 17-181 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-181
AO:615
nurseries, greenhouses and accessory buildings incidental to agricultural
uses.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Shall mean any use of land or water, or both, which
may create a dangerous condition for persons or property in or about
an airport or aircraft during landing or taking off at an airport; or, any
structure or tree which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of
aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — Shall mean any area of land or water, or
both, upon which an airport hazard might be created or established if not
prevented by the "Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act" (P.L. 1983, c. 260)
and related provisions of this chapter.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the application form
and all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit.
APPLICATION REVIEW COMMITTEE — Shall mean an advisory committee
comprised of two planning board members appointed by the chairman,
the planning board attorney, township engineer, a representative of the
township health department, the administrative officer and when
appropriate a representative of the board of adjustment formed for the
purpose of reviewing and determining the completeness of all applications
made to the planning board, as well as those applications referred by the
board of adjustment which requires site plan review.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the planning board unless a
different agency is designated in the text of this chapter when acting
pursuant to the authority of the Municipal Land Use Law.
ATRIUM HOUSE — Shall mean an attached unit similar to a townhouse
except it is arranged to produce a private yard designed for privacy through
the use of building walls on at least two sides of the yard with fencing and/
or walls on the remaining two sides. More than two units can be attached.
BANK — Shall mean a commercial bank, savings and loan, or savings bank.
BARN — Shall mean an accessory building on a farm used primarily for the
storage of grain, hay and other farm products, and for sheltering livestock.
BUILDING AREA — Shall mean the horizontal projection in plan, of all
covered or roofed areas of a structure, whether temporary or permanent.
BUILDING COVERAGE — Shall mean the area of a lot covered by buildings
measured on a horizontal plan around the periphery of the foundation(s)
and including the area under the roof of any structure supported by
columns or walls as measured around the extremities of the roof above the
columns.
CHILD CARE/DAY CARE CENTER — Shall mean a facility for the care,
development and supervision of children up to the age of 18 years, who
attend the facility for less than 24 hours a day.
§ 17-181 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-181
AO:616
CHURCH — Shall mean the principal structure used by a religious society
or congregation incorporated pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 16:1-1
et seq., for public worship, ritual and ceremony.
CIRCULATION — Shall mean systems, structures and physical
improvements for the movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or
power by such means as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers,
airways, pipes and conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such
means as terminals, stations, warehouses, and other storage buildings or
transshipment points.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean an area to be developed as a
single entity according to a plan containing residential housing units which
have a common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
COAH — Shall mean the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
COMMON PROPERTY — Shall mean land or water, or a combination of
land and water, together with improvements, within or related to a site
designated as a development, and designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common property
includes common open space and may contain such complementary
structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR PERSONS WITH HEAD INJURIES — Shall
mean a community residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1
et seq. providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under such
supervision as required, to not more than 15 persons with head injuries,
who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the
community, and shall include, but not be limited to: group homes, halfway
houses, supervised apartment living arrangements, and hostels. Such a
residence shall not be considered a health care facility within the meaning
of the "Health Care Facilities Planning Act" (N.J.S.A. 25:2H-1 et al.).
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE TERMINALLY ILL — Shall mean any
community residential facility operated as a hospice program providing
food, shelter, personal guidance and health care services, under such
supervision as required, to not more than 15 terminally ill persons.
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — Shall
mean any shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified
pursuant to standards and procedures established by regulation of the
Department of Human Services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:14-1 et seq.,
providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal guidance,
and other services to not more than 15 persons who have been victims of
domestic violence, including any children of such victims, who temporarily
require shelter and assistance in order to protect their physical or
psychological welfare.
CONDITIONAL USE — Shall mean a use permitted in a particular zoning
district only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
§ 17-181 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-181
AO:617
use as contained in the zoning ordinance, and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the planning board.
CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a subdivision which employs
a fixed minimum lot size requirement, as specified in the appropriate
district regulations.
CORNER LOT — Shall mean a lot located at the intersection of two streets.
A lot abutting a curved street shall be considered a corner lot if straight
lines drawn from the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of
less than 135°.
CRITICAL AREAS — Shall mean areas having serious soil limitations for
development due to slopes exceeding 18%, flood hazard areas, stream
corridors, seasonal high water tables less than 1.0 feet, good to excellent
ground water recharge areas as shown in the master plan and natural
resources inventory, depth to bedrock less than 2.0 feet, and Beech Grove
climax vegetation. (Assistance can be received from the master plan and the
township's natural resources inventory.)
CUTOFF ANGLE (OF A LIGHT FIXTURE) — Shall mean the angle,
measured up from nadir, between the vertical axis and the first line of sight
at which the bare source is not visible.
CUTOFF LIGHT FIXTURE — Shall mean a light fixture with less than 2.5%
of its light distribution occurring at a vertical angle 90° and above nadir,
and less than 10% of its light distribution occurring at a vertical angle 80°
and above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the fixture.
DENSITY — Shall mean the permitted number of dwelling units per gross
area of land to be developed.
DENSITY, DESIGN — Shall mean a number expressing the number of units
per acre on that portion of a tract devoted to a specific housing type,
including streets, parking areas, driveways, and yards, but excluding other
areas to be set aside for common property and/or public areas.
DENSITY, GROSS — Shall mean a number expressing dwelling units per
gross acre of land except that watercourses, areas with seasonal high water
tables at the surface, and areas with slopes in excess of 20% slopes shall
receive no density credit and may not be used in calculating the number of
units to be permitted on the tract. Areas away from the stream, but within
the 100-year flood plain, and areas with slopes between 10-20%, and areas
FULL CUTOFF LIGHT FIXTURE — Shall mean a light fixture that
produces no light at a vertical angle 90° and above nadir, and no more
than 10% of its light distribution occurs at a vertical angle 80° and
above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the fixture.
a.
SEMI-CUTOFF LIGHT FIXTURE — Shall mean a light fixture with less
than 5% of its light distribution occurring at a vertical angle 90° and
above nadir, and less than 20% of its light distribution occurring at a
vertical angle 80° and above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles
around the fixture.
b.
§ 17-181 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-181
AO:618
with seasonable high water tables between 0.5 and 1.5 feet shall receive
half credit. For purposes of this chapter, the delineation of areas of seasonal
high water tables shall be as shown on the Soil Conservation Service
maps, except that if an applicant desires to use site-specific information,
the seasonal high water tables shall be certified and sealed by a licensed
professional engineer based on tests witnessed by the township
construction official.
DEP APPROVED WELL — Shall mean a central water supply system for a
development which obtains water from one or more deep wells which have
been specifically approved by the Hopewell Township Municipal Utilities
Authority and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection as
not posing risks to the continued availability of water for other township
users.
DESIGN FLOOD (FLOODWAY OR FLOOD HAZARD AREA) — Shall mean
the relative size or magnitude of a flood, expressed as a design discharge
in cubic feet per second, which is developed from hydrologic criteria,
represents a major flood or reasonable expectancy, reflects both flood
experience and flood potential, and is the basis of the delineation of the
floodway and the flood hazard area and of the water surface elevations
thereof. (Chapter 12.)
DESIGN FLOOD PROFILE (FLOODWAY OR FLOOD HAZARD AREA) —
Shall mean the elevations of the water surface of the floodway design flood
and the flood hazard area design flood as shown on the flood map. (Chapter
12.)
DEVELOPER — Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot
or of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the division of a parcel of land into two
or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or
of any mining, excavation or landfill, any use or change in the use of any
building or other structures, or land or extension of use of land for which
permission is required pursuant to this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT DISABILITY OR DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED — Shall
mean a severe, chronic disability of a person which: (1) is attributable
to a mental or physical impairment or combination of mental or physical
impairments; (2) is manifest before age 22; (3) is likely to continue
indefinitely; (4) results in substantial functional limitations in three or more
of the following areas of major life activity, that is, self-care, receptive
and expressive language, learning, mobility, self-direction and capacity for
independent living or economic self-sufficiency; and (5) reflects the need
for a combination and sequence of special interdisciplinary or generic care,
treatment or other services which are of lifelong or extended duration
and are individually planned and coordinated. Developmental disability
includes, but is not limited to, severe disabilities attributable to mental
§ 17-181 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-181
AO:619
retardation, autism, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, spina bifida and other
neurological impairments where the above criteria are met.
DEVELOPMENT FEES — Shall mean money paid by an individual, person,
partnership, association, company, or corporation for the improvement of
property as permitted in this ordinance and by COAH's rules.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — Shall mean a zoning ordinance,
subdivision ordinance, site plan ordinance, official map ordinance or other
municipal regulation of the use and development of land, or amendment
thereto adopted and filed pursuant to this law.
DISABILITY GLARE — Shall mean the effect of stray light in the eye
whereby visibility and visual performance are reduced.
DISCOMFORT GLARE — Shall mean the sensation produced by luminance
within the visual field that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to
which the eyes are adapted, causing annoyance or discomfort, but not loss
of visual performance.
DISTURBANCE — Shall mean any activity involving the clearing,
excavating, storing, grading, filling or transporting of soil or any other
activity, which causes soil to be exposed to the danger of erosion.
DRAINAGE — Shall mean the removal of surface water or groundwater
from land by drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff
to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction of
development and means necessary for water supply preservation or
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean the lands required for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a
natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for
the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in
accordance with Title 58, N.J.S.A.
DRIVEWAY — Shall mean a suitably maintained private road giving access
from a public way to off-street traffic facilities and structures contiguous
thereto.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean a room or series of connected rooms
containing living, cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for one family.
DWELLING, PLEX — Shall mean a two, three or four unit dwelling in which
the units are attached at the sides and/or rears in various combinations so
the design incorporates a private balcony or patio or other limited outdoor,
but private, space. The structure is usually designed to have the look of a
large single family home.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY — Shall mean a detached building containing
one dwelling unit. For purposes of this chapter, modular homes shall be
considered single family dwellings.
EFFICIENCY UNIT — Shall mean a dwelling unit in a garden apartment
building consisting of a bath plus one main room without permanent
separations to be used for living, dining and bedroom facilities, with a
§ 17-181 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-181
AO:620
kitchen area separated from the main room by either a permanent wall or a
sliding or some other temporary partition.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — Shall mean the value of property
determined by the municipal tax assessor through a process designed to
ensure that all property in the municipality is assessed at the same
assessment ratio or ratios required by law. Estimates at the time of building
permit may be established by the tax assessor utilizing estimates for
construction cost. Final equalized assessed value will be determined at
project completion by the municipal tax assessor.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — Shall mean a plan which
fully indicates necessary land treatment measures, including a schedule
of the timing for their installation, which will effectively minimize soil
erosion and sedimentation. Such measures shall be equivalent to or exceed
standards adopted by the New Jersey State Soil Conservation Committee
and administered by the Mercer County Soil Conservation District. (Chapter
9.)
FAMILY — Shall mean one or more persons customarily living as a single
housekeeping unit. The family shall be deemed to include full-time servants
who have no other employment. More than five persons, exclusive of
domestic servants, not related by blood, marriage, adoption, or approved
foster care arrangements, but living on the same premises, shall not be
considered to constitute a "family."
FARM — Shall mean any large tract of land, and premises, containing five
contiguous acres or more, plus acreage for the home, used for raising crops
and rearing livestock or fowl and containing one or two dwelling units.
FARM CONSERVATION PLAN — Shall mean a plan which provides for
use of land, within its capabilities and treatment, within practical limits,
according to chosen use to prevent further deterioration of soil and water
resources. (Chapter 12.)
FARM STAND — Shall mean an accessory building located on a farm that
is used only on a seasonal basis for the sale of vegetables, fruit and other
consumable farm products actually raised on the farm on which the facility
is located.
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT — Shall mean a commercial establishment
where food and drink prepared for immediate consumption is purchased
at a counter or drive-up window and either eaten on the premises, in the
purchaser's automobile, or off the premises. Those restaurants where food
is consumed only at tables on the premises and served either cafeteria style
or by waiters and waitresses shall not be deemed "fast food restaurants."
"Fast food restaurants" shall also not include those retail stores where food
is primarily sold for preparation and consumption elsewhere, although as
a secondary use of the premises, prepared food may also be sold over the
counter for immediate consumption, such as a delicatessen.
FINAL PLAT — Shall mean the final map of proposed development
presented for final approval in accordance with these regulations and
§ 17-181 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-181
AO:621
which, if approved as a subdivision, shall be filed with the Mercer County
Recording Officer.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Shall mean the floodway, and additional portions
of the flood plain that are subject to flood flow at lesser depths and lower
velocities than the floodway, that are inundated by the flood hazard area
design flood and that are delineated on the flood map as Zone A. (Chapter
12.)
FLOOD MAPS — Shall mean maps filed with the township clerk pursuant to
Chapter 12, section 12-2.
FLOOD PLAIN — Shall mean the relatively flat area adjoining the channel
which has been or may be hereafter covered by flood water of the stream.
FLOODWAY — Shall mean the channel and portions of the adjacent flood
plain that carry the greater part of flood flow at greater depths and
velocities than do the other parts of the flood plain that constitute the
minimum area required for the passage of flood flows without aggravating
flood conditions upstream and downstream, that are necessary to preserve
the natural regimen of the stream for the reasonable passage of the
floodway design flood and that are delineated on the flood map. (Chapter 9.)
FLOOR AREA — Shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
floor or floors of a building which are enclosed and usable for human
occupancy. Such areas or area shall be measured between the inside face
of exterior walls. Such area or areas shall not include basement areas or
accessory building space, whether the latter be attached or detached, or
any parking garages.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — Shall mean the sum of the area of all floors of
buildings or structures compared to the total area of the site. For the
purposes of calculating floor area ratio, the area of all floors of buildings or
structures shall have the same meaning as "floor area" as defined above.
FOOTCANDLE (FC) — Shall mean a unit of illuminance on a surface one
foot square in area onto which there is a uniform flux of one lumen.
FOOTLAMBERT (FL) — Shall mean a unit of luminance of a surface
reflecting or emitting light at the rate of one lumen per square foot. The
average luminance of any reflecting surface is the product of the
illuminance in footcandles striking the surface times the reflectance of the
surface.
GARAGE — Shall mean a detached accessory building or portion of a
principal building for the parking or temporary storage of vehicles of the
occupants of the principal building with adequate dimensions to
accommodate one or more parked vehicles, a door able to be opened to
permit the vehicle(s) to enter the building, and a driveway leading to the
door(s).
GARDEN APARTMENT — Shall mean a dwelling unit in a building having
two or more dwelling units where entrance ways, hallways, basements,
attics, heating systems, yards, and similar services in the building are
shared in common, singly or in combination.
§ 17-181 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-181
AO:622
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — Shall mean a comprehensive plan for
the development of a planned development on a large tract as set forth in
the applicable zoning district and with a development period of at least five
years.
GOLF CLUB — Shall mean a private association of bona fide, dues paying
members which owns, or leases for a term of not less than 99 years, 50 or
more contiguous acres wholly or partly in the Township of Hopewell, and
employs the same as a golf course for the sole use of bona fide members
and their guests.
GOLF COURSE — Shall mean an area of 50 or more acres containing a full
sized golf course of at least nine holes, together with the necessary and
usual accessory uses and structures, such as, but not limited to: club house
facilities, dining and refreshment facilities, swimming pools, tennis courts
and the like, provided the operation of the accessory facilities is incidental
and subordinate to the operation of the golf course.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — Shall mean the total floor area in a structure
measured by using the inside face of exterior walls at each story. The floor
area of units sharing a common wall shall be measured from the center of
interior walls. In residential uses the gross floor area shall exclude the areas
of the garage, attic, open porch or patio, cellar, utility areas, heating and
cooling rooms and all portions of floor areas which have a ceiling height
above them of less than 7.5 feet. In nonresidential structures, the gross
floor area shall exclude areas used for utility, heating, cooling and other
mechanical equipment and parking garages but shall include all other areas
including cellars, warehousing and storage areas, regardless of ceiling
height.
HEIGHT — Shall mean the vertical dimension of a structure, as measured
from the average level of the finished grade along the wall of the structure
facing the nearest street to the highest part of the structure, except that the
following shall not be considered as part of the structure for these purposes
if they are less than 50 feet high and are less than 25% of the maximum
height for the structure which is permitted in the zoning district:
Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks,
ventilating fans, air-conditioning equipment or similar mechanical
equipment required to operate and maintain the building; fire or parapet
walls; skylights; spires; cupolas; flagpoles; chimneys; and similar
structures.
HELIPORT — Shall mean an airport or portion thereof for the service,
storage and use of helicopters.
HELISTOP — Shall mean a small fenced landing area maintained by a
commercial establishment for the picking up and discharge of its employees
and guests by helicopters. It shall have no service or other facilities.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — Shall mean a nonprofit corporation
operating under a recorded land agreement through which (a) each lot
owner, condominium owner, stockholder under a cooperative development,
or other owner of property or interests in the project shall be a member; (b)
§ 17-181 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-181
AO:623
each occupied dwelling unit is subject to a charge for a proportionate share
of the expenses for the organization activities and maintenance, including
any maintenance costs levied against the association by the township, and
(c) each owner and tenant has a right to use the common property.
HORIZONTAL ILLUMINANCE — Shall mean the illuminance on a horizontal
plane, expressed in footcandles (fc).
HOSPITAL — Shall mean any building or integrated group of buildings,
containing 50 beds or more, licensed pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
30:11-1, in which surgical and laboratory facilities are located for the
diagnosis, treatment and care of unrelated persons who are sick, wounded,
infirm or aged.
HOT TUB — Shall mean a structure placed on or below the ground and filled
with water. The system includes devices to heat, circulate and filter the
water, and may or may not have an accompanying deck. Hot tubs generally
have more than 20 square feet of water surface area, but shall not have
more than 60 square feet of water surface area. Facilities with more than
60 square feet of water surface area shall be considered swimming pools.
IESNA — Shall mean the Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America, an organization that recommends standards for the lighting
industry.
ILLUMINANCE — Shall mean the area density of the luminous flux incident
at a point on a surface. It is a measure of light incident on a surface
expressed in footcandles (fc).
INDUSTRIAL OR OFFICE PARK — Shall mean a total tract comprehensively
planned, designed, and approved for industrial or office uses whether or
not the buildings are erected in one development stage or over a period
of time, but where the streets, utilities and lots and/or tenant's parcels are
set forth on a plan for the entire tract prior to construction of any portion
of the tract. As development takes place in accordance with the approved
plans, changes may be made in the plans for the undeveloped section to
accommodate subsequent land needs provided the modification conforms
to logical extensions of installed segments of streets, drainage, utilities and
other facilities. Parks designed for more than one building or for more
than one tenant (but no subdivided lots) shall have buildings spaced so
that the mortgage and/or lease lines shall conform to the requirements for
lot lines as if the parcels were being subdivided and in order to establish
conformance with this chapter for such matters as building setbacks,
buffers, driveway locations, and distances between buildings.
INTERESTED PARTY — Shall mean (a) in a criminal or quasi-criminal
proceeding, any citizen of the State of New Jersey; and (b) in the case of
a civil proceeding in any court or in an administrative proceeding before
a municipal agency, any person, whether residing within or without the
municipality, whose right to use, acquire, or enjoy property is or may be
affected by any action taken under this chapter, or whose rights to use,
acquire, or enjoy property under this chapter, or under any other title or
§ 17-181 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-181
AO:624
any law of this State or of the United States have been denied, violated or
infringed by an action or a failure to act under this chapter.
JUDGMENT OF COMPLIANCE AND REPOSE — Shall mean a judgment
issued by the Superior Court approving the township's plan to satisfy its fair
share obligation.
JUNK AUTOMOBILE OR JUNK AUTOMOBILE BODY — Shall mean any
automobile which is no longer in actual use as a motor vehicle, or which is
wholly unfit without rebuilding or reconditioning for use for public highway
transportation, or which has been discarded for use as a motor vehicle.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Shall mean any activity involving the clearing,
grading, transporting, filling and any other activity which causes land to be
exposed to the danger of erosion. (Chapter 12.)
LIGHT LOSS FACTOR — Shall mean the multiplier used in maintained
illuminance calculations that accounts for ballast factor, lamp lumen
depreciation, luminaire dirt depreciation, and (for interior calculations)
room surface dirt depreciation.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Shall mean any form of illuminance from a luminaire
located on one property that emanates to another property.
LOADING AREA — Shall mean that suitably maintained areas of required
off-street traffic facilities devoted to one or more accessible loading spaces
for the use of commercial vehicles servicing the premises.
LOT — Shall mean a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by
a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — Shall mean the area contained within the lot lines, including
wetland buffer areas, but not including any portion of a street nor any lands
within the 100-year flood plain of any watercourse or lake site, wetlands,
any areas reserved for future roadways, or areas encompassed within any
easements, except that in areas with sewer service, lot areas need only
deduct streets, future roadways, and 100-year flood plains. The minimum
lot area shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Articles
VIII and IX of this chapter and in accordance with Chapter 16 of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Hopewell, with the more restrictive
applying. The minimum lot area of a lot fronting on a street proposed to be
widened in the adopted master plan shall be the minimum area required
for the district in which it is located plus the additional area needed to
anticipate the widening of this street.
LOT AVERAGING — Shall mean a residential development option that
allows a range of minimum lot areas, provided that the maximum density
for the parcel is not exceeded.
LOT COVERAGE — Shall mean that portion of lot area which by reason
of structures, off-street traffic facilities or other improvements is highly
resistant to infiltration by water and includes patios and gravel driveways.
§ 17-181 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-181
AO:625
LOT DEPTH — Shall mean the shortest horizontal distance between the
front lot line and a line drawn parallel to the front line through the midpoint
of the rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — Shall mean the horizontal distance between the side lot
lines measured along the street lines. The minimum lot frontage shall be
the same as the lot width except that on curved alignments with an outside
radius of less than 900 feet, the lot frontage may be reduced to a percentage
of the minimum lot width as set forth in the following chart. In the case of a
corner lot, either side may be considered the lot frontage, but the front yard
setback shall be met from all streets.
Outside Radius of Street Rightof-
Way
Reduced Lot Frontage as Percent
of Lot Width
Less than 500 feet 75%
500-599 feet 80%
600-699 feet 85%
700-799 feet 90%
800-899 feet 95%
900 feet or more 100%
LOT LINE — Shall mean any line forming a portion of the exterior boundary
of a lot. The lot line is the same as the street line for that portion of a lot
abutting a street. Lot lines extend vertically in both directions from ground
level.
LOT WIDTH — Shall mean that dimension which is the length of a line
connecting the points of intersection of the minimum front setback line and
the side lot lines.
LOWER INCOME — Shall mean income limits established for low and
moderate income levels. Low income for the average household is less than
50% of the median income. Moderate income is between 50% and 80% of
the median. For purposes of this chapter, the median income shall be the
applicable number published in the most recent "Income Limits" by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. The low
and moderate income levels shall be based on the number of people in
the household as shown in that publication as of the date of issuing each
certificate of occupancy.
LUMINAIRE — Shall mean light fixture; or complete lighting unit consisting
of a lamp, or lamps, and ballasting when applicable, together with the pets
designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the lamps, and to
connect the lamps to the power supply.
MAINTENANCE BOND — Shall mean a form of maintenance guarantee.
Any security which may be accepted by the township committee so as to
insure the maintenance and proper working of streets, utilities, sewers and
the like as well as the viability of planting shrubbery or other improvements
as may be required by the planning board. Such security shall be in the form
§ 17-181 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-181
AO:626
permitted and subject to the same approval as is provided for performance
guarantees.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Shall mean any security, other than cash,
which may be accepted by the township for the maintenance of any
improvements required by this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean all subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions.
MANUFACTURING AND ASSEMBLY — Shall mean an activity which
involves the fabrication, reshaping, reworking, assembly or combining of
products from previously prepared materials and which does not involve
the synthesis of chemical or chemical products or the processing of any
raw materials. Manufacturing includes light industrial operations such as
electronic, machine parts and small component assembly, as opposed to
heavy industrial operations such as automobile assembly or milling
activities.
MARSH OR MARSHY LAND — Shall mean any site of soft, wet land upon
which the water table is at or near the surface level of the ground.
MASTER PLAN — Shall mean a composite of the mapped and written
proposals recommending the physical development of the municipality, duly
adopted by the planning board.
MEDICAL CLINIC — Shall mean offices where patients are examined and
treated by physicians or dentists practicing as a group, but where no beds,
lodging or food are provided.
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH — Shall mean the minimum permitted distance
between the side lot lines, measured parallel to the street line at the
minimum building setback. The lot frontage (i.e. the horizontal distance
between the side lot lines, measured along the street lines) may not be less
than the minimum lot width, except that on a curved street with an outside
radius of less than 500 feet and straight side lot lines from the street to the
minimum building setback the lot frontage may be reduced to not less than
75% of the required minimum lot width. In the case of a lot located at the
corner of two streets, either side may be considered as the front.
MINOR SITE PLAN — Shall mean a development plan of one or more
lots which (1) proposes new development within the scope of development
specifically permitted by ordinance as a minor site plan; (2) does not involve
planned development, any new street or extension of any off-tract
improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42; and
(3) contains the information reasonably required in order to make an
informed determination as to whether the requirements established by
ordinance for approval of a minor site plan have been met.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a subdivision of land that does not
involve (1) the creation of more than three lots, inclusive of the remainder;
any prior subdivision of the same parcel after April 23, 1968 will be included
in determining how many lots are created; (2) a planned development; (3)
§ 17-181 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-181
AO:627
any new street; (4) extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which
is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
MITIGATION — Shall mean and include, but not be limited to, reforestation
and stabilization of all disturbed stream banks and all other disturbed areas
in the stream corridor and removal of all debris, re-establishment of the
integrity of the surrounding habitat by undertaking all feasible actions,
including, but not limited to, replacement of native vegetation lost as a
result of the disturbance to the stream corridor or rehabilitation and cure
of all other effects caused by disturbance to the stream corridor.
MOTEL — Shall mean a series of eight or more attached rental units with
individual entrances from the exterior of the building to each unit operated
as a business to provide lodging for transient guests.
NCQLP — Shall mean the National Council on Qualifications for the
Lighting Professions, an organization that certifies core competence in the
field of illumination engineering. Professionals who have passed a written
test and maintain continuing education credits in accordance with NCQLP
guidelines are recognized as LC, lighting certified, professionals.
NURSERY OUTLET — Shall mean a building and adjacent outside areas
used for the sale of plants, flowers, trees and related plant materials and
tools for planting, fertilizing and landscaping.
NURSERY SCHOOL — Shall mean a facility for the care, development and
supervision of children under the age of six years who attend the facility for
less than 24 hours a day.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — Shall mean any permit issued to permit the
occupancy of a structure upon completion in accordance with plans and
specifications previously approved by the appropriate township officer or
agency.
OFF-SITE AND OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS — Shall mean improvements
to accommodate conditions generated by a proposed development,
including, but not limited to, new improvements and extensions and
modifications of existing improvements. "Off-site" means located outside the
lot lines of the lot in question but within the property (of which the lot
is a part) which is the subject of a development application or contiguous
portion of a street or right-of-way. "Off-tract" means not located on the
property which is the subject of a development application nor on a
contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN LANDS — Shall mean that portion of land, including any farm-related
dwelling or accessory buildings located thereon, that is voluntarily deedrestricted
by the landowner for forest resource conservation or agricultural
use in order to qualify for the open lands subdivision pursuant to this
chapter.
OPEN SPACE — Shall mean any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space; provided that
§ 17-181 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-181
AO:628
such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets
and off-street parking and other improvements that are designed to be
incidental to the natural openness of the land.
OWNER — Shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, trustee or
other legal entity having sufficient propriety interest in the land sought to
be subdivided or for which a variance or special exception use is sought to
commence and maintain proceedings to the same under this chapter.
PARKING SPACE — Shall mean an area either within a structure or in the
open for the parking of motor vehicles. The area of a parking space is
intended to be sufficient to accommodate the exterior extremities of the
vehicle whether, in addition thereto, wheel blocks are installed within this
area. The width and length of each space shall be measured perpendicular
to each other regardless of the angle of the parking space to the access aisle
or driveway.
PATIO HOME — Shall mean a single family detached unit on a small lot with
walls along the side yards for privacy, usually with the home placed along
one side lot line. The front and rear yard can also be walled.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Shall mean any security, which may be
accepted by a municipality, including cash; provided that the township shall
not require more than 10% of the total performance in cash.
PERMITTED USE — Shall mean any use of land or buildings as permitted
by this chapter.
PLAT — Shall mean the map of a subdivision or site plan.
PLAT PRELIMINARY — Shall mean the plat submitted as a part of the
application for preliminary approval. (Article III.)
PRIME FORESTED AREA — Shall mean coniferous forest, deciduous forest,
mixed forest and plantation, as depicted on Figure 7 of the 2002 Master
Plan.
PRINCIPAL USE — Shall mean the main purpose for which any lot and/or
structure is used.
PRIVATE SCHOOL — Shall mean an institution of education whose general
course work is comparable to the public school system and whose
curriculum is approved by the New Jersey Department of Education or the
New Jersey Department of Higher Education.
PRO SHOP — Shall mean an accessory use associated with a golf course
in which golf and other sporting equipment, sportswear, and food and
beverages may be purchased.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — Shall mean the office of a member of a
recognized profession which shall be so designated by the approving
authority upon finding by such approving authority that such occupation is
professional in character and requires at least a bachelor's degree from an
accredited college or university, licensing, and training and experience as a
condition for the practice thereof, and that the practice of such occupation
shall in no way adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of
§ 17-181 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-181
AO:629
property rights in any zone to any greater extent than would the permitted
uses listed in that district. The issuance of a State or local license for
regulation of any such occupation shall not, alone, be deemed indicative of
professional standing. When such office is combined with a residence, the
conditions of a "home occupation" shall apply.
PUBLIC AREAS — Shall mean (1) public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths
and other recreational areas; (2) other public open spaces; (3) scenic and
historic sites; and (4) sites for schools and other public buildings and
structures.
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — Shall mean a master plan, capital
improvement program or other proposal for land development adopted by
the appropriate public body, or any amendment thereto.
PUBLIC DRAINAGE WAY — Shall mean the land reserved or dedicated
for the installation of storm water sewers or drainage ditches, or required
along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and
providing for the flow of water to safeguard the public against flood
drainage, sedimentation, and erosion.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — Shall mean an open space area conveyed or
otherwise dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, board of education,
State or county agency, or other public body for recreational or
conservation uses.
PUBLIC PURPOSE — Shall mean the use of land by a municipal, county,
State or Federal agency or authority.
QUADPLEX — Shall mean a four-family building.
QUARRY — Shall mean the place where quarrying is conducted and shall
include the ways immediately adjacent thereto.
QUARRYING — Shall mean the excavation, removal, handling and
processing of stone, sand, or gravel extracted from the premises including
the transportation, storage, crushing, grinding, pulverizing or mixing of the
extracted raw materials and all uses and operations accessory thereto.
RADIAL — Shall mean as or following the course of the radius from a given
point.
RESIDENT PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — Shall mean a single family house
which is the actual residence as well as the office of a physician, dentist,
lawyer, architect or other similar professional whose calling requires
specialized knowledge and long and intensive academic preparation.
RESTAURANT — Shall mean a commercial establishment where food and
drink are prepared, served and consumed. As used in this chapter, a
"restaurant" shall not include a "fast food restaurant" as defined herein.
RETENTION BASIN — Shall mean any impoundment area with a permanent
pool of water or pond made by constructing an embankment or by
excavating a pit or both and shall include the outfall area related thereto.
§ 17-181 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-181
AO:630
SEDIMENT BASIN — Shall mean a barrier or dam building at suitable
locations to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or other material. (Chapter 12.)
SETBACK LINE — Shall mean a line drawn parallel to a street line or lot
line and located at the point of the building nearest to the street line or lot
line beyond which a building does not project, except as permitted under
the "yard" definitions below. The minimum yard requirements shall be the
minimum required setbacks. All setbacks shall be measured horizontally
and all setbacks extend vertically above and below the ground. All setbacks
from public streets shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way width
as shown on the adopted master plan, or from the existing right-of-way,
whichever is greater.
SHED, GARDEN OR TOOL — Shall mean an accessory building for the
storage of miscellaneous yard equipment and materials as well as an area
for the use and/or storage of hand, electrical and gasoline powered tools
and equipment. Any shed of 200 square feet in area or greater shall meet
the garage setback requirements and any requirements of the construction
code in effect at the time of approval.
SHOPPING CENTER — Shall mean one or more buildings, or parts thereof,
designed as a unit to be occupied by two or more retail businesses and
conducted as an integrated and cohesively planned development. Where
there is more than one building on a lot, the buildings shall be spaced as
if they were to be on separate lots in order to establish conformance with
this chapter for such matters as building setbacks, buffers, driveways and
distance between buildings.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — Shall mean a triangular area outside the street rightof-
way abutting two intersecting streets. The sight triangle is formed by the
intersecting street lines and a line connecting a point on each line a set
distance from the point of intersection.
SILO — Shall mean a tall cylindrical structure in which feed for livestock is
stored.
SKYGLOW — Shall mean the luminance in the atmosphere caused by dust,
water vapor, and other particles that reflect and scatter any stray light that
is directed, reflected, or emitted into the atmosphere.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Shall mean a facility which
receives, stores, conveys, or discharges stormwater runoff and is designed
in accordance with all applicable local, county, and State regulations. A
stormwater management facility may be a retention or detention basin;
infiltration structure; grassed swale; filter fabric; rip-rap channel; and/or
stormwater outfall.
STREAM BANK — Shall mean the inclined sides of a stream channel or
embankment.
STREAM CORRIDOR — Shall mean all areas 150 feet from the centerline
in both directions of all waterways that receive surface water runoff from
an upland drainage area of 50 acres or more as may be shown on a
map entitled "Hopewell Township Stream Centerlines and 150-Foot Buffer,"
§ 17-181 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-181
AO:631
prepared by the Stony Brook Millstone Watershed Association dated April
12, 2004, and as may be hereafter amended.
STREAM CORRIDOR AVERAGING — Shall mean reducing the required
stream corridor area along specific lengths of retention basins in exchange
for an equivalent increase in width elsewhere along the perimeter of the
retention basin.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway,
viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing State, county or municipal
roadway, or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law or approved by official action as provided in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-35 or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office
of the county recording officer, prior to the appointment of a planning board
and the grant to such board of the power to review plats, and includes the
land between the street line, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other
areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this chapter, streets shall
be classified as follows:
STREET LINE — Shall mean the lot line which constitutes the edge of
the existing right-of-way or the right-of-way shown on the master plan,
whichever would result in a larger right-of-way.
STRIPPING — Shall mean any activity which significantly disturbs
vegetated or otherwise stabilized soil surface including clearing and
grubbing operations. (Chapter 12.)
STRUCTURE — Shall mean any building or other artificial thing which is
built or constructed, either above or below ground.
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land
into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or
development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the
meaning of this chapter, if no new streets are created: (1) divisions of land
found by the planning board or subdivision committee thereof, appointed
by the chairman to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels
ARTERIAL STREETS — Are those which are used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic.
a.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Are those which carry traffic from local
streets to the arterial streets.
b.
LOCAL STREETS — Are those which are used primarily for access to
the abutting properties.
c.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Are streets which are parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and provide access to abutting properties
and protection from through traffic.
d.
ALLEYS — Are minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular
service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting
on a street.
e.
§ 17-181 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-181
AO:632
are five acres or larger in size; (2) divisions of property by testamentary
or intestate provisions; (3) divisions of property upon court order including
but not limited to judgments of foreclosure; (4) consolidation of existing lots
by deed or other recorded instrument; and (5) the conveyance of one or
more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land, owned by the same person or
persons and all of which are found and certified by the administrative officer
to conform to the requirements of the municipal development regulations
and are shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax
map or atlas of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include
the term "resubdivision."
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — Shall mean a committee of at least three
planning board members appointed by the chairman with the approval of
the board, formed for the purpose of classifying subdivisions in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and performing such other duties
relating to land subdivision which may be conferred on this committee by
the board.
SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — Shall mean any increase in an approved
structure's bulk or floor area where the result exceeds any of the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, and where any
changes exceed the limitations necessary to qualify as an "insubstantial
change." An "insubstantial change" means a revision to a preliminary or
final plat which does not violate any requirements of the township's
ordinances, does not alter the amount of lower income housing or other
forms of participating in the lower income housing program as set forth in
the approved development, and does not have changes which exceed any
of the following: setback in any yard of five feet; seven feet in building
height; 1% in the approved floor area ratio; 1% in the approved lot coverage
(building, paving and other coverages); five feet in building spacing; three
parking spaces; one loading space; five feet in driveway locations; and
1% of the area of the approved site disturbance. A substitution of similar
landscaping material, lighting fixture, and signage is not a substantial
change provided there is no change in approved quantities and/or
dimensions.
SUBSTANTIVE CERTIFICATION — Shall mean a determination by COAH
approving a municipality's housing element and fair share plan in
accordance with the provisions of the Fair Housing Act and the rules and
criteria as set forth by COAH. A grant of substantive certification shall be
valid for a period of six years in accordance with the terms and conditions
contained in the substantive certification.
SURFACE WATER SUPPLY — Shall mean that water will be supplied to all
dwelling units in a development from a source other than wells located in
the township or in Hopewell Borough or Pennington Borough.
SWIMMING POOL — Shall mean a permanent structure placed partly or
entirely below ground and filled with water for the purpose of swimming.
Except for "hot tubs" as defined herein, a structure located above ground
shall be considered a permanent swimming pool when the structure has
§ 17-181 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-181
AO:633
a water depth greater than two feet and a water surface greater than 30
square feet.
TENNIS COURT — Shall mean a flat area, with either a blacktopped or
compacted earth surface, divided at the midpoint by a net. The area is
usually fenced and shall include the "in bounds" area as well as the
surrounding "out-of-bounds" area needed for player maneuverability.
TOWNHOUSE — Shall mean one dwelling unit in a line of three or more
attached dwelling units, with each dwelling unit extending from the ground
to the roof and having individual outside access and no interior rooms or
hallways shared with other dwelling units.
TRACT — Shall mean an area of land comprised of one or more lots having
sufficient dimensions and area to meet the requirements of this chapter
for the use(s) intended. The land area of any existing streets shall not be
included in calculating the area of the tract.
UNCONSTRAINED LAND — Shall mean the area of a tract or parcel that
does not contain floodplains, wetlands or slopes greater than 15%.
UTILITY — Shall mean services including, but not limited to, sewage
treatment, water supply, gas, electric, telephone, and cable TV.
VARIANCE — Shall mean permission to depart from the literal requirements
of the zoning provisions of this chapter.
VERTICAL EXISTENCE — Shall mean the luminance reflected off a vertical
surface, expressed in footcandles (fL).
VERTICAL ILLUMINANCE — Shall mean the illuminance on a vertical
plane, expressed in footcandles (fc).
WAREHOUSE — Shall mean a building in which goods or merchandise
is stored. The term shall include self-storage, mini, or other forms of
commercial storage activities.
WATER COURSE — Shall mean a defined channel which accepts
stormwater runoff from 50 acres or more.
YARD — Shall mean an area of generally open space extending between
the closest point of any building measured at the foundation or facade of
the building and a lot line or street line, except that incidental elements
of a structure attached to the building, may penetrate into the required
yard a distance no greater than two feet. These incidental penetrations
shall be permitted for items such as, but not limited to, gutters, eaves, bow
windows and window sills, steps, downspouts, roof overhangs, or chimneys,
but shall not be for such items as open or enclosed roofs over patios or
similar areas, or for porches, decks, balconies, or for any cantilevered areas
having an outside wall or railing. All yards shall be measured horizontally
and all minimum yard requirements extend vertically above and below the
ground. In an apartment, townhouse, industrial or office park complex,
shopping center, or other development where more than one building may
be constructed on a lot, yards shall also be the open space extending
between buildings. All yard dimensions shall be measured horizontally and
§ 17-181 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-181
AO:634
at right angles to either a straight street line, lot line, or building facade
or perpendicular to the point of tangent of curved lines and facades. The
minimum distance between buildings in developments where there is more
than one building on a lot shall be the sum of the two yards of the buildings
and in no event shall two buildings be closer to one another than the sum
of both required side yards, except that buildings that are accessory to an
agricultural use on a farm shall be exempt from this spacing requirement.
YARD, FRONT — Shall mean the area extending across the full width of
a lot between a street line and the foundation or facade of the building
except that incidental elements of a structure attached to the building may
penetrate into the required yard a distance no greater than two feet. These
incidental penetrations shall be permitted for items such as, but not limited
to, gutters, eaves, bow windows and window sills, steps, downspouts, roof
overhangs, or chimneys, but shall not be for such items as open or enclosed
roofs over patios or similar areas, or for porches, decks, balconies, or for
any cantilevered areas having an outside wall or railing. All yards shall be
measured horizontally and all minimum yard requirements extend vertically
above and below the ground. For apartments, townhouses, industrial or
office park, shopping center, or other development where more than one
building may be erected on a lot, the front yard shall be measured from the
designated front of the building to an imaginary line a designated distance
away from the front of the building. All buildings shall be set back at least
10 feet from any utility easement.
YARD, REAR — Shall mean the area extending across the full width of the
lot between the rear lot line and the foundation or facade of the building
except that incidental elements of a structure attached to the building may
penetrate into the required yard a distance no greater than two feet. These
incidental penetrations shall be permitted for items such as, but not limited
to, gutters, eaves, bow windows and window sills, steps, downspouts, roof
overhangs, or chimneys, but shall not be for such items as open or enclosed
roofs over patios or similar areas, or for porches, decks, balconies, or for
any cantilevered areas having an outside wall or railing. All yards shall be
measured horizontally and all minimum yard requirements extend vertically
above and below the ground. For apartments, townhouses, industrial or
office park, shopping center, or other development where more than one
building may be erected on a lot, the rear yard shall be measured from the
designated rear of the building to an imaginary line a designated distance
away from the rear of the building. All buildings shall be set back at least 10
feet from any utility easement. On residential lots there shall be a minimum
distance between the building and any Freshwater Wetland buffer and any
floodway that is at least equal to 75% of the rear yard requirement for the
district in which the lot is located.
YARD, SIDE — Shall mean the area extending from the front yard to the rear
yard and lying between each side lot line and the foundation or facade of
the building, except that incidental elements of a structure attached to the
building may penetrate into the required yard a distance no greater than
two feet. These incidental penetrations shall be permitted for items such
as, but not limited to, gutters, eaves, bow windows and window sills, steps,
§ 17-181 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-181
AO:635
downspouts, roof overhangs, or chimneys, but shall not be for such items as
open or enclosed roofs over patios or similar areas, or for porches, decks,
balconies, or for any cantilevered areas having an outside wall or railing. All
yards shall be measured horizontally and all minimum yard requirements
extend vertically above and below the ground. The side yard for apartments,
townhouses, industrial or office park complex, shopping center, or other
development where more than one building may be erected on a lot shall
be measured from the designated side of the building to an imaginary line
a designated distance away from the side of the building. All buildings shall
be set back at least 10 feet from any utility easement.
ZONING OFFICER — Shall mean that officer or employee of the township
or his duly authorized deputy appointed by the township committee to
administer and enforce the zoning provisions of this chapter.
ZONING PERMIT — Shall mean the final permit issued to an applicant by
the zoning officer and certifying the compliance of a particular structure or
use with the provisions of the zoning requirements.
§ 17-181 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-181
AO:636
ARTICLE XI
PLANNING BOARD
§ 17-182. NAME. [Ord. #437; Ord. #572-80]
There shall be a planning board to be known as "The Hopewell Township
Planning Board."
§ 17-183. APPOINTMENT. [Ord. #437; Ord. #550-80; Ord. #572-80]
There shall be nine members, consisting of the four following classes:
Class I. Mayor.
Class II. One of the officials of the township other than a member of
the township committee to be appointed by the mayor provided that the
member of the environmental commission who is also a member of the
planning board shall be deemed to be the Class II planning board member
for purposes of this section in the event that there be among the Class
IV members of the planning board both a member of the zoning board of
adjustment and a member of the board of education.
Class III. A member of the township committee to be appointed by it.
Class IV. Six other citizens of the township to be appointed by the mayor.
The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office, except that
one such member may be a member of the zoning board of adjustment
and one Class IV member may be a member of the board of education.
The member of the environmental commission who is also a member of the
planning board shall be a Class IV planning board member, unless there
be among the Class IV members of the planning board both a member of
the zoning board of adjustment and a member of the board of education,
in which case the member common to the planning board and the
environmental commission shall be deemed a Class II member of the
planning board.
Class IV-a. Two other citizens of the township shall be appointed by the
mayor as alternate members and shall meet the qualifications of Class
IV members. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of
appointment by the mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The
terms of the alternate members shall be for two years except that the terms
of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not more than one
alternate member shall expire in any one year; provided, however, that in
no instance shall the terms of the alternate members first appointed exceed
two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall
be filled by the mayor for the unexpired term only.
No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which
he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest. An
alternate member may, after public hearing if he requests one, be removed
by the governing body for cause.
§ 17-182 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-183
AO:637
Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member
of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
§ 17-184. TERMS. [Ord. #437; Ord. #572-80]
The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to his official
tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III shall
be for one year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms of
office, whichever occurs first except for a Class II member who is also a
member of the environmental commission. The term of a Class II or Class IV
member who is also a member of the environmental commission shall be for
three years or terminate at the completion of his term of office as a member
of the environmental commission whichever occurs first.
The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the zoning board
of adjustment or the board of education shall terminate whenever he is
no longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his Class
IV term, whichever occurs first. The initial term of Class IV members
first appointed after August 1, 1976, shall be so determined that to the
greatest practicable extent the expiration of terms of the Class IV members
shall be distributed evenly over the first four years after their appointment
provided that the initial Class IV term of no member shall exceed four years.
Thereafter, new members or members reappointed shall each be appointed
for a term of four years. Notwithstanding the foregoing, each person who
was a member of the planning board on August 1, 1976, shall continue in
office until the completion of his term as provided by law immediately prior
to that date.
§ 17-185. POWERS AND FUNCTIONS. [Ord. #437; Ord. #572-80;
Ord. #662-84, § 1]
The planning board shall, as provided in applicable ordinances and State
law, exercise its power in regard to:
a. The master plan;
b. Subdivision control and site plan review;
c. The official map;
d. The zoning ordinance including conditional uses;
e. The capital improvements program;
f. Variances and certain building permits in conjunction with subdivision
site plan and conditional use approval;
g. Participation in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by State or Federal law or regulation, as it deems advisable;
§ 17-183 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-185
AO:638
§ 17-186. ORGANIZATION AND PERSONNEL. [Ord. #437; Ord.
#572-80]
The planning board shall annually elect a chairman and a vice-chairman
from the members of Class IV and select a secretary and an assistant
secretary who may or may not be a member of the planning board or a
municipal employee. The planning board may employ or contract for and fix
the compensation of legal counsel, other than the township attorney, and
experts and a staff, and pay for their services and for such other expenses
as may be necessary and proper, not exceeding, in all, exclusive of gifts, the
amount appropriated by the township committee for its use.
§ 17-187. SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN COMMITTEE. [Ord. #437;
Ord. #572-80]
The chairman of the planning board may appoint a subdivision and site
plan committee consisting of at least three members of the planning board.
This committee shall have the power to approve minor subdivisions by
unanimous vote of those voting. It shall generally review and report to the
board on major subdivisions and site plans.
h. Assembling of data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process;
i. Performing such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of the township committee for the aid and
assistance of the township committee or other agencies or officers;
j. Reporting to the township committee on any proposed development
regulations which are referred to it.
k. Reviewing any matters which are referred to it pursuant to ordinance
adopted by the township committee which provide by the reference to
the planning board of any matter or class of matters before final action
thereon by a municipal body or municipal officer having final authority
thereon except for any matter under the jurisdiction of the board of
adjustment. Whenever the planning board shall have made a
recommendation regarding a matter authorized by this act to another
municipal body, such recommendation may be rejected only by a
majority of the full authorized membership of such other body.
l. At the request of the developer, the planning board shall grant one
informal review of a concept plan for a development for which the
developer intends to prepare and submit an application for
development. The developer shall not be required to submit any fees for
such an informal review. The developer shall not be bound by any
concept plan for which review is requested and the planning board shall
not be bound by any such review.
§ 17-185 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-188
AO:639
§ 17-188. RULES AND REGULATIONS. [Ord. #437; Ord. #572-80]
The planning board shall adopt, and may amend, reasonable rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with any applicable ordinance or other legal
requirement, for the administration of its functions, powers and duties. It
shall furnish a copy thereof to any person upon request and may charge
a reasonable fee for such copy. Copies of all such rules and regulations
and amendments thereto shall be maintained in the office of the township
administrator.
§ 17-189. MEETINGS OF THE PLANNING BOARD. [Ord. #437; Ord.
#572-80; Ord. #662-84, § 1]
§ 17-190. CONFLICT OF INTEREST. [Ord. #437; Ord. #572-80]
No member of the planning board shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
a. Regular Meetings. The planning board shall meet regularly at least
once a month, at the time and place specified in its rules. Meetings shall
be held as scheduled unless cancelled because there are no
applications for development to process.
b. Special Meetings. A special meeting may be called by the chairman or
on the request of any two members of the board at any time provided at
least 48 hours' notice thereon is given to the members of the board and
to the public as required by law.
c. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present. A quorum shall be the majority of the full authorized
membership of the board. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of
a quorum except as otherwise specified by law. Failure of a motion to
receive the number of votes required to approve an application for
development pursuant to the exceptional vote requirements of sections
17-5 or 17-53d shall be deemed an action denying the application. All
meetings shall be open to the public, except when a meeting is closed as
provided by law.
d. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the board
and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the board,
the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall
thereafter be made available for public inspection during normal
business hours at the office of the township administrator. Any
interested party shall have the right to compel production of the
minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceedings concerning the
subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party may be charged a
reasonable fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use.
§ 17-188 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-191
AO:640
§ 17-191. PAYMENT OF TAXES. [Ord. #616-82]
Every application or appeal submitted to the planning board shall be
accompanied by proof that no taxes are due or delinquent on the property
which is the subject of such application in order that formal action can be
taken with regard to the application or appeal.
§ 17-192. APPLICATION REVIEW COMMITTEE. [Ord. #674-85, § 1]
The chairman may appoint an application review committee which shall be
advisory in nature and comprised of two members of the planning board and
two alternates who shall serve in their absence, planning board attorney
and engineer, a representative of the township health department, the
administrative officer, and a member of the board of adjustment, when said
board refers an application to the committee for review. The purpose of the
committee shall be to review all applications for development including but
not limited to minor and major subdivisions and site plans to determine the
completeness of each application and to perform such other duties which
may be conferred on this committee by the board.
§ 17-193. through § 17-199. (RESERVED)
§ 17-191 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-193
AO:641

ARTICLE XII
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 17-200. ESTABLISHED. [Ord. #437; Ord. #572-80]
There shall be a board of adjustment (sometimes also referred to as the
zoning board) to be known as "The Hopewell Township Board of
Adjustment."
§ 17-201. APPOINTMENT. [Ord. #437; Ord. #554-80; Ord. #572-80]
There shall be seven regular members and two alternate members who shall
not hold any elective office or position under the township, except that one
member may also be a member of the planning board.
§ 17-202. TERM. [Ord. #437; Ord. #554-80; Ord. #572-80]
Each regular member shall serve for a term of four years. The initial terms
of the members first appointed after August 1, 1976, shall be so determined
that to the greatest practicable extent, the expiration of the terms of all
regular members shall be distributed evenly over the first four years after
their appointment, provided the initial term of no member shall exceed four
years.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" and shall be appointed for a period
of two years except that the expiration of such terms shall be distributed
evenly over the first two years after their appointment.
§ 17-203. POWERS AND FUNCTIONS. [Ord. #437; Ord. #554-80;
Ord. #572-80]
The board of adjustment shall have the power to grant variances and other
relief as provided in Chapter 17 and as otherwise provided by law.
Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member.
A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead
of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
§ 17-204. ORGANIZATION AND PERSONNEL. [Ord. #437; Ord.
#572-80]
The board of adjustment shall annually elect a chairman and a vicechairman
from its members and select a secretary and an assistant
secretary who may or may not be a member of the board of adjustment or
a municipal employee. Within the limits of appropriations made available
to it the board of adjustment may employ or contract for, and fix the
compensation of an attorney, other than the township attorney, and experts
and other staff and services as it shall deem necessary.
§ 17-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-205
AO:643
§ 17-205. RULES AND REGULATIONS. [Ord. #437; Ord. #572-80]
The board of adjustment shall adopt, and may amend, reasonable rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with any applicable ordinance or other legal
requirement, for the administration of its functions, powers and duties. It
shall furnish a copy thereof to any person upon request and may charge
a reasonable fee for such copy. Copies of all such rules and regulations
and amendments thereto shall be maintained in the office of township
administrator.
§ 17-206. MEETINGS. [Ord. #437; Ord. #572-80; Ord. #662-84, § 1]
The board of adjustment shall by its rules fix the time and place for holding
its regular meetings for business authorized to be conducted by the board.
Regular meetings shall be scheduled not less than once a month and shall
be held as scheduled unless cancelled for lack of applications for
development to process. Special meetings may be called by the chairman,
or on the request of any two members of the board provided that notice
is given to its members and the public in accordance with applicable
regulations. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum
being present. A quorum shall be the majority of the full authorized
membership of the board. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of a
quorum except as otherwise specified by law. Failure of a motion to receive
the number of votes required to approve an application for development
pursuant to the exceptional vote requirements of sections 17-5 or 17-53d
shall be an action denying the application.
§ 17-207. MINUTES. [Ord. #437; Ord. #572-80]
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the board, the findings,
if any, made by it and reasons therefore. The minutes shall thereafter be
made available for public inspection during normal business hours at the
office of the township administrator. Any interested party shall have the
right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceedings concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
party may be charged a reasonable fee for reproduction of the minutes for
his use.
§ 17-208. CONFLICT OF INTEREST. [Ord. #437; Ord. #572-80]
No member of the board of adjustment shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest.
§ 17-209. PAYMENT OF TAXES. [Ord. #615-82]
Every application or appeal submitted to the zoning board of adjustment
shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for local
improvements are due or delinquent on the property which is the subject of
§ 17-205 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-209
AO:644
such application in order that formal action can be taken with regard to the
application or appeal.
§ 17-210. through § 17-216. (RESERVED)
§ 17-209 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-210
AO:645

ARTICLE XIII
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
§ 17-217. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION, PROCEDURES.73
§ 17-217.1. Development Application Requirements. [Ord.
#97-1060, § 17-217.1]
Each development project containing lower income housing shall include
in its application, assurances that purchasers and renters of lower income
housing shall be required to qualify by income for the low or moderate
income dwelling unit they intend to occupy and that subsequent purchasers
or renters shall also qualify by income, adjusted for the date of the
subsequent transaction.
§ 17-217.2. Affordability Criteria. [Ord. #97-1060, § 17-217.2]
In order to ensure that both low and moderate income units are affordable
to a range of households within each household size, the maximum average
rent and price of low and moderate income units within each inclusionary
development shall be affordable to households earning 57.5% of median
income and the number of people in the household shall be limited to the
criteria set for the number of bedrooms in each unit as set forth in section
17-92d.
§ 17-217.3. Monitoring Period. [Ord. #97-1060, § 17-217.3]
a. For-Sale Dwelling Unit. Moderate income sales units within each
inclusionary development shall be available for at least three different
prices and low income sales units shall be available for at least two
different prices. The monthly cost of housing shall include mortgage
(principal and interest), property taxes, insurance and homeowners' or
condominium association fees. These costs shall not exceed 28% of the
household's eligible gross monthly income.
b. For-Rent Dwelling Unit. The monthly cost of housing shall include rent
and an allowance for utilities consistent with the utility allowance
approved by HUD for use in New Jersey. These costs shall not exceed
30% of the monthly gross income of the household size.
c. Homeowners' Association Fees. The payment of condominium or
homeowners' association fees and special assessments by low and
moderate income purchasers shall be 50% of the level paid by market
purchasers.
a. The period for controlling the qualifying income of initial purchasers
and renters, and for controlling subsequent sales prices and rent levels
of a unit, shall be 30 years (40 years for nonprofit and limited-profit
73.Editor's Note: Former subsection 17-7.1a-f was renumbered as section 17-217,
subsections 17-217.1-17-217.6. Sources contained herein include Ordinance No. 706-86,
§ 1
§ 17-217 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-217.3
AO:647
§ 17-217.4. Certificates of Eligibility. [Ord. #97-1060, § 17-217.4]
No lower income housing unit shall, during this thirty-year or forty-year
period, as required, be occupied unless a certificate of eligibility is issued
by the AHC. A certificate of eligibility shall not be issued unless (i) the unit
has been inspected and approved for occupancy by the township health
department, and (ii) the unit is covered by a deed or lease that contains
a covenant running to the developer and the township that specifies the
following:
housing developments) from the date of the initial certificate of
occupancy for the unit as upon issuance by the municipal construction
official. For rehabilitated units, the period for controlling sales prices
shall be six years and, for rental units, shall be 10 years.
b. The owner/operator of any developments containing rental units shall
submit an annual report to the affordable housing committee (AHC)
certifying that all lower income units are being rented at monthly costs
consistent with subsection 17-217.2b above. Enforcement and penalties
shall be as set forth in subsection 17-218.9 of the township's municipal
code.
a. That the office of the township administrator shall be notified before the
sale, or change in tenant in the case of renter-occupied units, of each
lower income unit;
b. That each subsequent purchaser or tenant shall certify that the gross
household income is within the then qualifying low or moderate income
limits, as applicable, and the certification shall be submitted to the AHC
in accordance with subsection 17-218.6 below;
c. That the monthly cost of purchasing or renting, as the case may be, the
lower income housing unit shall not exceed the affordability criteria set
forth in subsection 17-217.2 above;
d. The maximum qualifying income of a household shall be as set forth in
the most recent publication titled "Eligible Income by County"
published by NJ COAH or, absent such publication within the last two
years, then the most recent United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development "Family Income Limits." Each household shall
document the "gross household income" to verify the household's
eligibility. The AHC shall certify the "gross household income" to verify
the household's eligibility. The AHC shall certify the "gross household
income" for a period not to exceed 120 days based on the requirements
of N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1.
e. In the case of a for sale unit, that a purchaser shall be entitled to sell the
unit for a maximum resale price as set forth in subsection 17-218.6
below;
f. In the case of a rental unit, units offered for rental shall continue to be
offered as affordable rental units for at least the period required in
§ 17-217.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-217.4
AO:648
§ 17-217.5. Selection Procedures and Priorities. [Ord. #97-1060,
§ 17-217.5]
Selection procedures and priorities for purchase and/or occupancy of low
and moderate income housing units shall be as established in subsection
17-218.6 below and shall be monitored by the AHC.
§ 17-217.6. Affirmative Marketing Plan. [Ord. #97-1060, § 17-217.6]
subsection 17-217.3, above, and thereafter may be sold at prices
affordable to moderate income households subject to the resale price
controls set forth in subsection 17-218.6 below.
g. In the case of a rental unit, that every occupant of a lower income rental
unit shall, on or before April 15, file an annual statement of income and
expense of occupancy for the household for the previous year with the
owner/operator of the rental units, who shall in turn certify to the AHC
that the units are being rented at monthly rents meeting the
affordability criteria set forth in subsection 17-217.2.
Failure of a developer to comply with these requirements shall be cause for
denial of certificates of occupancy for market-level units in the developments
which have not already been issued. In the case of a resale or rerental, failure
to comply with these requirements shall be cause for the denial of a certificate
of eligibility for the unit to be sold or rerented.
a. Applicability. The Township of Hopewell has a twelve-year cumulative
fair share obligation to the year 1999 of 564 units of which 293 is new
construction. This ordinance shall apply to all developments that
contain proposed low and moderate income units that are listed below
and any future developments that may occur:
Brandon Farms (138 Units)
Pennington Pointe (5 units)
Trafalgar (150 units)
b. Purpose. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing
strategy designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and
minority groups, regardless of sex, age and number of children, to
housing units which are being marketed by a developer/sponsor,
municipality and/or designated administrative agency of affordable
housing. The plan shall address the requirements of N.J.A.C.5:93-11. In
addition, the plan prohibits discrimination in the sale, rental, financing
or other services related to housing on the basis of race, color, sex,
religion, handicap, age, familial status/size, or national origin. The
Township of Hopewell is in the housing region consisting of Mercer,
Monmouth and Ocean Counties. The affirmative marketing program is a
continuing program and shall meet the following requirements:
§ 17-217.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-217.6
AO:649
c. Regional Advertising. All newspaper articles, announcements, and
requests for applications for low and moderate income units shall
appear in the following daily and regional newspapers/publications.
Trenton Times
Asbury Park Press
Ocean County Observer
The primary marketing shall take the form of at least one press release
sent to the above publications and a paid display advertisement in each
of the above newspapers. Additional advertising and publicity shall be
on an "as needed" basis.
The advertisement shall include a description of the street address
of the units; directions to the housing units; number of bedrooms
per unit; range of prices/rents; size of units; income information; and
location of applications including business hours and where/how
applications may be obtained.
d. Neighborhood Advertising. All newspaper articles, announcements, and
requests for applications for low and moderate income housing shall
appear in the following neighborhood oriented weekly newspapers,
religious publications, and organizational newsletters within the
region:
Hopewell Valley News
Princeton Packet
Church Newsletters
e. Radio/TV Advertising. The following regional radio and/or cable
television stations shall be used:
Local Cable TV Access Channel
WHWH
WTTM
f. Location of Applications and Information. The following is the location
of the applications brochure(s), sign(s), and/or poster(s) used as part of
the affirmative marketing program including specific employment
centers within the region:
Hopewell Township Municipal Building
Pennington Branch of the Mercer County Library
Sales Offices of Brandon Farms, Pennington Pointe & Trafalgar
Janssen Pharmaceutical
Educational Testing Service
Mobil Oil
§ 17-217.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-217.6
AO:650
g. Community Contacts. The following is a listing of counties that will aid
in the affirmative marketing program with particular emphasis on
contacts that will reach out to groups that are at least likely to apply for
housing within the region:
Mercer County
Monmouth County
Ocean County
h. Data to County Boards of Realtors. Quarterly flyers and applications
shall be sent the Boards of Realtors in Mercer, Monmouth and Ocean
Counties for publication in their journals and for circulation among
their members. Applications shall be mailed to prospective applicants
upon request.
i. Data to Social Agencies. Additionally, quarterly informational circulars
and applications shall be sent to the chief administrative employees of
each of the following agencies in the counties within Mercer,
Monmouth and Ocean Counties.
Welfare or Social Service Board
Rental Assistance Office (local D.C.A. office)
Office on Aging
Housing Agency or Authority
County Library
Area Community Action Agencies
j. Random Selection of Households. The random selection of occupants of
low and moderate income housing will be done by the township's AHC
as set forth in subsection 17-218.6.
k. Administrative Agency. The Affordable Housing Management Service
(hereafter "AHMS") is the agency under contract with Hopewell
Township to administer the affirmative marketing program. AHMS has
the responsibility to income-qualify low and moderate income
households; to place income-eligible households in low and moderate
income units upon initial occupancy; to provide for the initial occupancy
of low and moderate income units with income-qualified households; to
continue to qualify households for reoccupancy of units as they become
vacant during the period of affordability controls; to assist with
advertising and outreach to low and moderate income households; and
to enforce the terms and the deed restrictions and mortgage loan as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1. The Hopewell Township Administrator is the
designated housing officer to act as liaison to AHMS. AHMS shall
provide counseling services to low and moderate income applicants on
subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law. The following service
providers have agreed to perform the above services:
§ 17-217.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-217.6
AO:651
§ 17-217.7. (Reserved)
§ 17-217.8. Homeowner Affordability Assistance Program. [Ord.
#02-1246, § 1; Ord. #07-1420; Ord. #19-1708]
This program has been established in an effort to maintain the affordability
of deed-restricted affordable units in the Township. Homeowners living in
deed restricted affordable units who may be in arrears with their mortgage
and/or association fees may apply for the homeowner affordability
assistance program, funded by developer fees and payable from the
Township housing trust fund for very-low, low- and moderate-income
homeowners.
l. Priority for Households in the Housing Region. Households who live
and work in the Mercer, Monmouth and Ocean Counties housing region
may be given preference for sales and rental units constructed within
that housing region. Applicants living outside the housing region shall
have an equal opportunity for units after regional applicants have been
initially serviced. The township intends to comply with N.J.A.C.
5:93-11.7.
m. Developer Participation. All developers of low and moderate income
housing units shall be required to assist in the marketing of the
affordable units in their respective developments.
n. Initiation and Continuance of Marketing Plan. The marketing program
shall commence at least 120 days before the issuance of either
temporary or permanent certificates of occupancy. The marketing
program shall continue until all low and moderate income housing units
are initially occupied and for as long as affordable units are deed
restricted and occupancy or reoccupancy of units continues to be
necessary.
o. Monitoring Reports to COAH. AHMS shall comply with the monitoring
and reporting requirements as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.6 and 12.1.
a. Qualification and eligibility for this program:
1. Any very-low, low- or moderate-income households, as defined in
this Chapter, living in a deed restricted affordable ownership
housing unit in the Township, paying as part of their shelter costs
mortgage or homeowners' association fees (collectively defined as
"shelter costs"), who are in arrears are eligible to apply for the
program.
2. On the application provided by the Township for homeowner
affordability assistance, the Township or its agent will determine
whether or not the household is spending more than 30% of its
gross income for shelter costs. This program is not available to
households spending less than 30% of their gross income for
shelter costs.
§ 17-217.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-217.8
AO:652
§ 17-218. AFFORDABLE HOUSING COMMITTEE (AHC).74
3. If the shelter costs, by paying off the arrearages or repairs, would
allow the household to spend between 30% and 40% of gross
income on shelter costs, then the household may request
affordability assistance in the form of a deferred loan to assist the
homeowner in becoming current with their shelter expenses.
4. The eligible household shall submit to the office of the municipal
housing liaison income and expense information concerning the
household's shelter costs in a form provided by the Township. The
Township will evaluate the request for the above-referenced loan
for a maximum amount not to exceed $5,000.
5. After review and approval by the Township, and subject to the
availability of funding through the Township's affordable housing
program for this form of affordability assistance, the Township may
approve a loan to assist with the payment of the shelter costs.
Approval shall only be granted to applicants who demonstrate to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Township that there is a very high
likelihood that with the receipt of the affordability assistance
provided herein that the applicant will be able to stay current with
their shelter costs in the future. If denied, a written determination
of why the funding assistance has been denied will be provided by
the Township or its agent. This determination shall be final and
non-appealable.
b. Loans for all properties participating in the homeowner affordability
assistance program shall be secured through a mortgage and mortgage
note executed by the property owner in favor of the Township of
Hopewell. The Township shall pay the required recording fees.
c. The homeowner affordability assistance program is a deferred payment
loan, with the loan amount (and no interest) to be repaid either upon
the sale of the unit (if less than five years) or it is forgiven upon the
expiration of five years from the date of the execution of the mortgage,
whichever comes first. Recapture of assistance funds provided herein
will occur if the property is sold within five years of the date of the loan.
If the affordable unit is sold during the five-year recapture period, 20%
of the funds are forgiven for each full year after the loan closing. In
such cases, the Township shall receive a pro rata portion of the
assistance amount from the Borrower, which amount shall be deposited
in the Township's housing trust fund.
d. Further, approval of any loan shall also be subject to certification by the
Chief Financial Officer that funds are available for this form of
affordability assistance.
e. At no time will any individuals/households be allowed to receive funding
approval under any of the local affordability assistance programs more
than once in a five-year time frame.
§ 17-217.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-218.1
AO:653
§ 17-218.1. Preamble. [Ord. #97-1060, § 17-218.1]
In conjunction with its efforts to meet its lower income housing obligations,
the township hereby creates the Affordable Housing Committee of Hopewell
Township (AHC) to monitor the long-term compliance of the township's
lower income housing obligation within housing developments containing
low/moderate income housing. The committee's responsibilities will be to:
establish tenanting/sale policies for use by developers/owners in sale,
rental, resale and rerental of low/moderate income units; establish and
enact additional rules and procedures in accordance with the provisions of
this section to assure that low and moderate income units constructed in
Hopewell Township remain available to such families for a minimum thirtyor
forty-year period, as required.
§ 17-218.2. Membership; Terms of Office. [Ord. #97-1060,
§ 17-218.2; Ord. #04-1308]
a. The AHC shall consist of seven members, all of whom shall be appointed
by the township committee and one of whom shall be a member of the
township committee. One of the remaining six members shall be an
occupant of a low/moderate income unit and shall be appointed within
one year of issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such units. The
township administrator and treasurer shall be ex-officio members of the
AHC.
b. The township committee may appoint alternate members.
c. Attendance by four members or alternates shall constitute a quorum.
Passage of any motion requires an affirmative vote by a majority of
members present.
d. The initial term of office of the AHC shall be two members for one year
and two members for two years to be designated when making the
appointment. The terms of office shall thereafter be two years with
reappointment at the pleasure of the township committee. The term of
the township committee member shall be one year. The appointments
shall be made in such a manner so that the terms of approximately onehalf
of the members shall expire each year.
e. The AHC shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from among its
members, neither of whom shall be the township committee member.
Their terms of office shall be one year and they shall be eligible for
reelection. The committee may also elect a secretary, who need not be a
member of the committee, and it may create and fill such other offices
as it shall determine.
f. The AHC shall submit annual budget requests and monthly financial
statements to the township. The township committee may employ or
assign at the request of the AHC such personnel or experts and other
74.Editor's Note: Former subsection 17-7.2a-i was renumbered as section 17-218, subsections
17-218.1-17-218.9. Sources contained herein include Ordinance Nos. 706-86, § 1.
§ 17-218.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-218.2
AO:654
§ 17-218.3. Vacancies, Removal for Cause. [Ord. #97-1060,
§ 17-218.3]
The township committee may remove any member of the AHC for cause on
written charges served upon the member and after a hearing thereon, at
which time the member shall be entitled to be heard either in person or by
counsel. A vacancy in the committee occurring otherwise than by expiration
of the term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment.
§ 17-218.4. Powers. [Ord. #97-1060, § 17-218.4]
staff the AHC deems necessary, provided such obligations do not exceed
the township budgetary allocation available to the AHC for such use.
a. The AHC is hereby granted and shall have and exercise, in addition to
other powers herein granted, all the powers necessary and appropriate
to carry out and execute the purposes of this section, including but not
limited to the following:
1. To prepare and forward to the Hopewell Township Committee such
rules and regulations as it deems necessary or appropriate to
implement the purposes of this section. Such rules and procedures
shall not become effective until approval by the township
committee. However, if the township committee fails to act within
60 days, the rules shall become effective.
2. To supply information to developers and families of low or
moderate income to help them comply with the provisions of this
section.
3. To hold hearings upon due notice and adjudicate applications of
individuals or households who believe themselves to be households
of low or moderate income.
4. To research and review requests from the New Jersey Mortgage
Finance Agency and any other Federal, State, county or local
agencies regarding funding or applications for funding.
5. To make recommendations to the township committee for a
spending plan indicating existing funds and estimated future
revenues, and setting forth proposed expenditures for how the
township's Lower Income Housing Fund should be spent and to
propose priorities for such expenditures.
6. To develop and monitor programs for rehabilitation of existing
substandard units, including criteria for identifying substandard
structures occupied by lower income households and
recommendations for rehabilitation loans and/or grants to
qualifying households.
§ 17-218.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-218.4
AO:655
§ 17-218.5. Definitions. [Ord. #97-1060, § 17-218.5]
As used in this section:
AHC — Shall mean the affordable housing committee created by Ordinance
No. 706-86.
GROSS HOUSEHOLD INCOME — Shall mean the total household income
from all sources of all members of the household age 18 and older with
verification as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1.
LOW AND MODERATE INCOME HOUSING — Shall mean dwelling units
limited to occupancy by low and moderate income households.
§ 17-218.6. Selection Procedures, Priorities, Income Eligibility,
Price Standards, Restrictions, Reports. [Ord. #93-948; Ord.
#97-1060, § 17-218.6]
The following procedures and priorities for dwelling unit initial sales,
resales, initial rentals and rerentals shall be monitored by the AHC:
b. In matters involving a hearing, the AHC shall give 10 days' written
notice to all parties involved, and shall give all interested persons an
opportunity to be heard.
a. Selection Procedures. The AHC shall establish a listing of qualified low
and moderate income households and persons based on the categories
below; the first such listing shall be compiled within 45 days of
notification by a developer that low and/or moderate income units will
be available for occupancy approximately six months thereafter. This
listing, along with any such similar listing conforming to the selection
categories set forth below as may be compiled by a developer and
submitted to the AHC, shall form the basis of an initial pool or
prospective purchasers or renters of the developer's initial sale/rental
program.
Thereafter, at least quarterly, the AHC shall provide an updated list,
recertifying categories of those households on the list which are likely
to be reached in the coming year and who have not obtained a housing
unit, and making appropriate adjustments for households whose status
may have changed since the last certification. Those applicants wishing
resale units only shall be so indicated. Prior to selling any unit, the
owner shall contact the AHC for determination as to income eligibility
of the prospective buyer and compliance with AHC rules and
regulations.
b. Income Eligibility. Certification of the gross household income of listed
households shall be accomplished by the developer/owner in the case of
initial sales rentals/rerentals and by the AHC in the case of resales as
follows:
1. Initial Sale/Rental and Subsequent Rerentals. The developer/owner
shall certify to the AHC that each prospective purchaser/renter
§ 17-218.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-218.6
AO:656
meets the selection categories and is income qualified. A
developer/owner shall submit a certification folder on each
applicant with appropriate documentation as to income and
eligibility according to the selection categories. Documentation of
household income shall comply with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1(b)2.
2. Resales. The AHC shall establish household income eligibility
based on information to be submitted by a prospective purchaser
corresponding to the documentation required under paragraph b1
above.
A letter certifying income eligibility shall be issued for a period of 120 days.
Said letter, or a notice of ineligibility, shall be issued by the AHC within 30
days of the receipt of a complete application. A finding of ineligibility may
cause the township to seek a rescission of the sale/rental as provided for in
paragraph c3 below.
c. Sale and Resale, Rental and Rerental Price Standards.
1. Units initially sold or rented as low or moderate income shall
remain so at resale or rerental. A developer of sale or rental units
shall provide the AHC with a listing, by unit type and size, of the
maximum selling price of the low and/or moderate income units. If
a rental unit is involved, a maximum rental price by unit type and
size shall be provided. These sale, resale, rental or rerental levels
shall not exceed affordability criteria established in subsection
17-217.2 above. In addition, an owner shall consult the AHC for the
names of eligible buyers who might be listed in one of the priority
categories prior to entering into a contract to sell a unit.
2. Maximum resale price shall equal the sum of the following:
(a) Price of unit paid by owner increased by 75% of the increase in
the CPI-housing component only, for the Philadelphia region,
which shall be measured from the first day of July preceding
the year of purchase to the first day of July preceding the year
of sale;
(b) Cost of reasonable permanent improvements for which a prior
approval from the committee has been issued. Declaration
value shall be based on actual documentation of labor and
materials at the time of installation or a reasonable estimate by
the owner of the value of the improvements, subject to the
verification of building permit data regarding the construction
value of the improvements;
(c) Cost of sale which includes realty transfer fee, attorneys' fees,
and brokers' fees. The committee shall from time to time
establish fee charge guidelines as to allowable charges so as
not to jeopardize the affordability of the sale unit to a low or
moderate income household.
§ 17-218.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-218.6
AO:657
3. Initial sale, resale, rental and rerental price restrictions including
township remedies for noncompliance shall be provided for in deed
restrictions subject to the township's attorney review and will not
be regulated by the AHC. However, any conveyance to an ineligible
person or sale/rental price established in excess of the restrictions
at the time of occupancy is subject to rescission by the township.
Any township costs and legal fees in obtaining rescission are to be
borne by the seller or unit owner in the case of rental units.
4. In the event initial sale, resale, rental or rerental cannot be
concluded after diligent marketing efforts within an established
time period, then the variation of eligible household incomes as
provided for in paragraph e below shall be operable subject to the
requirements stipulated therein.
5. All rental units sold after the expiration of the required period of
affordability may continue to be rented, but at market-level rates,
or may be sold as moderate income, owner-occupied units with an
additional twenty-year period of affordability consistent with all the
requirements of this chapter.
d. Variation of Eligible Household Income Standards.
1. In the event a developer of lower income units, after documented
diligent marketing efforts, cannot enter into a contract of sale or
rental agreement of initially constructed units within a sixty-day
period after receipt of a certificate of occupancy for the lower
income unit, the AHC shall permit the unit to be sold to households
whose income exceeds the eligibility range as follows: Low income
units may be sold or rented to households of moderate income;
moderate income units may be sold or rented to households with
incomes up to but not exceeding 120% of the median income as
defined herein. Any units permitted to be sold to households whose
income exceeds the eligibility ranges shall remain subject to
continued maximum resale price or rerental restrictions as set
forth elsewhere in this section.
2. If within 90 days after notification to the AHC that a rental unit has
become vacant, and owner/operator of the rental unit is unable to
enter into a lease agreement with a qualified tenant from a list of
potential tenants provided by the AHC or through its own efforts,
then the AHC shall permit the rerental of the unit as outlined in
paragraph e1 above, subject to continued rental restrictions as set
forth elsewhere in this section.
3. If within 90 days of notification to the AHC of an intent to sell, an
owner of a lower income unit has not become contractually
obligated to sell the unit to a qualified buyer from a list of potential
buyers provided to it by the AHC or through the owners' broker or
through the owners' efforts, then the affordable housing committee
shall permit the resale of the unit as outlined in paragraph e1
§ 17-218.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-218.6
AO:658
§ 17-218.7. Foreclosure Proceedings. [Ord. #97-1060, § 17-218.7]
The AHC shall promptly establish written regulations dealing with
foreclosure proceedings, extent of price controls continuation and
distribution of funds from a foreclosure sale, subject to approval by the
township committee.
§ 17-218.8. Program Fee Requirements. [Ord. #97-1060,
§ 17-218.8]
All developers of projects containing low and moderate income dwelling
units shall be required to pay an initial registration fee at the time of
issuance of a certificate of eligibility, in accordance with Chapter 10 of the
Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Hopewell.
Upon resale or rerental of such units, an additional fee shall be paid at the
time of issuance of certificate of eligibility, in accordance with Chapter 10
of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Hopewell:
Such fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 10 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Hopewell and those collected shall be
maintained in an escrow account by the township and expended only in the
exercise of the AHC's monitoring responsibilities and duties outlined herein.
§ 17-218.9. Enforcement; Applicability. [Ord. #706-86, § 1; Ord.
#93-948; Ord. #97-1060, § 17-218.9]
above, subject to continued price restrictions as set forth
elsewhere in this section.
e. Restriction on Use. Low and moderate income units shall be sold or
rented only to income-eligible low and moderate income households. All
low and moderate income units shall comply with the Federal housing
authority maximum occupancy standards for the number of people per
dwelling unit size. Such units shall be the primary residence of the
occupant(s). Purchasers or tenants may lease or sublet such units only
to income-qualified households, at rent levels not exceeding those
established for the unit, and only after approval by the AHC.
f. Program Reports. Developers/owners of low and moderate income units
initially marketed for sale or rental, as well as developers/owners of
rerental units, shall submit quarterly reports to the AHC identifying the
units sold, rented or rerented. These reports shall begin at the end of
the first calendar quarters following initial occupancy, continuing to
final completion of the project in the case of sale projects, or for the
duration of income controls in the case of rental projects. These reports
shall list by unit type and address the number of units sold or rented.
a. Developers seeking final approval for projects containing low and
moderate income dwelling units shall provide an affordable housing
plan for their project that provides necessary declaration of covenants
§ 17-218.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-218.9
AO:659
§ 17-219. ACCESSORY APARTMENTS.
§ 17-219.1. Purpose. [Ord. #04-1307, § 1]
An accessory apartment as defined hereinbelow is being authorized for the
purpose of providing additional opportunities for low and moderate income
housing within the Township of Hopewell.
§ 17-219.2. Definition. [Ord. #04-1307, § 1]
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — Is a self-contained, residential unit with a
kitchen, sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters and a private entrance which
is created to be occupied by a low- or moderate-income household. The
accessory apartment may be created within an existing dwelling unit, may
be created within an existing structure on a lot or be in addition to an
existing home or accessory building.
§ 17-219.3. Additional Requirements. [Ord. #04-1307, § 1]
The following additional conditions shall apply to accessory apartments:
and restrictions, which shall be reviewed by the township attorney,
including provisions to assure the initial sale or rental as well as
subsequent resales and rerentals of dwelling units in accordance with
the requirements of this section and section 17-92 of the township's
land use and development ordinance. The affordable housing plan shall
be subject to the approval of the planning board.
b. Developers seeking final approval shall also provide a written
affirmative marketing plan indicating how initial sale, rental and
rerental units will be marketed within the procedures and priorities
established for such units herein in accordance with subsection
17-217.6 of the township's land use and development ordinance.
c. In the event an applicant or developer fails to construct and sell or rent
his required low and moderate income housing units in accordance with
the provision of his approved affordable housing plan, the final plat
approval, and this section, he shall be subject to a revocation of his
development permit and cessation of issuances of certificates of
occupancy until the development is brought into compliance.
Revocation of such permits shall be preceded by written notice
establishing a thirty-day time period within which such noncompliance
may be corrected.
a. Accessory apartments, as defined hereinabove, shall be permitted
within all zoning districts within the Township of Hopewell except the
R-5 and R-6 districts and provided further that the lot upon which the
accessory apartment shall be created meets all zoning requirements for
said zone unless a variance is obtained from the appropriate Township
Land Use Board; and
§ 17-218.9 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-219.3
AO:660
b. Accessory apartments shall comply with all applicable statutes and
regulations of the State of New Jersey in addition to all local building
and health codes; and
c. Accessory apartments shall be rented only to a household which is
either a low or moderate income household at the time of the initial
occupancy of the unit as defined by the Hopewell Township Affordable
Housing Program; and
d. The accessory apartment shall, for a period of at least 10 years from the
date of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for said apartment, be
rented only to low- or moderate-income households; and
e. Rents of accessory apartments shall be affordable to low- or moderateincome
households as per the substantive regulations of the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) and shall include a utility
allowance; and
f. No more than 10 accessory apartments shall be utilized to address the
Hopewell Township Fair Share Obligation unless this 10 unit cap is
changed or waived by COAH; and
g. There shall be a recorded deed or dedication of covenants and
restrictions applied to the property upon which the accessory
apartment is located running with the land and limiting its subsequent
rental or sale within the requirements of paragraphs c and d above; and
h. Each accessory apartment shall have a gross floor area of at least 350
square feet, but shall not exceed more than three bedrooms of living
space, or 1,200 square feet, or 25% of the floor area of the dwelling,
whichever is greater, and shall have cooking facilities, a kitchen sink
and a complete sanitary facility for the exclusive use of the occupants;
and
i. The accessory apartment shall have a separate door with direct access
to the outdoors; and
j. The accessory apartment shall have a potable water supply and a
sanitary disposal system for the accessory apartment which shall be
reviewed and approved by the township health officer; and
k. The accessory apartment shall be affirmatively marketed to the housing
region wherein the Township of Hopewell is located; and
l. In the case of an accessory apartment created illegally or without
proper permits which the property owner desires to legitimize as an
accessory apartment under this section, all of the requirements of this
section in addition to meeting COAH criteria shall apply and the subsidy
provided for hereinbelow may be made available by the township to
said owner; and
m. At least one off-street parking space per bedroom or a maximum of two
spaces shall be provided for each apartment.
§ 17-219.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-219.4
AO:661
§ 17-219.4. Administration. [Ord. #04-1307, § 1]
The Township of Hopewell shall designate an administrative entity to
administer the accessory apartment program. Said administration shall
include advertising, income qualification of perspective renters, setting
rents and annual rental increases, maintaining a waiting list, distributing
the subsidy provided for hereinbelow, securing certificates of occupancy,
qualifying properties, handling application forms, filing deed restrictions
and monitoring reports and affirmatively marketing the accessory
apartment program. The administrative agency so designated to administer
this accessory apartment program shall only deny an application for an
accessory apartment if the project is not in conformance with the COAH
substantive requirements, the municipal zoning ordinance or this section.
All denials shall be in writing with the reasons clearly set forth. In
accordance with the COAH requirements, the Township of Hopewell shall
provide at least $10,000 to subsidize the physical creation of an accessory
apartment conforming to the requirements of this section and the COAH
requirements. Prior to the grant of such subsidy, the property owner shall
enter into a written agreement with the township ensuring that (i) the
subsidy shall be used to create the accessory apartment and (ii) the
apartment shall meet the requirements of this section and COAH
regulations.
§ 17-219.5. Application Requirements. [Ord. #04-1307, § 1]
All applicants wishing to create accessory apartments shall submit to the
Township of Hopewell: (a) a sketch of the floor plans showing the locations,
size, relationship of both the accessory apartment and the primary dwelling
within the building or in another structure; and (b) rough elevations
showing the modification of any exterior building facade to which changes
are proposed and (c) a site development sketch showing the location of the
existing dwelling and other existing buildings; all property lines; proposed
addition, if any, along with the minimum building setback lines; the required
parking spaces for both dwelling units and any man-made conditions which
might affect construction.
§ 17-219.6. Fee Waivers. [Ord. #04-1307, § 1]
In order to encourage the creation of accessory apartments, the Township
of Hopewell shall waive all building permit and construction fees, except
the State mandated training fees for an accessory apartment application.
§ 17-220. MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON.
§ 17-220.1. Purpose. [Ord. #06-1375]
The purpose of this section is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the Township of Hopewell's responsibility to
assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing
Act of 1985.
§ 17-219.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-220.2
AO:662
§ 17-220.2. Definitions. [Ord. #06-1375]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — Shall mean the entity responsible for
administering the affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable
housing program for the Township of Hopewell to ensure that the restricted
units under administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented,
as applicable, only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — Shall mean the employee charged by
the governing body with the responsibility for oversight and administration
of the affordable housing program for the Township of Hopewell.
§ 17-220.3. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison Position
and Compensation; Powers and Duties. [Ord. #06-1375]
a. Establishment of Position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of municipal housing liaison for the Township of
Hopewell.
b. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the municipal housing liaison shall be appointed by the township
committee and may be a full or part-time municipal employee.
c. The municipal housing liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Township of
Hopewell, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out:
1. Serving as Hopewell Township's primary point of contact for
inquiries from the State, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
2. Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Township of
Hopewell's Fair Share Plan;
3. Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reporting as required
by COAH;
4. Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
5. Attending continuing education programs as may be required by
COAH;
6. If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in Hopewell Township as described in
paragraph f below.
d. Subject to approval by COAH, the Township of Hopewell may contract
with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency
charged by the governing body, which entity shall have the
§ 17-220.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-220.3
AO:663
responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of the
Township of Hopewell. If Hopewell Township contracts with another
entity to administer all or any part of the affordable housing program,
including the affordability controls and affirmative marketing plan, the
municipal housing liaison shall supervise the contracting administrative
agent.
e. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the township committee
at the time of the appointment of the municipal housing liaison.
f. Administrative Powers and Duties Assigned to the Municipal Housing
Liaison.
1. Affirmative Marketing.
(a) Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
affirmative marketing plan of the Township of Hopewell and
the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15.
2. Household Certification.
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or ineligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the Township of Hopewell when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
3. Affordability Controls.
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
§ 17-220.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-220.3
AO:664
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county
clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
4. Resale and Rental.
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or re-rental.
5. Communicating with Unit Owners.
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
6. Enforcement.
(a) Ensure that all restricted units are identified as affordable
within the tax assessor's office and any municipal utility
authority (MUA) and upon notification to the administrative
agent of change in billing address, payment delinquency of two
consecutive billing cycles, transfer of title, or institution of a
writ of foreclosure on all affordable units, notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
§ 17-220.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-220.3
AO:665
§ 17-221. ENFORCEMENT.
§ 17-221.1. Purpose. [Ord. #07-1409]
The purpose of this section of the Code is to facilitate enforcement of
the provisions of the Hopewell Township Affordable Housing Program as
well as to enforce the requirement of the New Jersey Fair Housing Act,
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
("COAH") Substantive and Procedural Rules as they appeal at N.J.A.C.
5:94-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:95-1 et seq. and the New Jersey Housing
Mortgage Finance Agency Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
appearing at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
§ 17-221.2. Noncompliance a Violation. [Ord. #07-1409]
Any person or entity who violates any terms, conditions or requirements
of the Hopewell Township Affordable Housing Program as set forth in
this Article, as amended from time to time; violates any of the terms,
conditions or requirements of the New Jersey Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq., as may be amended from time to time; violates any of
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contract in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the administrative
agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(f) Establishing a rent-to-equity program;
(g) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
(h) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
7. The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 17-220.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-221.2
AO:666
the terms, conditions or requirements of the Substantive and Procedural
Rules of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing ("COAH") which
appear at N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:95-1 et seq., as amended
from time to time or violates the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls,
terms, conditions or requirements as issued by the New Jersey Housing
and Mortgage Finance Agency appearing at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as
amended from time to time shall be subject to punishment in accordance
with the general penalty provisions of this Code as they appear in Section
3-1 et seq.
§ 17-222. through § 17-225. (RESERVED)
§ 17-221.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-222
AO:667

ARTICLE XIV
SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS AND CONSTRUCTION DETAILS
§ 17-226. INTENT. [Ord. #782-88, § 4]
These technical standards are intended to serve as township standards
for the design, construction and operation of public improvements, when
requirements for the same are not otherwise set forth by the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs pursuant to the Uniform Construction
Code.
§ 17-227. MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. #782-88, § 4]
These standards are interpreted to be minimum requirements and are not
intended to substitute for a detailed design investigation on the part of
any applicant or person being regulated hereunder, or under any related
ordinance of the township.
§ 17-228. APPLICABLE FEDERAL, STATE OR COUNTY
REGULATIONS. [Ord. #782-88, § 4]
Whenever Federal, State or county regulations or standards are applicable,
or may be applicable in lieu of the standards contained in this section, the
more stringent design or construction procedure shall be deemed to apply.
§ 17-229. ADOPTION OF STANDARDS AND DETAILS. [Ord.
#782-88, § 4]
Site improvement standards and construction details as prepared by the
township engineer are hereby adopted by reference, and are on file and
available for inspection in the planning board and township clerk's office.
Copies of these documents may be purchased at either the planning board
or township clerk's office in the same manner as other public documents.
Future revisions to said standards and details shall be by resolution of the
township committee.
§ 17-230. DRAINAGE SHALL BE CONCLUSIVE AS TO ANY
QUESTIONS. [Ord. #782-88, § 4]
The standards and details shall be conclusive as to any question regarding
design standards arising under this chapter.
§ 17-231. MANNER OF CONSTRUCTION. [Ord. #782-88, § 4]
All construction of improvements required as a condition of subdivision or
site plan approval shall be carried out in a workmanlike manner, subject to
the approval of the township engineer.
§ 17-226 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-232
AO:669
§ 17-232. NONCOMPLIANCE A VIOLATION. [Ord. #782-88, § 4]
If the township engineer shall find that construction is not being carried
out in conformance with this chapter, he shall cause the person directing
construction on site to be served personally with written notice stating that
unless the conditions specified in the notice are corrected within 10 working
days all construction on the site shall be terminated until the conditions
specified are corrected. A copy of the notice shall be sent by certified mail
to the address of the person shown in the township records to have received
the site plan or subdivision approval under which the construction is being
carried out.
Failure to comply with such notice within 10 working days of such
extensions thereof as the township engineer may grant shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter.
§ 17-233. through § 17-240. (RESERVED)
§ 17-232 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-233
AO:670
ARTICLE XV
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
§ 17-241. INTENDED PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES. [Ord.
#00-1142, § 1]
The intention of this Article is to effectuate and accomplish the protection,
enhancement and perpetuation of historic buildings, structures, sites,
objects, improvements and districts within the Township of Hopewell, to
implement the historic preservation element of the township's master plan,
and to advance the following public purposes:
§ 17-242. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #00-1142, § 2]
ADDITION — Shall mean an extension or increase in the size, floor area or
height of any building, structure, site, object or improvement.
ALTERATION — Shall mean any change in the exterior features of any
building, structure, site, object or improvement.
a. To safeguard the heritage of Hopewell Township by preserving the
resources within the township which reflect elements of its historical
significance;
b. To identify, designate, and regulate historic landmarks and historic
districts in order to preserve their historical significance;
c. To encourage the continued use of historic landmarks and historic
districts and to facilitate their appropriate use or reuse;
d. To maintain and develop an appropriate and harmonious setting for
historic landmarks and historic districts within the Township of
Hopewell;
e. To foster civic pride in the history and architecture of Hopewell
Township;
f. To promote appreciation of historic landmarks and historic districts for
the education, pleasure and welfare of the local population;
g. To encourage beautification and private reinvestment in historic
landmarks and historic districts, and surrounding properties;
h. To manage change of historic landmarks and historic districts by
encouraging sensitive alteration and/or new construction;
i. To discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources;
j. To recognize the importance of historic landmarks and historic districts
by urging property owners and tenants to maintain their properties in
keeping with the requirements and standards of this article;
k. To encourage the proper maintenance and preservation of historic
settings and landscapes.
§ 17-241 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-242
AO:671
APPLICATION — Shall mean a request to the commission made pursuant to
this article for the purposes of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness or
other action by the commission hereunder specified.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean an application to the
planning board or the zoning board of adjustment of the Township of
Hopewell for approval of a major or minor subdivision plat or site plan,
planned development, conditional use or zoning variance, or an application
for the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any
mining excavation or landfill, or for any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or of any parcel of land, for which permission
may be required pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
BUILDING — Shall mean any man-made structure created principally to
shelter any form of human activity as well as its functionally related
appurtenances such as a house and a barn.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — Shall mean that document issued
by the commission which is required before any work may be commenced
on any historic landmark or any building, structure, site, object or
improvement located within an historic district.
COMMISSION — Shall mean the historic preservation commission
established pursuant to the provisions of this article.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — Shall mean the officer in charge of the
granting of building or construction permits in the township.
DEMOLITION — Shall mean the partial or total razing, dismantling or
destruction, whether entirely or in significant part, of any designated
building, structure, site, object or improvement. Demolition includes the
removal of a building, structure, site, object or improvement from its
location or the removal or destruction of its facade or surface.
DESIGNATED HISTORIC LANDMARK OR HISTORIC DISTRICT — Shall
mean an individual building, structure, site, object, improvement or district
which has been determined to have historical significance pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
HISTORIC — Shall mean having historical, cultural, architectural,
archaeological, economic, social or other significance as defined by the
provisions of this article.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — Shall mean a significant concentration, linkage or
continuity of buildings, structures, sites, objects or improvements united
historically by plan or physical development which qualifies for designation
under section 17-24.4 of this article.
HISTORIC DISTRICT RESOURCES — Shall mean those resources classified
as either key, contributing or noncontributing, which are defined as follows:
KEY — Shall mean any buildings, structures, sites, objects or
improvements which, due to their significance, would individually
qualify for historic landmark status;
a.
§ 17-242 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-242
AO:672
HISTORIC LANDMARK — Shall mean any building, structure, site, object or
improvement which qualifies for designation under section 17-24.4 of this
article.
HISTORICAL — Shall mean of, relating to, or having the character of
history.
IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean a building or other structure, or any work
constituting a man-made alteration of, or addition to, any building,
structure, site or object.
INTEGRITY — Shall mean the authenticity of a building, structure, site,
object, improvement or district evidenced by the survival of the physical
characteristics that existed during its historic or prehistoric period.
INTERESTED PARTY — Shall mean any person whose right to use, acquire
or enjoy property is affected by any action taken under this article, or whose
rights to use, acquire or enjoy property under this article or under any
other law of this State or of the United States have been denied, violated or
infringed by an action or a failure to act under this article.
INVENTORY — Shall mean a list of historic properties determined to meet
criteria of significance specified herein.
LANDSCAPE — Shall mean the visual character of the land, including
but not limited to architecture, building setbacks and height, fences,
hedgerows, plantings and vistas.
MASTER PLAN — Shall mean the master plan of the Township of Hopewell,
as amended from time to time, compiled pursuant to the Municipal Land
Use Law.
MINOR APPLICATION — Shall mean any application for a certificate of
appropriateness which:
CONTRIBUTING — Shall mean any buildings, structures, sites, objects
or improvements which are integral components either because they
date from a time period which makes them historically significant or
because they represent an architectural type, period or method which
is historically significant; and
b.
NONCONTRIBUTING — Shall mean any buildings, structures, sites,
objects or improvements which do not have significant historical value
because they neither date from a time period nor represent an
architectural type, period or method which is historically significant.
c.
Does not involve demolition, relocation or removal of an historic
landmark or a key or contributing resource in an historic district;
a.
Does not involve an addition to an historic landmark or a property in an
historic district or new construction in an historic district;
b.
Is a request for approval of fences, signs, lighting, paving or
streetscape work which, in the opinion of the chairman of the
c.
§ 17-242 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-242
AO:673
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW — Shall mean the Municipal Land Use Law
of the State of New Jersey, P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq.), as
amended from time to time.
NATIONAL REGISTER CRITERIA — Shall mean the established criteria for
evaluating the eligibility of properties for inclusion in the National Register
of Historic Places, as set forth in 36 C.F.R. 60.4, et seq.
OBJECT — Shall be used as a term to distinguish from buildings and
structures those constructions or features that are primarily artistic in
nature or are relatively small in scale and simply constructed. Although it
may be, by nature or design, movable, an object is associated with a specific
setting or environment.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR — Shall mean the repair of any
deterioration, wear or damage to a structure or any part thereof in order
to return the same as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to the
occurrence of such deterioration, wear, or damage with inkind material and
quality workmanship.
PERMIT — Shall mean any required approval issued by the construction
official pursuant to applicable building or construction codes for work or
improvement(s) to property, or to a building or structure located thereon.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, firms, companies,
corporations, entities or unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents,
employees, servants, factors or any kind of personal representatives of any
thereof in any capacity, acting either for himself or for any other person,
under either personal appointment or pursuant to law. When permitted by
context "person" shall also include the United States, the State of New
Jersey and/or other States, or any political subdivision thereof, and any
foreign country or government.
PRESERVATION — Shall mean the act or process of applying measures
necessary to sustain the existing form, integrity and materials of an historic
landmark. Work, including preliminary measures to protect and stabilize
the property, generally focuses upon the ongoing maintenance and repair of
historic materials and features rather than extensive replacement and new
construction.
PROTECTION — Shall mean the act or process of applying measures
designed to affect the physical condition of a property by defending or
guarding it from deterioration, loss or attack, or to cover or shield the
property from danger or injury.
RECONSTRUCTION — Shall mean the act or process of reproducing, by
means of new construction, the form, features and detailing of a noncommission,
will not substantially affect the characteristics of the
historic landmark or the historic district;
Is a request for a field change for a certificate of appropriateness which
has already been issued and which meets the criteria of paragraph c
above.
d.
§ 17-242 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-242
AO:674
surviving building, structure, site, object, improvement or landscape for the
purpose of replicating its appearance at a specific period of time and in its
historic location when documentary and physical evidence is available.
REHABILITATION — Shall mean the act or process of returning a property
to a state of utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an
efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of
the property which are significant to its historic values.
REPLACEMENT — Shall mean the act or process of replicating any exterior
architectural feature that is used to substitute for an existing deteriorated
or extensively damaged architectural feature.
RESTORATION — Shall mean the act or process of accurately recovering
the form and details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a
particular period of time. It may sometimes mean the removal of later work
or the replacement of missing earlier work.
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARDS — Shall mean the
publication issued by the U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park
Service, entitled: "The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the
Treatment of Historic Properties," 36 C.F.R. 68, issued in 1992 and revised
and supplemented from time to time.
SITE — Shall mean the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or
historic occupation or activity, a building or structure, or a burial ground
or cemetery, whether standing, ruined or vanished, where the location itself
possesses historical, cultural or archaeological value regardless of the value
of any existing structure.
STREETSCAPE — Shall mean the visual character of the street including,
but not limited to, the architecture, building setbacks and height, fences,
storefronts, signs, lighting, parking areas, materials, sidewalks, curbing and
landscaping.
STRUCTURE — Shall be used as a term to distinguish from buildings those
functional constructions made usually for purposes other than creating
human shelter, such as a bridge.
SURVEY — Shall mean the inventory of buildings, structures, sites, objects,
improvements and districts located within the Township of Hopewell which
is conducted by the commission for the ascertainment of their historical
significance pursuant to the provisions of this article.
SURVEY DATA — Shall mean the raw data produced by the survey; that is,
all the information gathered on each property and area investigated.
VIEW OR VISTA — Shall mean the view by the public of a building,
structure, site, object, improvement or landscape from any point on a street,
road or walkway which is used as a public thoroughfare, either vehicular
and/or pedestrian.
§ 17-243. HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
§ 17-242 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-243.1
AO:675
§ 17-243.1. Establishment. [Ord. #00-1142, § 3]
There is hereby established within the Township of Hopewell an historic
preservation commission, whose members shall serve without
compensation.
§ 17-243.2. Responsibilities. [Ord. #00-1142, § 3]
The historic preservation commission shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
a. To identify, record and maintain a survey of all buildings, structures,
sites, objects, improvements and districts of historical significance
within the township.
b. To recommend to the township committee the designation of buildings,
structures, sites, objects or improvements as historic landmarks, and to
recommend the designation of historic districts.
c. To monitor and recommend to the township committee any buildings,
structures, sites, objects, improvements or districts for inclusion in the
New Jersey or National Register of Historic Places.
d. To make recommendations to the planning board on the historic
preservation plan element of the master plan and on the implications
for preservation of historic landmarks and historic districts of any other
master plan elements. The commission may provide information to the
planning board indicating the location and significance of historic
landmarks and historic districts, and identify the standards used to
assess worthiness for historic landmark or historic district designation.
e. To advise the planning board and zoning board of adjustment on
applications for development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-110.
f. To provide written reports pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-111 on the
application of the zoning ordinance provisions concerning historic
preservation to proposed construction.
g. To review and render determinations regarding applications for
Certificates of Appropriateness as set forth in this article.
h. To advise the planning board on the inclusion of historic landmarks and
historic districts in the recommended capital improvement program.
i. To monitor and recommend to the township committee the submission
of any grants related to historic preservation.
j. To carry out such other advisory, educational and informational
functions as will promote historic preservation in the township.
§ 17-243.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-243.3
AO:676
§ 17-243.3. Membership; Appointment. [Ord. #00-1142, § 3]
The commission shall consist of five regular members and two alternate
members, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the township committee. The Mayor shall appoint, and the township
committee shall approve, the full membership within 60 days from the
effective date of this article. At the time of appointment, members shall be
designated by the following classes:
§ 17-243.4. Terms. [Ord. #00-1142, § 3]
a. Class A - A person who is knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history and who may reside outside the
municipality; and,
b. Class B - A person who is knowledgeable in, or who has demonstrated
an interest in, local history and who may reside outside the
municipality; and,
c. Class C - Citizens of the municipality who shall hold no other municipal
office, position or employment except for membership on the planning
board or zoning board of adjustment. Class C members should have at a
minimum a demonstrated interest in history, historic preservation or a
related field.
Of the five regular members, at least one member shall be appointed from each
class. Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of Class C members. At
the time of appointment, alternate members shall be designated as "Alternate
No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2".
a. The terms of the members first appointed under this article shall be so
determined that to the greatest practicable extent the expiration of the
terms shall be distributed, in the case of regular members, evenly over
the first four years after their appointment, and in the case of alternate
members, evenly over the first two years after their appointment;
provided that the initial term of no regular member shall exceed four
years and that the initial term of no alternate member shall exceed two
years. Thereafter, the term of a regular member shall be four years; the
term of an alternate member shall be two years.
b. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the term of any member
common to the historic preservation commission and the planning
board shall be for the term of membership on the planning board; and
the term of any member common to the historic preservation
commission and the zoning board of adjustment shall be for the term of
membership on the zoning board of adjustment.
c. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
within 60 days for the unexpired term only.
§ 17-243.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-243.5
AO:677
§ 17-243.5. Role of Alternates. [Ord. #00-1142, § 3]
The alternate members may participate in all commission discussions
during proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order
that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the
event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote,
Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
§ 17-243.6. Liaison Person. [Ord. #00-1142, § 3]
A member of the township committee of the Township of Hopewell shall
be designated as a liaison between the historic preservation commission
and the township committee. The role of such liaison person shall be
informational only and such person shall possess no voting rights with
regard to any action taken by the commission.
§ 17-243.7. Officers. [Ord. #00-1142, § 3]
Annually, the commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from its
members and select a recording secretary who may or may not be a member
of the commission or a municipal employee.
§ 17-243.8. Budget. [Ord. #00-1142, § 3]
The governing body shall make provision in its budget and appropriate
funds for the expenses of the historic preservation commission. The
commission may employ, contract for and fix the compensation of experts
and other staff and services as it shall deem necessary. The commission
shall obtain its legal counsel from the municipal attorney at the rate of
compensation determined by the governing body, unless the governing body
by appropriation provides for separate legal counsel for the commission.
Expenditures pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed, exclusive of
gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by township committee for the
commission's use.
§ 17-243.9. Finances. [Ord. #00-1142, § 3]
The township committee shall establish by ordinance reasonable fees
necessary to cover the expenses of administration and professional services
to aid the commission in its review of applications and development
reviews. These fees are in addition to any other required under any portion
of this or any other applicable township ordinance.
§ 17-243.10. Rules of Commission. [Ord. #00-1142, § 3]
a. The commission shall adopt written rules for the transaction of its
business and for the consideration of applications for certificates of
appropriateness and for the designation of historic landmarks and
historic districts. Such rules shall not be inconsistent with the
§ 17-243.5 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-243.10
AO:678
§ 17-243.11. Removal. [Ord. #00-1142, § 3]
A member of the commission may, after a public hearing, if requested, be
removed by the governing body for cause.
§ 17-243.12. Meetings; Quorum. [Ord. #00-1142, § 3]
provisions of this article and shall include but not be limited to rules
pertaining to all notices and hearings required herein.
b. In order to make available to the public information useful to the
preservation and protection of historic landmarks and historic districts
and to provide the basis for consistency of policy, the commission
secretary shall maintain complete files and records. The commission's
files shall include but are not limited to data used in the classification of
buildings, structures, sites, objects, improvements and districts,
minutes of commission meetings, applications for certificates of
appropriateness along with collateral data, decisions and appeals
associated therewith and information, materials and references
submitted to the public related to historic preservation. A record of
commission proceedings shall be kept and made available but a formal
verbatim record shall not be required.
c. The commission secretary shall keep minutes and records of all
meetings and proceedings, including voting records, attendance,
resolutions, reports, findings, determinations, decisions and
applications, which shall be public documents. All meetings shall be
noticed and conducted in accordance with the Open Public Meetings
Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6, et seq. Copies of all minutes shall be maintained in
the Municipal Building and shall be delivered to the township clerk.
d. Copies of records shall be made available to municipal bodies, agencies,
and officials for their use. When the planning board or the zoning board
of adjustment refers an application to the historic preservation
commission, then the referring Board shall receive a copy of the
commission's report.
e. The construction, planning and zoning offices shall maintain and
display an up-to-date map showing the boundaries of all areas
designated as historic districts, as well as the locations of all historic
landmarks.
f. No member of the commission shall be permitted to act on any matter
in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest. Unless a member resides or owns property within
200 feet of property which is the subject of an application, mere
ownership or residence in a designated historic district and/or
ownership of a designated historic landmark or an undesignated
property shall not be deemed a personal or financial interest.
§ 17-243.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-243.12
AO:679
§ 17-244. DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC LANDMARKS AND
HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
§ 17-244.1. Survey. [Ord. #00-1142, § 4]
The commission shall maintain a comprehensive survey of the Township
of Hopewell to identify historic landmarks and historic districts that are
worthy of protection and preservation.
§ 17-244.2. Criteria for Designation. [Ord. #00-1142, § 4]
The criteria for evaluating and designating historic landmarks and historic
districts shall be guided by the National Register Criteria. The commission
or any person may recommend designation of historic landmarks or historic
districts that are in accordance with the National Register Criteria or that
possess one or more of the following attributes:
a. The historic preservation commission shall establish and post in the
Municipal Building a regular schedule of meetings, which shall include
a minimum of one meeting per month. Regular meetings shall be held
as scheduled unless canceled for lack of a quorum, lack of applications
to process or for other good reason(s), which shall be noted in the
minutes. Additional special meetings may be called by the chairman or
vice chairman, or on the request of any two of its members, when the
regular meetings are inadequate to meet the needs of its business, to
handle emergencies or to meet time constraints imposed by law.
b. The historic preservation commission shall hold public hearings to
review all applications for certificates of appropriateness, referrals of
development applications and other business which comes before the
commission.
c. The presence of three members, which may include alternate members
filling the vacancies of regular members, shall constitute a quorum.
Liaison person(s) are not entitled to vote and shall not be counted
towards achieving a quorum. A majority vote of those present and
voting shall prevail, and shall be sufficient to grant or deny a certificate
of appropriateness. Not less than a majority of the appointed
membership shall be required to grant or change an historic landmark
or historic district designation or to grant approval for demolition.
a. Character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage or
cultural characteristics of the township, State or Nation; or
b. Association with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or
c. Association with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
d. Embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction, architecture, or engineering; or
§ 17-243.12 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-244.2
AO:680
§ 17-244.3. Procedures for Designation. [Ord. #00-1142, § 4]
e. Identification with the work of a builder, designer, artist, architect or
landscape architect whose work has influenced the development of the
township, State or Nation; or
f. Embodiment of elements of design, detail, material or craftsmanship
that render an improvement architecturally significant or structurally
innovative; or
g. Unique location or singular physical characteristics that make a district
or landmark an established or familiar visual feature; or
h. Ability or potential ability to yield information important in prehistory
or history.
a. Persons wishing to make a nomination shall contact the commission
secretary regarding consideration of a proposed historic landmark or
historic district. The commission may also initiate the designation of an
historic landmark or historic district. The Commission will schedule a
hearing to review the proposed historic landmark or historic district.
b. A nomination to propose an historic landmark shall include the
following information which addresses the criteria for designation as
set forth herein:
1. A photograph, preferably black and white, of the proposed
landmark; and
2. A copy of the municipal tax map showing the property on which the
proposed landmark is located; and
3. A physical description of the proposed landmark; and
4. A statement of significance.
c. A nomination to propose an historic district shall include the following
information which addresses the criteria for designation as set forth
herein:
1. A building-by-building inventory of all properties within the
district; and
2. A photograph, preferably black and white, of all properties within
the district; and
3. A copy of the municipal tax map of the district showing boundaries;
and
4. A physical description of the proposed district; and
5. A statement of significance.
§ 17-244.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-244.3
AO:681
d. Following receipt of a nomination to propose an historic landmark or
historic district, the commission shall schedule a public hearing on the
proposed designation.
e. At least 20 days prior to the public hearing, the commission shall, by
personal service or certified mail, perform the following:
1. Notify the owner(s) of record of a property that has been proposed
for historic landmark designation, or the owner(s) of record all
properties located within a district that has been proposed for
historic district designation, that the property or district, as
applicable, is being considered for such designation and the
reasons therefor;
2. Advise the owner(s) of record of the significance and consequences
of such designation, and of the rights of the owner(s) of record to
contest such designation under the provisions of this article;
3. Notify the owner(s) of record of the date, time and location of the
hearing concerning the proposed designation of the property or
district; and
4. Serve any further notices as may be required under the provisions
of the Municipal Land Use Law.
f. At least 20 days prior to the public hearing, the commission shall also
cause public notice of the hearing to be published in the official
newspaper of the township.
g. At least 20 days prior to the public hearing, a copy of the nomination
report shall also be made available for public inspection in the
municipal offices of the township.
h. At the public hearing scheduled in accordance with this article, the
commission shall review the nomination report and accompanying
documents. Interested persons shall be given the opportunity to be
heard and to comment on the proposed nomination for designation.
i. Designation of an historic district shall not proceed over the objection
of 51% of the property owners, in accordance with the procedural
guidelines set forth by the National Register of Historic Places.
j. If the proposed nomination is approved by the commission, then the
commission shall forward a report concerning the proposed historic
landmark or historic district to the township committee, which shall
contain a statement of the commission's recommendations and the
reasons therefor. Township committee action on designating an historic
landmark or an historic district shall then be otherwise subject to those
procedures and statutes which apply to a change of a zoning
designation and the adoption, revision or amendment of any
development regulation.
§ 17-244.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-244.3
AO:682
§ 17-244.4. Historic Landmarks Designated.75 [Ord. #00-1172, § 1;
Ord. #01-1195, § 1; Ord. #01-1219, § 1; Ord. #01-1220, § 1; Ord.
#01-1221, § 1; Ord. #05-1346, § 1; Ord. #05-1347, § 1; Ord.
#05-1348, § 1; Ord. #05-1349, § 1; Ord. #05-1350, § 1; Ord.
#05-1351, § 1; Ord. #06-1382, § 1; Ord. #06-1383, § 1; Ord.
#06-1384, § 1; Ord. #08-1449, § 1; Ord. #08-1450, § 1; Ord.
#08-1451, § 1; Ord. #08-1452, § 1; Ord. #08-1453, § 1; Ord.
#14-1601; Ord. #14-1603; Ord. No. 2016-1647; Ord. No. 2016-1648]
k. All other requirements of the Municipal Land Use Law regarding
adoption of development regulations shall be followed.
l. Upon adoption of an article by the township committee designating an
historic landmark or an historic district, the said designation shall
supplement, rather than supersede, the existing zoning district in which
the affected historic landmark or historic district is located. At that
time, the designation list and map shall be incorporated into the master
plan and zoning ordinance of the township as required by the Municipal
Land Use Law. Designated properties shall also be noted as such on the
records for those properties as maintained by the planning and zoning
offices, as well as the offices of the construction official, the township
tax assessor and the township clerk.
m. Amendments to historic landmark or historic district designations may
be made in the same manner as they were adopted in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
a. The Mount Rose Distillery Archaeological Site consisting of Block 39,
Lot 8.31, and the contiguous portion of the right-of-way of Pennington-
Rocky Hill Road, to the center line of the existing pavement, shall be
designated an historic landmark under Ordinance No. 00-1142.
b. The "Bear Tavern Road Iron Truss Bridge over Jacobs Creek," along
with the Route 579 right-of-way, abutments, approaches and related
retaining walls, shall be designated as an historic landmark within the
Township of Hopewell, pursuant to and in accordance with Ordinance
No. 00-1142.
c. The "Old Methodist Cemetery," a.k.a. the "New Light/New Side
Presbyterian Meeting House and Cemetery," which is located on
Pennington-Titusville Road (Block 63, Lot 2 on the Hopewell Township
Tax Map), shall be designated as a historic landmark within the
Township of Hopewell, pursuant to and in accordance with Ordinance
No. 00-1142.
d. The "Mine Road Bridge over Stony Brook," which is located on Mine
Road east of Route 31 and which carries Mine Road over the Stony
75.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 00-1142 pertaining to Historic Preservation is codified as
Sections 17-243-17-250.
§ 17-244.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-244.4
AO:683
Brook shall be designated as a historic landmark within the Township of
Hopewell, pursuant to and in accordance with Ordinance No. 00-1142.
e. The "Smith/Hunt/Hill Farm," a.k.a. the "Wilson Hunt Farm" or the "Hunt
Woodward Farm," which is located at 170 Marshall's Corner-Woodsville
Road (Block 31, Lot 13.03 on the Hopewell Township Tax Map), shall be
designated as a historic landmark within the Township of Hopewell,
pursuant to and in accordance with Ordinance No. 00-1142.
f. The "Brown Farmstead," a.k.a. the "Hoff/Brown House" or the
"Bellando/Rapp Property," which is located at 166 Church Road (Block
61, Lot 15.01 on the Hopewell Township Tax Map), shall be designated
as an historic landmark within the Township of Hopewell, pursuant to
and in accordance with Ordinance No. 00-1142.
g. The "Lanning/Hunt Farmstead," a.k.a. the "Dippery Farm," which is
located at 438 Valley Road (Block 56, Lot 1 on the Hopewell Township
Tax Map), shall be designated as an historic landmark within the
Township of Hopewell, pursuant to and in accordance with Ordinance
No. 00-1142.
h. The "Lott's Mills," a.k.a. the "Somerset Roller Mills," which is located at
1200 Route 29 (Block 99.01, Lot 6 on the Hopewell Township Tax Map),
shall be designated as an historic landmark within the Township of
Hopewell, pursuant to and in accordance with Ordinance No. 00-1142.
i. The "Noah Hunt Farmstead," a.k.a. "Rosedale Park," which is located at
194 Blackwell Road (Block 44, Lot 7 on the Hopewell Township Tax
Map), shall be designated as an historic landmark within the Township
of Hopewell, pursuant to and in accordance with Ordinance No.
00-1142.
j. The "Major Henry Phillips House," a.k.a. the "Holcomb/Ely Farmstead"
or the "Birum House," which is located at 84 Pleasant Valley Road
(Block 54, Lot 7 on the Hopewell Township Tax Map), shall be
designated as an historic landmark within the Township of Hopewell,
pursuant to and in accordance with Ordinance No. 00-1142.
k. The "Jeremiah Woolsey House," a.k.a. the "Woolsey House," which is
located at 237 Washington Crossing-Pennington Road (Block 92, Lot 26
on the Hopewell Township Tax Map), shall be designated as an historic
landmark within the Township of Hopewell, pursuant to and in
accordance with Ordinance No. 00-1142.
l. The "Mount Rose General Store" which is located at 230 Hopewell-
Princeton Road (Block 16, Lot 21 on the Hopewell Township Tax Map),
shall be designated as an historic landmark within the Township of
Hopewell, pursuant to and in accordance with Ordinance No. 00-1142.
m. The "Samuel Moore Sr. House", a.k.a. the "John Welling House," which
is located at 56 East Curlis Avenue (Block 74, Lot 47 on the Hopewell
Township Tax Map), shall be designated as an historic landmark within
§ 17-244.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-244.4
AO:684
the Township of Hopewell pursuant to and in accordance with
Ordinance No. 00-1142.
n. The "Andrew Titus House," which is located at 11 Cedar Lane (Block
133, Lot 11 on the Hopewell Township Tax Map), shall be designated as
an historic landmark within the Township of Hopewell, pursuant to and
in accordance with Ordinance No. 00-1142.
o. The "Titusville Store," which is located at 34 River Drive (Block 134, Lot
13 on the Hopewell Township Tax Map), is the site of 1 building located
on a .5 acre parcel; and shall be designated as an Historic Landmark
within the Township of Hopewell, pursuant to and in accordance with
Ordinance No. 00-1142.
p. The "Harbourton Blacksmith's House," which is located at 1459
Trenton Harbourton Road (Block 52, Lot 1 on the Hopewell Township
Map), is the site of 1 dwelling and accessory buildings located on a 1.72
acre parcel; and shall be designated as an Historic Landmark within the
Township of Hopewell, pursuant to and in accordance with Ordinance
No. 00-1142.
q. The "Runyon-Titus Barn," located at 115 Route 31 North (Block 37, Lot
19 on the Hopewell Township Tax Map), is the site of a barn and
springhouse located on a 67 acre parcel; and shall be designated as an
Historic Landmark within the Township of Hopewell, pursuant to and in
accordance with Ordinance No. 00-142.
r. The "Enos Titus Farmstead," which is located at 340 Rocky Hill Road
(Block 45, Lot 1.02 on the Hopewell Township Max Map), is the site of a
farmstead including 1 dwelling, 1 large barn and accessory buildings
located on a 2.24 acre parcel; and shall be designated as an Historic
Landmark within the Township of Hopewell, pursuant to and in
accordance with Ordinance No. 00-1142.
s. The "Marshall's Corner Schoolhouse," which is located at 95
Pennington Hopewell Road (Block 34, Lot 8 on the Hopewell Township
Tax Map), is the site of 1 building located on a .76 acre parcel; and shall
be designated as an Historic Landmark within the Township of
Hopewell, pursuant to and in accordance with Ordinance No. 00-1142.
t. The "Stout Chorley House," located at 130 Hopewell Rocky Hill Road
(Block 14, Lot 15.01 on the Hopewell Township Tax Map), is comprised
of brick and stone manor house built in stages from the late 18th to mid
20th centuries.
These buildings contain elements of both the 18th, 19th and 20th
centuries, and is a notable landmark at the eastern end of Hopewell
Township and shall be designated as an Historic Landmark within the
Township of Hopewell, pursuant to and in accordance with Ordinance
No. 00-1142.
§ 17-244.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-244.4
AO:685
§ 17-244.5. Historic Districts Designated. [Ord. #08-1448, § I]
§ 17-245. REFERRAL OF DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS
INVOLVING HISTORIC LANDMARKS OR HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
[Ord. #00-1142, § 5]
u. The "Atchley - Hunter Farmstead," located at 133 Pleasant Valley Road
(Block 60, Lot 1 on the Hopewell Township Tax Map), contains several
agricultural buildings and a farmhouse, all possessing a high degree of
historical integrity.
These buildings contain elements of the 18th centuries through the
20th, and are fully integrated in setting as a farmstead in continuous
use over that period and shall be designated as an historic landmark
within the Township of Hopewell pursuant to and in accordance with
Ordinance No. 00-1142.
v. The "Captain John Stillwell House" which is located at 246
Lambertville-Hopewell Road (Block 25 Lot 14 on the Hopewell
Township Tax Map), shall be designated as an Historic Landmark within
the Township of Hopewell, pursuant to and in accordance with
Ordinance No. 00-1142.
w. The "Stephen and Edwin Titus Farmhouse" located at 96 Lambertville-
Hopewell Road (Block 5, Lot 26 on the Hopewell Township Tax Map),
shall be designated as an Historic Landmark within the Township of
Hopewell, pursuant to and in accordance with Ordinance No. 00-1142.
a. Harbourton Rural Historic District.
1. The "Harbourton Rural Historic District" shall be designated as an
historic district within the Township of Hopewell.
2. The Harbourton Rural Historic District shall consist of those
properties, or parts thereof, designated on the plan entitled
"Harbourton Rural Historic District" as determined by the
Hopewell Township Historic Commission, which plan shall amend
the Hopewell Township Zoning Map.
a. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-110, the planning board and zoning board
of adjustment of the Township of Hopewell shall refer to the historic
preservation commission every application for development submitted
to either board for development involving historic landmarks or
properties located within historic districts. This referral shall be made
when the application for development is deemed complete or is
scheduled for a hearing, whichever occurs sooner. The historic
preservation commission may provide its advice on said application,
which shall be conveyed through its delegation of one of its members or
staff to testify orally at the hearing on the application and to explain any
written report(s) that the commission may have provided to the board
concerning the proposed application.
§ 17-244.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-245
AO:686
§ 17-246. CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
§ 17-246.1. When Required. [Ord. #00-1142, § 6]
A certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission shall be required
before any work is commenced on any historic landmark or within any
historic district, whether or not a permit is required for such work,
including but not limited to the following:
§ 17-246.2. When Not Required. [Ord. #00-1142, § 6]
b. On all matters referred to the historic preservation commission which
require approval by the township's planning board or zoning board of
adjustment, the decision of the commission shall be a recommendation
only. In reviewing applications for development, the commission may
comment on any of the zoning and land use considerations which are
relevant to the application. The planning board or zoning board of
adjustment, as applicable, shall consider the testimony and/or written
report(s) presented and may disapprove or change any of the
recommendations made by the commission by a vote of a majority of its
full authorized membership and shall record in its minutes the reasons
for not following such recommendations.
c. Yard Variances. Due to the fact that structures in historic districts may
have been built close to the lot lines, it is in the public interest to retain
a neighborhood's historic appearance by approving variances to normal
yard requirements. Where it is deemed that such variance will not
adversely affect neighboring properties, the appropriate board may
grant such variance to standard requirements if so recommended by
the historic preservation commission.
d. An approval by the planning board or zoning board of adjustment, as
the case may be, does not relieve the applicant of the requirement of
obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the commission (see
section 17-246) for those aspects of the work not approved by the
application for development.
a. Changing the exterior appearance of any building, structure, site,
object or improvement by addition, reconstruction, alteration or
replacement, including the replacement of windows and doors, except
for the activities described in subsection 17-246.2 below.
b. Demolition of any building, structure, site, object or improvement.
c. Relocation of a principal or accessory building, structure, site, object or
improvement.
d. Any addition to or new construction of a principal or accessory building,
structure, site, object or improvement.
§ 17-245 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-246.2
AO:687
§ 17-246.3. Procedures. [Ord. #00-1142, § 6]
a. A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required before a permit is
issued by the construction official for changes to the interior of a
structure.
b. A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required for exterior or
interior painting of existing structures.
c. A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required if, in the opinion of
the commission, the work contemplated constitutes "ordinary
maintenance and repair" as defined by this article. In such cases, and if
a permit is required for the proposed work, the commission shall
promptly notify the construction official that a certificate of
appropriateness is not required as a prerequisite to the issuance of the
permit.
a. Except for the circumstances described in subsection 17-246.2a and b
above, no work shall be performed on any historic landmark or on any
building, structure, site, object or improvement located within an
historic district until either a certificate of appropriateness has been
issued by the commission for such work or until a determination has
been made by the commission that no certificate of appropriateness is
necessary for such work due to the fact that the proposed work
constitutes "ordinary maintenance and repair" pursuant to subsection
17-246.2c above.
b. All applicants for a certificate of appropriateness, or for a
determination of nonnecessity pursuant to subsection 17-246.2c above,
shall complete an application form. Application forms shall be made
available in the office of the construction official. Completed
applications shall be filed with the construction official, who shall then
forward the application package promptly to the commission.
c. Each application for a certificate of appropriateness or for a
determination of nonnecessity shall be accompanied by sketches,
drawings, photographs, descriptions or other information to show the
proposed alterations, additions, changes or new construction.
Applications for demolition shall include current and historical
photographs of the interior and exterior of the building. The
commission may require the subsequent submission of such additional
materials as it reasonably requires to make an informed decision.
d. The construction official shall forward a copy of all permit applications
dealing with historic landmarks or historic districts to the commission
prior to issuance of the requested permit, except where the permit
relates to the type(s) of work described in subsection 17-246.2a and b
above.
e. The commission shall render a decision on each application for a
certificate of appropriateness, or for a determination of non-necessity
§ 17-246.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-246.3
AO:688
§ 17-246.4. Informational Meetings. [Ord. #00-1142, § 6]
Persons considering action that requires a certificate of appropriateness
are encouraged to request an informal informational meeting with the
commission and/or its chairman prior to submitting a formal application
for a certificate of appropriateness or for a determination of non-necessity
pursuant to subsection 17-246.2c above. Requests for such informational
meetings can be made to the commission secretary. The Commission and/
or its Chairman shall hold such informational meetings within 30 days
of receipt of such request. The purpose of an informational meeting is
to review the design issues and standards of appropriateness and the
procedures for obtaining a certificate of appropriateness or a determination
of non-necessity pursuant to subsection 17-246.2c above.
§ 17-246.5. Application Review. [Ord. #00-1142, § 6]
pursuant to subsection 17-246.2c above, and submit its report to the
construction official within 45 days of referral of same by the
construction official. Nothing herein shall prohibit an extension of time
by mutual agreement of the applicant and the commission.
a. The commission shall hold a public hearing on all applications for
certificates of appropriateness. No public hearing shall be required in
order for the commission to render a determination of non-necessity
pursuant to subsection 17-246.2c above.
b. Prior to holding a public hearing on an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, the commission shall, in addition to complying with
the requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6, et
seq., notify the applicant in writing at least 20 days prior to the hearing
by personal service or certified mail setting forth the time, date and
place of the hearing.
c. An applicant for a certificate of appropriateness shall not be required to
appear or to be represented at the hearing in order for the commission
to consider the application for a certificate of appropriateness, and the
commission may take action in the absence of the applicant.
d. At the hearing, the commission shall allow all persons the opportunity
to be heard concerning the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness
for the proposed work.
e. After conducting the public hearing, the commission shall render a
determination on the application. All determinations shall be in writing
with an explanation of the reasons for the decision, and shall be
delivered promptly to the construction official. The commission shall
grant a certificate of appropriateness to the applicant if it finds the
application appropriate to the historic landmark or historic district and
in conformity with the standards and criteria set forth in section 17-247
of this article. The commission may issue a certificate of
appropriateness subject to certain condition(s), which shall be set forth
§ 17-246.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-246.5
AO:689
in detail in the commission's written decision. The commission shall
deny the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness if it finds the
application inappropriate to the historic landmark or historic district
and/or not in conformity with the said standards and criteria. The
commission's denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be deemed
to prohibit the applicant from undertaking the work applied for, and
shall preclude the issuance of any required permit for the said work
by the construction official. Upon receipt of the commission's written
determination, the construction official shall notify the applicant of said
determination in writing within five days thereof.
f. Failure of the commission to render its written determination to the
construction official within the forty-five-day period referenced above
shall be deemed to constitute a determination in favor of the issuance of
a certificate of appropriateness for the proposed work and without
conditions. In the event that the applicant has consented to an
extension of time to consider the application, the construction official
shall be notified of said extension and no certificate of appropriateness
or permit shall be issued for the proposed work until a determination
has been rendered by the commission during the extension period.
g. Appeals from determinations of the construction official pursuant to the
historic preservation commission's decision may be made by the
applicant to the zoning board of adjustment, according to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70a. Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit the right of
judicial review of the action after an appeal is concluded by the zoning
board of adjustment. The appellant shall pay all costs for copies of any
transcript(s) required for appeal. If, in the case of an appeal made
pursuant to this paragraph, the zoning board of adjustment determines
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by
the construction official pursuant to a determination rendered by the
historic preservation commission, the zoning board of adjustment shall,
in writing, include the reasons for its determination in the findings of its
decision thereon.
h. The owner shall post the certificate of appropriateness on a
conspicuous spot on the exterior of the designated property visible to
the public during the entire process of work.
i. When a certificate of appropriateness has been issued, the construction
official or his appointee shall, from time to time, inspect the work
approved by such certificate and shall regularly report to the
commission the results of such inspections, listing all work inspected
and reporting any work not in accordance with such certificate.
j. A certificate of appropriateness shall be valid for a period of two years
from date of issue unless reasonable extensions are requested by the
applicant or the commission.
§ 17-246.5 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-246.5
AO:690
§ 17-246.6. Minor Applications. [Ord. #00-1142, § 6]
The chairman of the historic preservation commission, or other designated
member(s) of the commission acting on the chairman's behalf, may review
applications for minor work (minor applications) without holding a public
hearing. If the chairman finds the application appropriate, he/she may act
in place of the full commission without the necessity of a public hearing and
is authorized to issue a certificate of appropriateness to the construction
official for said minor work. The construction official shall then authorize
the applicant to proceed and issue any required permit associated
therewith. If the chairman does not find the application appropriate, the
application shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the full
commission.
§ 17-246.7. Emergency Procedures. [Ord. #00-1142, § 6]
k. The performance of unauthorized activities shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter and may subject the responsible parties to
sanctions imposed hereunder.
a. When an historic landmark or a key or contributing historic district
resource requires immediate repair to preserve its continued
habitability and/or the health and safety of its occupants or others,
emergency repairs may be performed in accordance with applicable
construction codes immediately upon approval of the construction
official, who shall certify that a bona fide emergency of the type
referenced herein exists, without first obtaining a certificate of
appropriateness from the commission. Under such circumstances, the
repairs performed shall be only such as are necessary to preserve the
continued habitability of the building or structure and/or the health and
safety of its occupants or others. Where feasible, temporary measures
to prevent further damage shall be used, provided these measures are
reversible without damage to the building or structure.
b. Simultaneously with the commencement of the emergency work, the
property owner shall make a request for a certificate of appropriateness
from the commission memorializing the approval for said emergency
work. This request shall be made through the construction official
pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection 17-246.3 above.
c. It should be noted that the procedures outlined in this section should be
strictly limited to those circumstances which, in the opinion of the
construction official, rise to the level of a bona fide emergency of the
type referenced above. No work in addition to the emergency repairs
shall be performed until an appropriate request for approval has been
granted by the construction official and historic preservation
commission pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection 17-246.5
above.
§ 17-246.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-246.8
AO:691
§ 17-246.8. Requirement of Obtaining Certificates of
Appropriateness for Government Actions. [Ord. #00-1142, § 6]
§ 17-247. STANDARDS AND CRITERIA. [Ord. #00-1142, § 7]
a. It is recognized that the intent and purposes of this article would not be
fully served if the municipality and other governmental agencies were
to control the actions of others but fail to apply similar constraints to
itself. The Township of Hopewell, when it plans to undertake any work
on any municipally owned historic landmark or on any municipally
owned property in an historic district, may submit such plans to the
historic preservation commission and shall receive an advisory report
on the appropriateness of those plans before undertaking the work.
b. In those circumstances where the township cannot require compliance,
as in certain cases involving the county, State and Federal
governments, the township most strongly urges the voluntary
cooperation of such agencies in seeking a certificate of appropriateness
and hereby authorizes the commission to consider such requests and
applications. This does not relieve the property owner from complying
with applicable State and Federal regulations regarding historic
preservation.
a. The purpose of this section is to provide uniform standards and criteria
for the regulation of historic landmarks and historic districts for use by
the historic preservation commission. All projects requiring a
certificate of appropriateness and all applications for development on
historic landmarks or in historic districts shall be governed by the
principles of the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation
(as contained within the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the
Treatment of Historic Properties) and by the Secretary of the Interior's
Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring & Reconstructing
Historic Buildings.
b. In reviewing applications for certificates of appropriateness, the
historic preservation commission may consider the siting, design,
arrangement, texture, details, scale, shape, materials, finish and
relationship to streetscape and/or landscape of the proposed work and
the relationship of those characteristics to the historical significance of
the historic landmark or historic district.
c. In reviewing applications for certificates of appropriateness, the
historic preservation commission shall not consider use, zoning
requirements for setbacks, density, height limitations or lot coverage as
these matters fall within the purview of the planning board and zoning
board of adjustment.
d. In considering development application referrals from the planning
board and/or zoning board of adjustment, the historic preservation
commission may consider use, zoning requirements for setbacks,
§ 17-246.8 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-247
AO:692
§ 17-248. DEMOLITIONS AND RELOCATIONS.
§ 17-248.1. Criteria. [Ord. #00-1142, § 8]
In regard to an application to demolish or relocate an historic landmark or
an historic district resource, the following matters shall be considered:
density, height limitations and lot coverage in rendering its advice to
the appropriate board.
e. Criteria for Review. In its review of historic landmarks or properties
located within historic districts, the commission shall give
consideration to certain criteria, including but not limited to the
following:
1. The historical value of the landscape or streetscape.
2. The historical value of a building, structure, site, object,
improvement or district and its relationship to property of the
surrounding area.
3. The general compatibility of the proposed use to the historical
value of the surrounding area.
4. The general compatibility of the exterior design, arrangement,
texture and materials proposed to be used with the historical value
of the surrounding area. In carrying out its review under these
guidelines, the following criteria shall be utilized:
(a) All exterior elevations, including the roof, must be maintained
and new construction must be compatible with existing
structures, districts and surrounding areas.
(b) Inkind or similarly compatible building materials must be
utilized.
a. Its current and potential use for those purposes currently permitted by
the zoning ordinance or for the use proposed.
b. The probable impact of its removal upon the ambiance of the historic
landmark or historic district.
c. The structural soundness and integrity of the building, structure, site,
object or improvement and the economic feasibility of restoring or
rehabilitating same so as to comply with the requirements of the
applicable construction codes.
d. The compelling reasons for not retaining the building, structure, site,
object or improvement at its present location, the proximity of the
proposed new location and its accessibility to residents of the
municipality, and the probability of significant damage to the building,
structure, site, object or improvement as a result of the relocation.
§ 17-247 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-248.1
AO:693
§ 17-248.2. Procedure. [Ord. #00-1142, § 8]
e. The compatibility, nature and character of the current and the proposed
surrounding areas as they relate to the intent and purposes of this
article and whether the proposed new location is visually compatible in
accordance with the standards set forth herein.
a. Where Demolition Disapproved. In the event that the historic
preservation commission disapproves an application for a certificate of
appropriateness to demolish an historic landmark or a building,
structure, site, object or improvement located in an historic district, the
owner shall, nevertheless, as a matter of right, be entitled to raze or
demolish same provided that all of the following requirements have
been fully met:
1. Appeal to Zoning Board of Adjustment. The owner has applied for
the necessary certificate of appropriateness and has received
notice of the commission's denial of same from the construction
official and has appealed to the zoning board of adjustment, which
has affirmed such denial.
2. Sale for Fair Market Value. The owner has prior to seeking
demolition for a period of at least 180 days (the "offer period"), and
at a price reasonably related to its fair market value, made a bona
fide offer to sell such building, structure, site, object or
improvement and the land pertaining thereto to any person, entity,
organization, government or political subdivision thereof which
gives reasonable assurance that it is willing to preserve the
building, structure, site, object or improvement and the land
pertaining thereto.
3. Demolition Notice Posted and Publication.
(a) Notice of any proposed demolition shall be posted on the
exterior premises of the building, structure, site, object or
improvement throughout the Notice Period in a location such
that it is clearly readable. In addition, the applicant shall cause
to be published in the official newspaper of the township a
notice setting forth the following:
(1) The applicant's intent to demolish, including a description
of the subject property (by block and lot as well as by
physical location) and a description of the building,
structure, site, object or improvement to be demolished;
and
(2) The applicant's proposed use of the property following
demolition; and
(3) The anticipated time frame(s) associated with the
demolition; and
§ 17-248.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-248.2
AO:694
(4) A statement indicating that the applicant shall consider
any and all bona fide offers to sell the property to any
person who wishes to preserve the building, structure,
site, object or improvement; and
(5) The applicant's name and address, along with a telephone
number where the applicant may be reached during
normal business hours by any interested person who
wishes to discuss the proposed demolition and/or to make
an offer to purchase the property as set forth above.
(b) The notice shall be published as follows:
(1) At least once within the first 10 days of the Notice Period;
and
(2) At least once within the period of time that is not less than
10 nor more than 15 days prior to the expiration of the
Notice Period; and
(3) At least once each 20 days between the above first and last
notifications.
(c) At the conclusion of the Notice Period, if the applicant still
wishes to demolish the subject building, structure, site, object
or improvement, it shall, prior to performing the demolition,
perform the following:
(1) Advise the commission in writing of its intention to
proceed with the demolition; and
(2) Certify in writing to its compliance with the provisions of
paragraph a2 above relating to the 180-day offer period;
and
(3) Provide the commission with a copy of the notice that
appeared in the official newspaper of the township and a
listing of all dates on which the said notice appeared in the
newspaper; and
(4) Advise the commission in writing as to whether any
interested persons submitted an offer or offers to purchase
the property, whether during the 180-day "offer period" or
following the newspaper noticing referenced above, and
set forth the terms and conditions relating to said offer(s)
and the results of any negotiations pertaining thereto; and
(5) File copies of the affidavits of publication relating to the
newspaper noticing with the commission.
4. Notice Period. The period of time during which notice must be
given in the manner hereinbefore set forth shall be known as the
"Notice Period" which shall commence on the tenth day following
§ 17-248.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-248.2
AO:695
§ 17-249. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. #00-1142, § 9]
It shall be the duty of all municipal officials reviewing all permit applications
involving real property or improvements thereon to determine whether
such application involves any activity which should also be the subject of
an application for a certificate of appropriateness. If it should, the officer
shall inform both the construction official and the applicant, as well as the
historic preservation commission.
§ 17-250. VIOLATIONS: PENALTIES AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
§ 17-250.1. Violations. [Ord. #00-1142, § 10]
the date of the notice of denial of the appeal from the zoning board
of adjustment and such Notice Period shall run for a period of time
of 60 days.
b. Assignment. No assignment of the rights granted by a certificate of
appropriateness to demolish shall be permitted.
c. Expiration of Approval.
1. In cases where demolition is permitted, the certificate of
appropriateness shall be valid for one year from the date of historic
preservation commission approval of the application. The one-year
period shall not be extended.
2. At the time of issuance of the certificate of appropriateness to
demolish, the construction official shall designate the period of
time (within the one year approval period) within which demolition
must be completed.
d. Approval After Change of Circumstances. The commission may at any
time during such Notice Period, if a significant change in circumstances
occurs, approve a certificate of appropriateness to demolish, in which
event, a permit from the construction official shall be issued within 10
days thereafter.
a. If any person shall undertake any activity vis-a-vis an historic landmark
or property located within an historic district without first having
obtained and posted a certificate of appropriateness as provided in this
article, such person shall be deemed to be in violation of this article.
b. Upon learning of the violation, the construction official shall personally
serve upon the owner of the lot whereon the violation is occurring a
notice describing the violation in detail.
c. If the owner cannot be personally served within the municipality with
said notice, a copy thereof shall be posted on the site in question and a
copy shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
owner at his or her last known address as it appears on the municipal
tax rolls.
§ 17-248.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-250.1
AO:696
§ 17-250.2. Penalties Designated. [Ord. #00-1142, § 10]
Any person who commits a violation of this article shall, in the discretion
of the municipal court judge, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 per
violation or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both, and/
d. Within 10 days of receipt of the notice of violation, the violator shall be
required to file an application for a certificate of appropriateness in the
same manner as prescribed pursuant to section 17-245 of this article,
and the notice shall advise the violator of such.
e. Upon receipt of the violator's application, the commission shall conduct
a review of the said application and hold a public hearing in the same
manner as prescribed for regular applications pursuant to section
17-245 of this article.
f. Upon the violator's filing of an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, the imposition of all enforcement action on behalf of
the township shall be stayed until such time as:
1. The commission has rendered a decision on the violator's
application and the construction official has served notice thereof
upon the applicant; and
2. The violation is still deemed to be in existence; and
3. No further appeal of the decision of the commission and
construction official relating to the said application is pending
before the zoning board of adjustment or any court; and
4. All appeal periods relating to the said application have expired.
g. If the commission grants a certificate of appropriateness to the violator
for the unauthorized work, then the violator shall no longer be deemed
to be in violation of this article. If the commission grants a certificate of
appropriateness to the violator subject to certain conditions, then the
violator shall be deemed to have cured the violation only upon its timely
satisfaction of the said conditions in accordance with the requirements
of the commission. If the commission denies a certificate of
appropriateness to the violator for the unauthorized work, then the
violation shall still exist and the violator shall be subject to appropriate
enforcement action as prescribed by this article.
h. In the event that the violator fails to file a timely application for a
certificate of appropriateness after having been served with a notice of
violation as set forth above, or in the event that there is no longer any
stay of enforcement activity in effect as set forth above and the violation
is still deemed to be in existence, then the construction official shall
cause to be issued a summons and complaint, returnable in the
Hopewell Township Municipal Court, charging violation of this article.
Each separate day that the violation exists shall be deemed to be a new
and separate violation of this article.
§ 17-250.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-250.2
AO:697
or be required to correct, abate and/or restore the premises or property to
its previous condition.
§ 17-250.3. Injunctive Relief. [Ord. #00-1142, § 10]
In the event that any person becomes aware that any type of activity is
about to occur which would permanently and adversely change an historic
landmark or a property located within an historic district, such as
demolition or removal, without the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness by the commission, that person shall immediately notify
the construction official, who shall then immediately contact the township
attorney and the chairman of the commission so that an application to the
Superior Court of New Jersey may be made for such injunctive relief as is
necessary to prevent the activity.
§ 17-251. OTHER REQUIREMENTS UNAFFECTED. [Ord. #00-1142,
§ 11]
The requirements of this article shall be considered to be in addition to and
in no case shall they be interpreted as a substitute for any other approval,
permit or other action as otherwise provided for.
§ 17-250.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-251
AO:698
ARTICLE XVI
GROWTH SHARE AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROVISIONS
[Pursuant to Ordinance Nos. 2017-1670 and 2018-1690, former
Sections 17-252 entitled "Applicability of Growth Share", Section
17-253 entitled "Residential Growth Share Provisions", and Section
17-254 entitled "Nonresidential Growth Share Provisions" are
repealed inasmuch as the "Growth Share" rules adopted by the New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing ("COAH") upon which they
were based have been invalidated by the Courts.]
§ 17-252. (RESERVED) [Ord. #08-1430, § 1; repealed by Ord.
#2017-1670 § 3; Ord. #2018-1690]
§ 17-253. MANDATORY AFFORDABLE HOUSING SET-ASIDE IN
FUTURE REZONINGS OR THE GRANT OF VARIANCES
AUTHORIZING MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING. [Ord. #08-1430, § 1; Ord.
#2017-1670 § 5; Ord. #2018-1690]
a. Pursuant to directives of the Superior Court in the third round
affordable housing proceedings encaptioned In the Matter of the
Township of Hopewell, Docket No. MER-L-1557-15 (Mount Laurel), if
the Township or its land use Boards permit, either through future
rezonings or the grant of variances, multi-family or single family
attached development that is "approvable" and "developable" as
defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-1, et seq. at a gross density of six units to the
acre or more, the Township and/or its land use Boards shall require that
an appropriate percentage of the residential units shall be set-aside for
low and moderate income households in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:93-1, et seq. This requirement shall apply to any multi-family or
single-family attached residential development, including the
residential portion of a mixed- use project which consists of six or more
new residential units, whether permitted by a zoning amendment, a
variance granted by the Township's land use Boards, or adoption of a
Redevelopment Plan or amended Redevelopment Plan in areas in need
of redevelopment or rehabilitation. Nothing herein precludes the
Township from imposing an affordable housing set-aside in a
development not required to have a setaside pursuant to the provisions
hereof consistent with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311(h) and other applicable law.
Consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-1, et seq., for inclusionary projects in
which low and moderate income units are to be offered for "sale", the
appropriate set-aside percentage is 20%; for inclusionary projects for
which the low and moderate income units are to be offered for "rent",
the appropriate set-aside percentage is 15%. This requirement does not
create any entitlement for a property owner or applicant for a zoning
amendment, variance, or adoption of a Redevelopment Plan or
amended Redevelopment Plan in areas in need of redevelopment or
rehabilitation, or for approval of any particular proposed project. This
§ 17-252 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-253
AO:699
§ 17-254. (RESERVED) [Ord. No. 08-1430; repealed by Ord.
#2017-1670 § 6; Ord. #2018-1690]
§ 17-255. GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR CONSTRUCTING
AFFORDABLE UNITS. [Ord. #08-1430, § 1]
§ 17-256. PAYMENT IN LIEU PROVISIONS. [Ord. #08-1430, § 1]
requirement does not apply to any sites or specific zones otherwise
identified in judicially approved Settlement Agreements under Docket
No. MER-L-1557-15 (Mount Laurel) or the Township's judicially
approved third round Housing Element and Fair Share Plan
(collectively "Compliance Plan"), for which density and set-aside
standards shall be governed by the specific standards set forth therein.
A property shall not be permitted to be subdivided so as to avoid
meeting the above affordable housing requirement.
a. Affordable housing units being constructed on site or off site shall meet
the requirements of the Hopewell Township's Affordable Housing
Ordinance, and shall be in conformance with COAH's third round rules
at N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et seq. and the Uniform Housing Affordability
Controls at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., including, but not limited to,
requirements regarding phasing schedule, controls on affordability,
low/moderate income split, heating source, maximum rent and/or sales
prices, affordability average, bedroom distribution, and affirmative
marketing.
b. To the greatest extent possible, affordable housing units being provided
within inclusionary developments shall be disbursed throughout
inclusionary developments and shall be located within buildings
designed to be architecturally indistinguishable from the market-rate
units otherwise being constructed within the development. To that end,
the scale, massing, roof pitch and architectural detailing (such as the
selection of exterior materials, doors, windows, etc.) of the buildings
containing the affordable housing units shall be similar to and
compatible with that of the market-rate units.
c. Single-family attached buildings in the form of semi-detached (side-byside)
units or duplex (over and under) units, triplex and quadplex
buildings shall be deemed to be permitted uses in the underlying zone
when created for the purpose of meeting the growth share obligation on
site and shall conform to the bulk standards set forth in subsection
17-92d3.
a. Any payment in lieu amount shall be derived from the analysis of the
subsidy required to create an affordable housing unit in Hopewell
Township, which analysis shall be on file in the office of the planning
board. The subsidy shall be adjusted annually based on the actual
construction cost of an affordable housing unit, utilizing such indicators
as the Consumer Price Index for housing, the NJ Department of
§ 17-253 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-256
AO:700
Community Affairs construction indicators, or such other reliable
source.
b. All payments in lieu of constructing affordable housing shall be
deposited by Hopewell Township into an affordable housing trust fund
to be established by Hopewell Township in conformance with
regulations established by COAH and shall at all times be identifiable
from development fees. These funds shall be used by Hopewell
Township in accordance with regulations established by COAH to
create new affordable housing opportunities within the physical
boundaries of Hopewell Township.
§ 17-256 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-256
AO:701

ARTICLE XVII
AFFORDABLE HOUSING OBLIGATIONS
[Adopted 1-29-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1680]
§ 17-257. MONITORING AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS. [Ord.
No. 2018-1680]
a. The Township of Hopewell shall comply with the following monitoring
and reporting requirements regarding the status of the implementation
of its Court-approved Housing Element and Fair Share Plan:
1. Beginning on February 1, 2018, and on every anniversary of that
date through February 1, 2025, the Township agrees to provide
annual reporting of its Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity to
the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Council on
Affordable Housing, or Local Government Services, or other entity
designated by the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided to Fair
Share Housing Center (FSHC) and posted on the municipal
website, using forms developed for this purpose by the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs (NJDCA), Council on Affordable
Housing (COAH), or Local Government Services (NJLGS). The
reporting shall include an accounting of all Affordable Housing
Trust Fund activity, including the source and amount of funds
collected and the amount and purpose for which any funds have
been expended.
2. Beginning on February 1, 2018, and on every anniversary of that
date through February 1, 2025, the Township agrees to provide
annual reporting of the status of all affordable housing activity
within the municipality through posting on the municipal website
with a copy of such posting provided to Fair Share Housing Center,
using forms previously developed for this purpose by COAH or any
other forms endorsed by the Special Master and FSHC.
3. By July 1, 2020, as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the
Township will post on its municipal website, with a copy provided to
FSHC, a status report as to its implementation of its Plan and an
analysis of whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled mechanisms
continue to present a realistic opportunity and whether any
mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or
supplemented. Such posting shall invite any interested party to
submit comments to the municipality, with a copy to FSHC,
regarding whether any sites no longer present a realistic
opportunity and should be replaced and whether any mechanisms
to meet unmet need should be revised or supplemented. Any
interested party may by motion request a hearing before the Court
regarding these issues.
4. By March 1, 2020, and every third year thereafter, as required by
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, the Township will post on its municipal
website, with a copy provided to FSHC, a status report as to its
§ 17-257 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-257
AO:703
§ 17-258. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2018-1680]
The following terms when used in this Ordinance shall have the meanings
given in this Section:
ACT — Means the Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.)
ADAPTABLE — Means constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — Means the entity designated by the Township
to administer affordable units in accordance with this Ordinance, N.J.A.C.
5:93, and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — Means a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — Means the average percentage of median
income at which new restricted units in an affordable housing development
are affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — Means, a sales price or rent level that is within the
means of a low- or moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C.
5:93-7.4, and, in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be
amended and supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent
for the unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as
may be amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Means a development
included in or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan or otherwise intended to address the Township's fair share obligation,
and includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a 100% affordable housing development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Means any mechanism in a
municipal Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a
municipality's fair share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — Means a housing unit proposed or created pursuant
to the Act and approved for crediting by the Court and/or funded through
an affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — Means a housing unit designed to meet the
needs of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of
the population such that: 1) all the residents of the development wherein
the unit is situated are 62 years of age or older; or 2) at least 80% of the
satisfaction of its very low income requirements, including its
family very low income requirements. Such posting shall invite any
interested party to submit comments to the municipality and FSHC
on the issue of whether the municipality has complied with its very
low income and family very low income housing obligations.
§ 17-257 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-258
AO:704
units are occupied by one person who is 55 years of age or older; or 3) the
development has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older persons" as
defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — Means the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1, et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — Means a structure in which
households live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing
facilities, central heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements
include, but are not limited to: transitional facilities for the homeless;
Class A, B, C, D and E boarding homes as regulated by the State of New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs; residential health care facilities
as regulated by the New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for
the developmentally disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated
by the New Jersey Department of Human Services; and congregate living
arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — Means a facility that is licensed by
the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide
apartment-style housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted
living services are available when needed for four or more adult persons
unrelated to the proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum,
one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable
door on the unit entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — Means a household that has been certified by
an Administrative Agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — Means the Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the
New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301, et seq.).
DCA — Means the State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — Means a housing unit with health and safety
code violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Means any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land included in a proposed development including the holder of an option
to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — Means the division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
§ 17-258 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-258
AO:705
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1, et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — Means a development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not limited
to: new construction, the conversion of a non-residential structure to
residential use and the creation of new affordable units through the gut
rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Means a household with a total gross
annual household income equal to 50% or less of the regional median
household income by household size.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — Means a restricted unit that is affordable to a lowincome
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — Means the primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement and load bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Means housing not restricted to low- and
moderate-income households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — Means the median income by household size for the
applicable housing region, as adopted annually by COAH or a successor
entity approved by the Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Means a household with a total
gross annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the
regional median household income by household size.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — Means a restricted unit that is affordable to
a moderate-income household.
NON-EXEMPT SALE — Means any sale or transfer of ownership other
than the transfer of ownership between spouses; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — Means a process by which currently
income-eligible households are selected for placement in affordable housing
units such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except
for purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — Means the maximum housing value in each
housing region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80%
of the regional median as defined by duly adopted Regional Income Limits
published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
§ 17-258 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-258
AO:706
REHABILITATION — Means the repair, renovation, alteration or
reconstruction of any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-6.
RENT — Means the gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant,
including the rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenantpaid
utilities computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for
its Section 8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include
charges for food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — Means a dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or
an ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a marketrate
unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — Means the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26, et seq.
VERY LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Means a household with a total gross
annual household income equal to 30% or less of the regional median
household income by household size.
VERY LOW-INCOME UNIT — Means a restricted unit that is affordable to a
very low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Means building insulation (for attic, exterior walls
and crawl space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm
windows, replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement
doors, and is considered a major system for purposes of a rehabilitation
program.
§ 17-259. APPLICABILITY. [Ord. No. 2018-1680]
§ 17-260. ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENTS. [Ord. No.
2018-1680]
a. The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and that
are proposed to be created within the Township of Hopewell pursuant
to the Township's most recently adopted Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan.
b. Moreover, this Ordinance shall apply to all developments that contain
low-and moderate-income housing units, including any currently
unanticipated future developments that will provide low- and moderateincome
housing units.
a. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
1. Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15), provided, however,
that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the
§ 17-258 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-260
AO:707
§ 17-261. PHASING SCHEDULE FOR INCLUSIONARY ZONING.
[Ord. No. 2018-1680]
In inclusionary developments the following schedule shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
§ 17-262. NEW CONSTRUCTION. [Ord. No. 2018-1680]
provider in accordance with an alternative plan approved by the
Court;
2. Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
b. With the exception of units established with capital funding through a
twenty-year operating contract with the Department of Human
Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative living
arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on affordability in
accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative commitment is approved
by the Court.
c. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall act as
the Administrative Agent for the purposes of administering the
affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the alternative
living arrangement.
a. Affordable Requirements.
1. Low/Moderate Split and Bedroom Distribution of Affordable
Housing Units:
(a) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between lowand
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd
number of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a
low income unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall
be very low income units (affordable to a household earning
30% or less of regional median income by household size). The
very low income units shall be counted as part of the required
number of low income units within the development.
(b) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted
units within each bedroom distribution shall be very low or
low-income units.
§ 17-260 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-262
AO:708
(c) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such
that:
(1) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and
moderate-income units;
(2) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two bedroom units;
(3) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three bedroom units; and
(4) The remaining units may be allocated among two and
three bedroom units at the discretion of the developer.
(d) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be
structured such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the
number of age-restricted low- and moderate-income units
within the inclusionary development. This standard may be
met by having all one-bedroom units or by having a twobedroom
unit for each efficiency unit.
2. Accessibility Requirements:
(a) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be
subject to the technical design standards of the Barrier Free
SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and the following:
(b) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units
in other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit
is attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the
following features:
(1) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
and
(2) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
(3) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
(4) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a
door or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first
floor; and
(5) If not all of the foregoing requirements in 2(b)(1) through
2(b)(4) can be satisfied, then an interior accessible route of
travel must be provided between stories within an
individual unit, but if all of the terms of paragraphs 2(b)(1)
through 2(b)(4) above have been satisfied, then an interior
§ 17-262 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-262
AO:709
accessible route of travel shall not be required between
stories within an individual unit; and
(6) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a, et seq.) and the Barrier Free
SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that Hopewell has
collected funds from the developer sufficient to make 10%
of the adaptable entrances in the development accessible:
(i) Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
(ii) To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Township of Hopewell's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible
entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have
been constructed with adaptable entrances.
(iii) The funds deposited under paragraph (6)(ii) above
shall be used by the Township of Hopewell for the sole
purpose of making the adaptable entrance of an
affordable unit accessible when requested to do so by
a person with a disability who occupies or intends to
occupy the unit and requires an accessible entrance.
(iv) The developer of the restricted units shall submit a
design plan and cost estimate to the Construction
Official of the Township of Hopewell for the
conversion of adaptable to accessible entrances.
(v) Once the Construction Official has determined that
the design plan to convert the unit entrances from
adaptable to accessible meet the requirements of the
Barrier Free SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the
cost estimate of such conversion is reasonable,
payment shall be made to the Township's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund in care of the Township Treasurer
who shall ensure that the funds are deposited into the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund and appropriately
earmarked.
(7) Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site
impracticable" to meet the requirements. Determinations
of site impracticability shall be in compliance with the
Barrier Free SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
3. Design:
§ 17-262 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-262
AO:710
(a) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate- income units shall be integrated with the market
units.
(b) In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall have access to all of the same common elements and
facilities as the market units.
4. Maximum Rents and Sales Prices:
(a) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing
units, the Administrative Agent shall follow the procedures set
forth in UHAC, utilizing the most recently published regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits
published by HUD and the calculation procedures set forth in
the Consent Order entered on December 16, 2016, by the
Honorable Douglas K. Wolfson, JSC, in In the Matter of the
Township of East Brunswick for a Judgment of Compliance of
its Third Round Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, Docket
No.: MID-L-004013-15.
(b) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 60% of median income, and the average
rent for restricted rental units shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 52% of median income.
(c) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental
units shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for
both low-income and moderate-income units, provided that at
least 13% of all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be
affordable to very low-income households, which very lowincome
units shall be part of the low-income requirement.
(d) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within
each affordable development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 70% of median income, and each
affordable development must achieve an affordability average
of 55% for restricted ownership units; in achieving this
affordability average, moderate-income ownership units must
be available for at least three different sales prices for each
bedroom type, and low-income ownership units must be
available for at least two different sales prices for each
bedroom type.
(e) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
(1) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
§ 17-262 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-262
AO:711
(2) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a 1 1/2 person
household;
(3) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(4) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a 4 1/2 person
household; and
(5) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(f) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance
with the affordability average requirements for restricted units
in assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments,
the following standards shall be used:
(1) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(2) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a 1 1/2 person
household; and
(3) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(g) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units
shall be calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the
unit, including principal and interest (based on a mortgage
loan equal to 95% of the purchase price and the Federal
Reserve H.15 rate of interest), taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner
association fees do not exceed 28% of the eligible monthly
income of the appropriate size household as determined under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented;
provided, however, that the price shall be subject to the
affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(h) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so
as not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the
appropriate size household, including an allowance for tenant
paid utilities, as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the
rent shall be subject to the affordability average requirement
of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
(i) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units
may increase annually based on the percentage increase in the
regional median income limit for each housing region. In no
event shall the maximum resale price established by the
Administrative Agent be lower than the last recorded purchase
price.
§ 17-262 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-262
AO:712
§ 17-263. UTILITIES. [Ord. No. 2018-1680]
§ 17-264. OCCUPANCY STANDARDS. [Ord. No. 2018-1680]
§ 17-265. CONTROL PERIODS FOR RESTRICTED OWNERSHIP
UNITS AND ENFORCEMENT MECHANISMS. [Ord. No. 2018-1680;
Ord. No. 2018-1697]
(j) The rents of very low-, low- and moderate-income units may be
increased annually based on the permitted percentage
increase in the Housing Consumer Price Index for the
Northeast Urban Area. This increase shall not exceed 9% in
any one year. Rents for units constructed pursuant to lowincome
housing tax credit regulations shall be indexed
pursuant to the regulations governing low- income housing tax
credits.
a. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market
units within an inclusionary development.
b. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth
in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved
by the NJDCA for its Section 8 program.
a. In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the
Administrative Agent shall, to the extent feasible and without causing
an undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive to:
1. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
2. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
3. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
4. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
a. Control Periods.
1. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and
supplemented. Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5 the control period on
all ownership units for which a specific number of years is not
otherwise specified in an individual ordinance or redevelopment
plan shall be not less than 50 years for all affordable units. As to
Block 78, Lot 17 (Enourato), there shall be a control period
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11 of not less than 40 years for all
affordable units. Each restricted ownership unit shall remain
subject to the requirements of this Ordinance, until Hopewell takes
action to release the unit from such requirements; prior to such
action, a restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented.
§ 17-262 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-265
AO:713
§ 17-266. PRICE RESTRICTIONS FOR RESTRICTED OWNERSHIP
UNITS, HOMEOWNER ASSOCIATION FEES AND RESALE PRICES.
[Ord. No. 2018-1680]
2. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to
the unit.
3. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the Administrative Agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine
the non-restricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an
appraisal or the unit's equalized assessed value without the
restrictions in place.
4. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the Administrative Agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs,
successors and assigns) to repay, upon the first non-exempt sale
after the unit's release from the restrictions set forth in this
Ordinance, an amount equal to the difference between the unit's
non-restricted fair market value and its restricted price, and the
recapture note shall be secured by a recapture lien evidenced by a
duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
5. The affordability controls set forth in this Ordinance shall remain in
effect despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of
foreclosure with respect to restricted ownership units.
6. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a Continuing
Certificate of Occupancy or a certified statement from the
Construction Official stating that the unit meets all Code standards
upon the first transfer of title following the removal of the
restrictions provided under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be
amended and supplemented.
a. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented,
including:
1. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the Administrative Agent.
2. The Administrative Agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing
and in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the
foregoing standards.
3. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association
fees and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income
purchasers and those paid by market purchasers.
§ 17-265 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-266
AO:714
§ 17-267. BUYER INCOME ELIGIBILITY. [Ord. No. 2018-1680]
§ 17-268. LIMITATIONS ON INDEBTEDNESS SECURED BY
OWNERSHIP UNIT; SUBORDINATION. [Ord. No. 2018-1680]
4. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
Administrative Agent to increase the maximum sales price for the
unit on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible
capital improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable
for a larger household or the addition of a bathroom. See Section
17-269.
a. Buyer Eligibility.
1. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than or
equal to 50% of median income and moderate-income ownership
units shall be reserved for households with a gross household
income less than 80% of median income.
2. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Administrative Agent may,
upon approval by the Township Committee, and subject to the
Court's approval, permit a moderate-income purchaser to buy a
low-income unit if and only if the Administrative Agent can
demonstrate that there is an insufficient number of eligible lowincome
purchasers in the housing region to permit prompt
occupancy of the unit and all other reasonable efforts to attract a
low income purchaser, including pricing and financing incentives,
have failed. Any such low-income unit that is sold to a moderateincome
household shall retain the required pricing and pricing
restrictions for a low-income unit.
3. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit
must occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and
shall not lease the unit; provided, however, that the Administrative
Agent may permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon
application and a showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit
to another certified household for a period not to exceed one year.
4. The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the
unit, and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner association
fees, as applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible
monthly income.
a. Limitation on Indebtedness.
§ 17-266 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-268
AO:715
§ 17-269. CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS TO OWNERSHIP UNITS. [Ord.
No. 2018-1680]
§ 17-270. CONTROL PERIODS FOR RESTRICTED RENTAL UNITS.
[Ord. No. 2018-1680; Ord. No. 2018-1697]
1. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the Administrative Agent
for a determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness
complies with the provisions of this Section, and the Administrative
Agent shall issue such determination prior to the owner incurring
such indebtedness.
2. With the exception of First Purchase Money Mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95%
of the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the Administrative Agent in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
a. Improvements.
1. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
Administrative Agent to increase the maximum sales price for the
unit on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase
of the unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render
the unit suitable for a larger household or that add an additional
bathroom. In no event shall the maximum sales price of an
improved housing unit exceed the limits of affordability for the
larger household.
2. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property
that are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the
unit was initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range,
washer, dryer, dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included
in the maximum allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to
the purchaser at a reasonable price that has been approved by the
Administrative Agent at the time of the signing of the agreement to
purchase. The purchase of central air conditioning installed
subsequent to the initial sale of the unit and not included in the
base price may be made a condition of the unit resale provided the
price, which shall be subject to ten-year, straight-line depreciation,
has been approved by the Administrative Agent. Unless otherwise
approved by the Administrative Agent, the purchase of any
property other than central air conditioning shall not be made a
condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser must
personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved transfer
of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has taken
place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
a. Control Periods.
§ 17-268 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-270
AO:716
§ 17-271. RENT RESTRICTIONS FOR RENTAL UNITS; LEASES.
[Ord. No. 2018-1680]
1. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented.
The control period on all rental units for which a specific number of
years is not otherwise specified in an individual ordinance or
redevelopment plan shall be not less than 50 years for all
affordable units. As to Block 78, Lot 17 (Enourato), there shall be a
control period pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11 of not less than 40
years for all affordable units. Each restricted rental unit shall
remain subject to the requirements of this Ordinance, until
Hopewell takes action to release the unit from such requirements.
Prior to such action, a restricted rental unit must remain subject to
the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented.
2. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed
restriction shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records
office of the County of Mercer. A copy of the filed document shall be
provided to the Administrative Agent within 30 days of the receipt
of a Certificate of Occupancy.
3. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability
controls of this Ordinance despite the occurrence of any of the
following events:
(a) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(b) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit;
or
(c) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on
the property containing the unit.
a. Rent Restrictions.
1. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full
amount of the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current
lease for each restricted rental unit shall be provided to the
Administrative Agent.
2. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover
the customary charges for food and services) without the express
written approval of the Administrative Agent.
3. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall
not exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit
§ 17-270 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-271
AO:717
§ 17-272. TENANT INCOME ELIGIBILITY. [Ord. No. 2018-1680]
and shall be payable to the Administrative Agent to be applied to
the costs of administering the controls applicable to the unit as set
forth in this Ordinance.
4. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling
units are restricted rental units in compliance with this Ordinance.
a. Tenant Eligibility.
1. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(a) Very low-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of the
regional median household income by household size.
(b) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 50% of the
regional median household income by household size.
(c) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than 80% of the regional
median household income by household size.
2. The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income
household, as applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the
unit does not exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the
household's eligible monthly income as determined pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be amended and supplemented;
provided, however, that this limit may be exceeded if one or more of
the following circumstances exists:
(a) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross
household income for rent, and the proposed rent will reduce
its housing costs;
(b) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(c) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded
living conditions;
(d) The household documents the existence of assets with which
the household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
§ 17-271 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-272
AO:718
§ 17-273. MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON. [Ord. No. 2018-1680]
(e) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the Administrative Agent and the owner of
the unit.
3. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in a.1(a) through a.2(e) above with
the Administrative Agent, who shall counsel the household on
budgeting.
a. Position; Duties.
1. The Township of Hopewell shall appoint a specific municipal
employee to serve as a Municipal Housing Liaison responsible for
overseeing the Township's affordable housing program, including
overseeing the administration of affordability controls on the
affordable units and the affirmative marketing of available
affordable units in accordance with the Township's Affirmative
Marketing Plan; fulfilling monitoring and reporting requirements;
and supervising Administrative Agent(s). Hopewell shall adopt an
ordinance creating the position of Municipal Housing Liaison and a
Resolution appointing the person to fulfill the position of Municipal
Housing Liaison. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed
by the governing body and may be a full or part time municipal
employee. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be approved by the
Court and shall be duly qualified through a training program
sponsored by Affordable Housing Professionals of New Jersey
before assuming the duties of Municipal Housing Liaison.
2. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight
and administration of the affordable housing program for
Hopewell, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out to the Administrative Agent:
(a) Serving as Hopewell's primary point of contact for all inquiries
from the State, affordable housing providers, Administrative
Agents and interested households;
(b) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Hopewell's Fair
Share Plan;
(c) Compiling, verifying, submitting and posting all monitoring
reports as required by the Court and by this Ordinance;
(d) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
Administrative Agents, as needed; and
(e) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at
least annually and more often as needed.
§ 17-272 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-273
AO:719
§ 17-274. ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT. [Ord. No. 2018-1680]
3. Subject to the approval of the Court, the Township of Hopewell
shall designate one or more Administrative Agent(s) to administer
and to affirmatively market the affordable units constructed in the
Township in accordance with UHAC and this Ordinance. An
Operating Manual for each affordable housing program shall be
provided by the Administrative Agent(s) to be adopted by
resolution of the governing body and subject to approval of the
Court. The Operating Manual(s) shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the Township Clerk, in the office of the
Municipal Housing Liaison, and in the office(s) of the
Administrative Agent(s). The Municipal Housing Liaison shall
supervise the work of the Administrative Agent(s).
a. Position; Duties. An Administrative Agent shall be an independent
entity serving under contract to and reporting to the municipality. The
fees of the Administrative Agent shall be paid by the owners of the
affordable units for which the services of the Administrative Agent are
required. The Administrative Agent shall perform the duties and
responsibilities of an Administrative Agent as set forth in UHAC,
including those set forth in Sections 5:80-26.14, 16 and 18 thereof,
which includes:
1. Affirmative Marketing:
(a) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market
affordable housing units in accordance with the Affirmative
Marketing Plan of the Township of Hopewell and the provisions
of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
2. Household Certification:
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or non-eligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
§ 17-273 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-274
AO:720
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located;
(f) Employing a random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Township of Hopewell when
referring households for certification to affordable units; and
(g) Notifying the following entities of the availability of affordable
housing units in the Township of Hopewell: Fair Share Housing
Center, the New Jersey State Conference of the NAACP, the
Latino Action Network, NORWESCAP, the Supportive Housing
Association, and the Central Jersey Housing Resource Center.
3. Affordability Controls:
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the Mercer County Register of Deeds or Mercer
County Clerk's office after the termination of the affordability
controls for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of Continuing Certificates of Occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
4. Resales and Rerentals:
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
Administrative Agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rerental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- (or very low-) and
moderate-income households regarding the availability of
restricted units for resale or re-rental.
5. Processing Requests from Unit Owners:
(a) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from
owners of restricted units who wish to take out home equity
loans or refinance during the term of their ownership that the
§ 17-274 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-274
AO:721
amount of indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the
terms of this Ordinance;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the
depreciated cost of central air conditioning systems;
(c) Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a
restricted unit; and
(d) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted
units for hardship waivers.
6. Enforcement:
(a) Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee
owners, and notifying all such owners that they must either
move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the Administrative Agent;
(c) Posting annually, in all rental properties (including two-family
homes), a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together
with the telephone number of the Administrative Agent where
complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the
Administrative Agent, to be approved by the Township
Committee and the Court, setting forth procedures for
administering the affordability controls.
7. Additional Responsibilities:
(a) The Administrative Agent shall have the authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its
responsibilities hereunder.
§ 17-274 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-274
AO:722
§ 17-275. AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No.
2018-1680]
(b) The Administrative Agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet
the Court-approved monitoring and reporting requirements in
accordance with the deadlines set forth in this Ordinance.
(c) The Administrative Agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as
needed.
a. Adoption of Affirmative Marketing Plan.
1. The Township of Hopewell shall adopt by resolution an Affirmative
Marketing Plan, subject to approval of the Court, that is compliant
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
2. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and
minority groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin,
ancestry, marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual
orientation, disability, age or number of children to housing units
which are being marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of
affordable housing. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is intended to
target those potentially eligible persons who are least likely to
apply for affordable units in that region. It is a continuing program
that directs marketing activities toward Housing Region 4 and is
required to be followed throughout the period of restriction.
3. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall provide a regional preference
for all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 4,
comprised of Mercer, Monmouth and Ocean Counties.
4. The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
Affirmative Marketing Plan and for the proper administration of the
Affirmative Marketing Program, including initial sales and rentals
and resales and rerentals. The Administrative Agent designated by
the Township of Hopewell shall implement the Affirmative
Marketing Plan to assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable
units.
5. In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the
Administrative Agent shall provide a list of counseling services to
low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
6. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall describe the media to be used
in advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In
implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the Administrative
§ 17-274 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-275
AO:723
§ 17-276. ENFORCEMENT OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
REGULATIONS. [Ord. No. 2018-1680]
Agent shall consider the use of language translations where
appropriate.
7. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units
shall begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected
date of occupancy.
8. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the County Administration
Building and/or the County Library for each county within the
housing region; the municipal administration building and the
municipal library in the municipality in which the units are located;
and the developer's rental office. Applications shall be mailed to
prospective applicants upon request.
9. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
a. Enforcement.
1. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations
governing an affordable unit by an Owner, Developer or Tenant, the
municipality shall have all remedies provided at law or equity,
including but not limited to foreclosure, tenant eviction, a
requirement for household recertification, acceleration of all sums
due under a mortgage, recuperation of any funds from a sale in
violation of the regulations, injunctive relief to prevent further
violation of the regulations, entry on the premises, and specific
performance.
2. After providing written notice of a violation to an Owner, Developer
or Tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the
Owner, Developer or Tenant of the penalties for such violations, the
municipality may take the following action(s) against the Owner,
Developer or Tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a
period of 60 days after service of the written notice:
(a) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the Owner, Developer
or Tenant is adjudged by the Court to have violated any
provision of the regulations governing affordable housing units
the Owner, Developer or Tenant shall be subject to one or more
of the following penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
(1) A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each
and every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
§ 17-275 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-276
AO:724
considered a separate and specific violation of these
provisions and not a continuation of the initial offense;
(2) In the case of an Owner who has rented a low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment into the
Township of Hopewell Affordable Housing Trust Fund of
the gross amount of rent illegally collected;
(3) In the case of an Owner who has rented a low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment of an
innocent tenant's reasonable relocation costs, as
determined by the Court.
(b) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
Owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable
as if the same were a judgment of default of the First Purchase
Money Mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or
moderate-income unit.
(1) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff,
at which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the
violating Owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not
less than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off
any First Purchase Money Mortgage and prior liens and
the costs of the enforcement proceedings incurred by the
municipality, including attorney's fees. The violating
Owner shall have his right to possession terminated as
well as his title conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(2) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the First Purchase Money Mortgage lien and any
prior liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The
excess, if any, shall be applied to reimburse the
municipality for any and all costs and expenses incurred in
connection with either the court action resulting in the
judgment of violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that
the proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are insufficient to
reimburse the municipality in full as aforesaid, the
violating Owner shall be personally responsible for the full
extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all costs
incurred by the municipality in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be
placed in escrow by the municipality for the Owner and
shall be held in such escrow for a maximum period of two
years or until such earlier time as the Owner shall make a
§ 17-276 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-276
AO:725
claim with the municipality for such. Failure of the Owner
to claim such balance within the two-year period shall
automatically result in a forfeiture of such balance to the
municipality. Any interest accrued or earned on such
balance while being held in escrow shall belong to and
shall be paid to the municipality, whether such balance
shall be paid to the Owner or forfeited to the municipality.
(3) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the
purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions
and provisions of the regulations governing the affordable
housing unit. The Owner determined to be in violation of
the provisions of this plan and from whom title and
possession were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale shall
not be entitled to any right of redemption.
(4) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if
insufficient amounts are bid to satisfy the First Purchase
Money Mortgage and any prior liens, the municipality may
acquire title to the low- and moderate-income unit by
satisfying the First Purchase Money Mortgage and any
prior liens and crediting the violating owner with an
amount equal to the difference between the First Purchase
Money Mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderateincome
unit could have been sold under the terms of the
regulations governing affordable housing units. This
excess shall be treated in the same manner as the excess
which would have been realized from an actual sale as
previously described.
(5) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either
sold at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality
shall obligate the Owner to accept an offer to purchase
from any qualified purchaser which may be referred to the
Owner by the municipality, with such offer to purchase
being equal to the maximum resale price of the low- and
moderate-income unit as permitted by the regulations
governing affordable housing units.
(6) The Owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and
liable for complying with the terms and restrictions of
governing affordable housing units until such time as title
is conveyed from the Owner.
§ 17-276 HOPEWELL CODE § 17-277
AO:726
§ 17-277. APPEALS. [Ord. No. 2018-1680]
Appeals from all decisions of an Administrative Agent appointed pursuant
to this Ordinance shall be filed in writing with the Court.
§ 17-278. REPEALER. [Ord. No. 2018-1680]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are repealed as
to such inconsistencies.
§ 17-279. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. No. 2018-1680]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions thereof.
§ 17-280. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. No. 2018-1680, adopted
1-29-2018]
This Ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided
by law.
§ 17-277 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-280
AO:727
Chapter 18
CABLE TELEVISION AND COMMUNICATIONS
[Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes ordinance Nos.
710-86 and 03-1296.]
§ 18-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. #18-1696]
Hopewell Township hereby grants to Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania,
LLC its non-exclusive consent to place in, upon, along, across, above, over
and under the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways, and public
places in the municipality poles, wires, cables, and fixtures necessary for
the construction, maintenance and operation in Hopewell Township of a
cable television system and cable communications system.
§ 18-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #18-1696]
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or
definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions given by the Federal
Communications Commission F.C.C. Rules and Regulations 47 C.F.R.
Subsection 76.1 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act 47
U.S.C. Section 521 et seq. as amended, the New Jersey Cable Television
Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq. as amended, and the Rules of Practice and
Procedure of the Office of Cable Television and Telecommunications, and
shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with federal or
state definitions:
a. TOWN or MUNICIPALITY – Is the Township of Hopewell, County of
Mercer, State of New Jersey.
b. COMPANY – Is the grantee of rights under this Ordinance and is known
as Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania, LLC.
c. ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT – Is Chapter 186 of the General Laws
of New Jersey, and subsequent amendment thereto, Section 48:SA-1
d. FCC – Is the Federal Communications Commission.
e. BOARD or BPU – Is the Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
f. OFFICE or OCTV – Is the Office of Cable Television of the Board.
g. BASIC CABLE SERVICE – Means any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the
FCC.
h. APPLICATION – Is the Company's Application for Renewal of Municipal
Consent.
§ 17-280 HOPEWELL CODE § 18-2
AO:728
§ 18-3. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS. [Ord. #18-1696]
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to the Company
was held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions
of the Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and
the municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications
of the Company to receive this consent, and the representations of the
Company that the Company possesses the necessary legal, technical,
character, financial and other qualifications and that the Company's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ 18-4. DURATION OF FRANCHISE. [Ord. #18-1696]
The consent herein granted shall expire 10 years from the date of expiration
of the pervious Certificate of Approval issued by the Board.
In the event that the Municipality shall find that the Company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
Ordinance, the Municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including modification
and/or termination of the Certificate of Approval; provided however, that the
Municipality shall first have given the Company written notice of all alleged
instances of non-compliance and an opportunity to cure same within 90 days
of that notification.
§ 18-5. FRANCHISE FEE. [Ord. #18-1696]
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30, the
Company shall, during each year of operation under the consent herein, pay
to the Municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges
in the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television
reception service in the Municipality or any higher amount permitted by the
Act or otherwise allowable by law. The current fee is 3.5% of the Company's
gross revenues, as defined under N.J.S.A. 48:5A-3(x) pursuant to N.J.S.A.
48:5A-30(d).
§ 18-6. TERRITORY. [Ord. #18-1696]
The consent granted herein to the Company shall apply to the entirety of
the Municipality and any property hereafter annexed.
§ 18-7. EXTENSION OF SERVICE. [Ord. #18-1696]
The Company shall be required to proffer service along any public rightof-
way to any person's residence or business located in those areas of the
franchise territory described herein. Any additional extension of the system
i. PRIMARY SERVICE AREA or PSA – Consists of the area of the Township
currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map annexed to
the Company's Application for Municipal Consent.
§ 18-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-7
AO:729
will be made in accordance with the company's line extension policy. The
Company observes a line extension policy of 25 homes per mile.
§ 18-8. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. #18-1696]
§ 18-9. CUSTOMER SERVICE. [Ord. #18-1696]
In providing services to its customers, the Company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. § 14:18-1, et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes
and regulations. The Company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the Township upon written request of
the Township Administrator or Clerk.
a. Restoration: In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces
in the natural topography, the company shall at its sole expense restore
and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good condition as
existed prior to the commencement of said work. Any restoration shall
commence as expeditiously as practical, and the Company will make
every effort to commence restoration work 10 calendar days after a
notice of violation is issued to the Company by the Township.
b. Relocation: If at any time during the period of this consent, the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
shall remove, re-lay and relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
company.
c. Removal or Trimming of Trees: During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the Company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such trees
from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the Company. Such
trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance for the Company's facilities.
d. Installation of Equipment: The Company shall install equipment in the
same location and manner as existing public utilities whenever deemed
possible by the Company, in order to minimize the impact of same on
surrounding property.
a. The Company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state
and federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
b. The Company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state
and federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of
devices for the hearing impaired and the notification of same to
customers.
§ 18-7 HOPEWELL CODE § 18-9
AO:730
§ 18-10. MUNICIPAL COMPLAINT OFFICER. [Ord. #18-1696]
The Office of Cable Television and Telecommunications is hereby designated
as the complaint officer for the municipality, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall be received and processed in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5.
§ 18-11. LOCAL OFFICE. [Ord. #18-1696]
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
§ 14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters.
§ 18-12. PERFORMANCE BOND. [Ord. #18-1696]
During the life of the franchise, the Company shall give to the Township a
bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the Company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ 18-13. SUBSCRIBER RATES. [Ord. #18-1696]
The rates of the Company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ 18-14. COMMITMENTS BY THE COMPANY. [Ord. #18-1696]
The Company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association ("NCTA").
c. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the Township
to express any comment with respect to telephone accessibility to the
Complaint Officer, or impair the right of the Complaint Officer to take
any action that is permitted under law.
a. The Company shall provide Expanded Basic or a similar tier of cable
television service to one outlet at no cost to each qualified existing and
future school in the Township, public and private, elementary,
intermediate and secondary, provided the school building is within 200
feet of active cable distribution plant. This includes Bear Tavern
Elementary School located at 1162 Bear Tavern Road Titusville; Stony
Brook Elementary School located at 20 Stephenson Road Pennington;
Timberlane Middle School located at 51 S. Timberlane Drive
Pennington; Hopewell Valley Central High School located at 259
Pennington- Titusville Road Pennington. Each additional outlet
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the
school requesting service.
§ 18-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-14
AO:731
§ 18-15. PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS.
[Ord. #18-1696]
b. The Company shall provide Expanded Basic or a similar tier of cable
television service at no cost to one outlet to every Township building
located at 201 Washington Crossing Pennington Road Titusville,
including the main Municipal Building, Police Station and Municipal
Court, and the Department of Public Works building located at 203
Washington Crossing Road Titusville; the Union Fire and Rescue
located at 1396 River Road Titusville, and each qualified existing and
future municipal building, police, fire or emergency management
facility in the Township, provided the facility is located within 200 feet
of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any,
shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the Township.
c. The Communications Act of 1934, as amended [47 U.S.C. § 543(b)],
allows the Company to itemize and/or identify: (1) the amount on the
subscriber bill assessed as a franchise fee and the identity of the
governmental authority to which the fee is paid; (2) the amount on the
bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the Company by
the cable franchise to support public, education, and/or governmental
access channels or the use of such channels; and (3) any grants or other
fees on the bill or any tax, assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by
any governmental authority on the transaction between the operator
and the subscriber. The Company reserves its external cost, passthrough
rights to the full extent permitted by law.
a. The Company will continue to provide one channel for educational
access and one channel for governmental access. These channels shall
be provided on the most basic tier of service offered by the Company in
accordance with the Cable Act, Section 611, and as further set forth
below. The government access channel is managed by the Township.
Hopewell Valley Regional High School has been designated by the
Township as the administrator of the educational access channel.
b. The Company will maintain the cable, modulators, and equipment
necessary for Hopewell Township to send a signal to the Company, and
to receive the return feed of the signal.
c. The Company will maintain the cable, modulators, and equipment
necessary for the Hopewell Valley Regional High School to Send a
signal to the Company, and to receive the return feed of the signal.
Shared use of the channel shall be governed by mutual agreements
among the Boroughs of Hopewell and Pennington, the Township of
Hopewell and the Hopewell Valley Regional High School.
d. The Company does not relinquish its ownership of or ultimate right of
control over a channel by designating it for EG use. An EG access user -
whether an educational or government user - acquires no property or
other interest by virtue of the use of a channel so designated, and may
§ 18-14 HOPEWELL CODE § 18-15
AO:732
§ 18-16. EMERGENCY USES. [Ord. #18-1696]
§ 18-17. LIABILITY INSURANCE. [Ord. #18-1696]
The Company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at its
sole expense at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability
insurance naming the Township as an insured, and insuring against loss
by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the minimum
amounts of $1,000,000 covering liability for any death, personal injury,
property damages or other liability arising out of its construction and
operation of the cable television system, and an excess liability (or
"umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
The Company agrees to provide the Township with adequate notice of a
change in or cancellation of its liability insurance policy.
not rely on the continued use of a particular channel number, no matter
how long the same channel may have been designated for such use.
e. The Company shall not exercise editorial control over the use of any
educational or governmental channel capacity, except Company may
refuse to transmit any educational or governmental access program or
portion of any public or governmental access program that contains
obscenity, indecency, or nudity.
f. Educational Access. "Educational Access" shall mean non-commercial
use by educational institutions such as public or private schools, but not
"home schools," community colleges and/or universities.
g. Government Access. "Government Access" shall mean non-commercial
use by the governing bodies of the Township for the purpose of showing
the public local government at work.
h. Fallow Time. Because blank or underutilized PG channels are not in the
public interest, in the event the Township or other EG access users elect
not to fully program the PG access channel, the Company may program
unused time on those channels subject to reclamation by the Township
upon no less than 60 calendar days' written notice.
i. Signal Quality. The Company shall take any steps that are necessary to
ensure that the signals originated on the access channels are carried
without material degradation, and with a signal whose quality is equal
to that of the other channels that the Company transmits.
a. The Company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS")
rules in accordance with applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations.
b. The Company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the Township or any other person, during an emergency, if for any
reason the Township is unable to make full use of the cable television
system as contemplated herein.
§ 18-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-18
AO:733
§ 18-18. INCORPORATION OF THE APPLICATION. [Ord. #18-1696]
All of the statements and commitments contained in the Application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the Company as terms and
conditions of this municipal consent. The Application and other relevant
writings submitted by the Company shall be annexed hereto and made a
part hereof by reference provided same do not conflict with application
State or Federal law.
§ 18-19. COMPETITIVE EQUITY. [Ord. #18-1696]
Should the Township grant municipal consent for a franchise to construct,
operate and maintain a cable television system to any other person,
corporation or entity on terms materially less burdensome or more
favorable than the terms contained herein, the Company may substitute
such language that is more favorable or less burdensome for the
comparable provision of this Ordinance subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C.
§ 14:17-6.7. The Company agrees to simultaneously provide a courtesy copy
of the petition to the Township Administrator in the event that it files such
a request with the BPU under this Section of the consent agreement.
§ 18-20. SEPARABILITY. [Ord. #18-1696]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the Ordinance.
§ 18-21. THIRD PARTY BENEFICIARIES. [Ord. #18-1696]
Nothing in this Franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or Franchise.
§ 18-22. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. #18-1696]
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or other part of this
Ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not
affect or invalidate the remainder of this Ordinance, but shall be confined
in its effect to the section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or other part of
this Ordinance directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment
shall have been rendered and all other provisions of this Ordinance shall
remain in full force and effect.
§ 18-18 HOPEWELL CODE § 18-23
AO:734
§ 18-23. INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES REPEALED. [Ord.
#18-1696]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances that are in conflict with or otherwise
impose obligations different from the provisions of this Franchise
Agreement are superseded by this Franchise Agreement.
§ 18-24. PROPRIETARY INFORMATION. [Ord. #18-1696]
The Company shall not be required to disclose information which it
reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature. The Township
agrees to treat any information disclosed by the Company as confidential
and only to disclose it to those employees, representatives, and agents of
the Township that have a need to know in order to enforce this Ordinance
and who agree to maintain the confidentiality of all such information.
The Company shall not be required to provide Customer information in
violation of Section 631 of the Cable Act or any other applicable federal
or state privacy law. For purposes of this Section, the terms "proprietary
or confidential" include, but are not limited to, information relating to the
Cable System design, customer lists, marketing plans, financial information
unrelated to the calculation of franchise fees or rates pursuant to FCC rules,
or other information that is reasonably determined by the Company to be
competitively sensitive. The Company may make proprietary or confidential
information available for inspection but not copying or removal by the
Municipality's representative. In the event that the Township has in its
possession and receives a request under a state "sunshine," public records,
or similar law for the disclosure of information the Company has designated
as confidential, trade secret or proprietary, the Township shall notify the
Company of such request and cooperate with Company in opposing such
request.
§ 18-25. NEW DEVELOPMENTS. [Ord. #18-1696]
The Municipality, for its part, shall endeavor to exercise reasonable efforts
to require developers and utility companies to provide the Company with at
least 15 days' advance notice of an available open trench for the placement
of necessary cable.
§ 18-26. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. #18-1696, adopted 9-24-2018]
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a Renewal
Certificate of Approval from the BPU.
Chapter 19
SEWER AND WATER MATTERS
§ 19-1. SEWER MATTERS.
§ 18-23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-1.1
AO:735
§ 19-1.1. Stony Brook Sewer Utility.76 [Ord. #13-1588]
§ 19-1.2. Ewing Lawrence Sewer Authority. [Ord. #13-1588; Ord.
No. 2016-1631]
a. It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to
the protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of
the township to collect charges from all users who contribute
wastewater to the Stony Brook treatment works. The proceeds of such
charges so derived will be used for the purpose of operating and
maintaining the public wastewater treatment works.
b. There is hereby created the Stony Brook Sewer Utility of the Township
of Hopewell. The Stony Brook Sewer Utility is created pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:62-106, N.J.S.A. 40:62-47 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 40:63-1 et seq.,
and shall have all the powers, rights and obligations as provided for in
the New Jersey Statutes. The Stony Brook Sewer Utility shall consist of
the township committee and such other township employees as may be
designated by the governing body to operate and maintain said utility in
accordance with the rules and regulations hereinafter adopted.
c. Sewer Service Fees. Charges for sewage disposal service to premises
located within the Stony Brook Service District with non-metered water
connections will be $385 per quarter.
d. Sewer Service Billing. Sewer service bills shall be rendered quarterly.
The amount charged shall be due on the date indicated on the bill.
Interest will be charged on any overdue balance at the rate of 8% per
annum on balances of $1,500 or less and 18% per annum on balances
greater than $1,500. In the event that sewer bills are not duly paid as
provided for herein, the amounts due shall be forwarded to the collector
of taxes for the Township of Hopewell. All delinquent unpaid sewer bills
shall become a lien upon the premises served until paid; the township
shall have the same remedy for the collection thereof together with
legal interest, costs and penalties as presently permitted under the laws
of the State of New Jersey.
a. It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to
the protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of
the township to collect charges from all users who contribute
wastewater to the ELSA treatment works. The proceeds of such
charges so derived will be used for the purpose of operating and
maintaining the public wastewater treatment works.
b. There is hereby created the Ewing Lawrence Sewer Utility of the
Township of Hopewell. The Ewing Lawrence Sewer Utility is created
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:62-106, N.J.S.A. 40:62-47 et seq. and N.J.S.A.
76.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 755-88, 786-88,
90-850, 91-878, 93-947, 94-968, 94-974, 94-983, 95-1020, 96-1039, 97-1069, 98-1108,
98-1109, 99-1138, 00-1141, 00-1173, 01-1213, 02-1225, 04-1309, 04-1310, 04-1316,
13-1573 and 13-1574.
§ 19-1.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 19-1.2
AO:736
40:63-1 et seq., and shall have all the powers, rights and obligations as
provided for in the New Jersey Statutes. The Ewing Lawrence Sewer
Utility shall consist of the township committee and such other township
employees as may be designated by the governing body to operate
and maintain said utility in accordance with the rules and regulations
hereinafter adopted.
c. Sewer Service Fees.
1. Metered Premises. The charge for sewerage disposal services
provided to the systems' users shall be based upon the water
consumed on the users' premises as measured by a meter for this
purpose. In the absence of water meters, users shall pay the fee
specified in paragraph 2 of this subsection.
(a) Users may obtain an additional meter to measure water used
for outside purposes, such as sprinkler systems, swimming
pools, etc., which does not flow into the sanitary sewer (also
see subsection 19-1.3e). Users may receive a deduction from
their quarterly water consumption for the amount of water
measured by the additional meter.
(b) All discrepancies with measurement of water used by the
secondary meter shall be reconciled by the Municipal Engineer
using all scientific means available to determine actual
amounts of water used. In the event it is certified by the
Municipal Engineer that there is not a reasonable basis to
determine water used by scientific means, then the Municipal
Engineer is authorized to adjust the measurement based upon
a five year average of historic usage of the secondary meter for
the property. When five years of data for the secondary meter
does not exist, then the average shall be based upon a
minimum of two years. There shall be no adjustment for
discrepancies when less than two years of secondary meter
data exists.
(c) When a secondary meter has been found defective it shall be
replaced pursuant to subsection 19-1.3e. During the
replacement period (30 days maximum) water used shall be
determined based upon historic data as set forth in
19-1.2c1(b). When less than two years of data is available the
Municipal Engineer shall provide an estimate during the
replacement period.
2. Non-Metered Premises. Charges for sewer service for premises
without water meters shall be based upon an estimated annual
water consumption. The estimated water consumption shall be 85%
of the calculated wastewater flow based upon the NJDEP's
Treatment Works Application wastewater calculation.
3. Rate. The user rate shall be a uniform charge, which shall include
operation, maintenance and replacement costs, administrative
§ 19-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-1.2
AO:737
§ 19-1.3. Regulations Governing Sewers. [Ord. #13-1588; Ord. No.
2016-1631]
expenses, debt service and any additional contract charges
required by the agreement with the Township of Ewing or ELSA.
Price Per 1,000
Gallons
ELSA/Ewing-Treatment*
Operations, Maintenance and
Replacement Charges/Costs and Ewing
Contract Charge
$9.98
*As per contractual agreement
Price Per 1,000
Gallons
Hopewell
Administrative/O&M $1.20
Debt Service $0.23
Total Unit Charge per 1,000 Gallons: $11.41
4. Sewer Service Billing. Sewer service bills shall be rendered
quarterly. The amount charged shall be due on the date indicated
on the bill. Interest will be charged on any overdue balance at the
rate of 8% per annum on balances of $1,500 or less and 18% per
annum on balances greater than $1,500. In the event that sewer
bills are not duly paid as provided for herein, the amounts due shall
be forwarded to the collector of taxes for the Township of
Hopewell. All delinquent unpaid sewer bills shall become a lien
upon the premises served until paid; the township shall have the
same remedy for the collection thereof together with legal interest,
costs and penalties as presently permitted under the laws of the
State of New Jersey.
a. Sump Pumps and Storm Drainage Collectors. No person shall connect
any sump pump or storm drainage collectors to a sewer line. This
includes, but is not limited to roof drains, leaders, gutters, stormwater
detention ponds or tanks. The record title owner shall be responsible
under this subsection and shall be presumed to have caused any such
connection.
b. Infiltration into Sewer System. No person shall permit, allow, or suffer
or cause the infiltration of water or any other substance which is not
normal sewage into the sewer system. The record title owner shall be
responsible under this subsection and shall be presumed to have
caused any such connection.
§ 19-1.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 19-1.3
AO:738
§ 19-1.4. Prohibited Discharges. [Ord. #13-1588]
c. Sewer Connections, Extensions and/or Additions. No person shall be
permitted to connect to any public sewer system, or to perform any
extension or addition to an existing sewer connection, except through
and with the approval of the Hopewell Township Committee, provided
such Hopewell Township Committee approval is required or permitted
pursuant to applicable law, regulations, rules or water quality
management plan for the connection, extension or addition to or of a
public sewer system, which approval must be received through the
affirmative vote of not less than two-thirds of the full membership
thereof.
d. Powers and Authority of the Township. Duly authorized employees or
officials of the township bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter any and all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
e. Additional Meters. Additional meters installed in accordance with
subsection 19-1.2c1 shall be of the make and model prescribed by the
Township. All installation shall be approved by the Township and the
costs of purchasing the meter, installing the meter, all construction
permit fees, and maintaining the meter in good working condition is the
sole responsibility of the user. The owner shall monitor the secondary
meter and replace any defective meter within 30 days. Hopewell
Township reserves the right to declare the secondary meter defective
for any reason. Upon receipt of notice from Hopewell Township that the
secondary meter is defective then the owner shall replace the defective
meter within 30 days of receipt of notice from the Township.
f. Waiver of Prosecution Upon Finding of Special Need. Whenever the
township committee finds that the public health, safety or welfare
requires prompt and efficient access to properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing; and
further finds that this need outweighs the municipality's interest in
collecting a fine or imposing a penalty for a violation of this subsection,
the township committee may authorize a period of general amnesty,
during which the municipality shall suspend the imposition of fines and
penalties and waive prosecution of all persons found during the
amnesty period to have violated the terms of this subsection.
Authorization of a period of general amnesty must be by resolution of
the governing body after an advertised public hearing, and any general
amnesty so authorized must be limited to a period not to exceed 60
days.
a. No person shall discharge, deposit or cause or allow to be discharged or
deposited:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, mineral oil or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
§ 19-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-1.4
AO:739
§ 19-1.5. Disposition of Sewer Revenues. [Ord. #13-1588]
Revenue realized from sewer charges shall be dedicated to purposes
normally associated with the operation of a sewerage system, including, but
2. Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singularly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment
process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a
public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
wastewater treatment plant.
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the
wastewater system.
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with
the proper operation of the wastewater facilities, such as but not
limited to ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch
manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups or milk
containers, etc.
5. Any unpolluted waters, such as stormwater, groundwater, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water.
6. Any waters or waste containing an odor-producing substance
which, either singularly or by interaction with other waste, is
capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or which
prevents entry into sewers for their inspection, maintenance and
repair.
7. Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, which constitute a slug.
8. Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases,
develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids which
interfere with the collection system, or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
9. Any wastes containing viable pathogenic bacteria other than those
normal to domestic sewage.
10. Any waste containing grease or oil that will solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between 32° Fahrenheit and 150°
Fahrenheit.
11. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes, de-inking
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
§ 19-1.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 19-1.5
AO:740
not limited to, operations, maintenance, repair, debt service and offset of
future revenue requirements.
§ 19-1.6. Annual Review of Rates. [Ord. #13-1588]
§ 19-2. WATER MATTERS.
§ 19-2.1. Water Utility. [Ord. #00-1141, § 2]
There is hereby created a water utility of the township. Said utility is
created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:62-47 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 40:63-1 et seq.,
and said utility shall have all the powers, rights and obligations as provided
for in the New Jersey Statutes. Said utility shall consist of the township
committee and such other township employees as may be designated by the
governing body to operate and maintain said utility in accordance with the
rules and regulations hereinafter adopted.
§ 19-2.2. Water Service Fees. [Ord. #00-1141, § 2; Ord. #12-1561]
The water service fee shall be payable in quarterly installments due and
owing on January 10th, April 10th, July 10th and October 10th, respectively.
Payment must be made before the last business day of the billing month.
Interest will be charged on any overdue balance at the maximum rate
allowed under N.J.S.A. 54-5:67c until the account is brought current.
Interest will be charged back to the date the fee became due and owing.
In the event that water bills are not duly paid as provided for herein, the
amounts shall be forwarded to the Collector of Taxes for the Township of
Hopewell. All delinquent unpaid water bills shall become a lien upon the
premises served until paid and the Township shall have the same remedy
for the collection thereof together with legal interest, costs and penalties as
presently permitted under the laws of the State of New Jersey. The minimum
charge for consumption of up to 6,000 gallons per quarter shall be $75 in
each quarter. For amounts over 6,000 gallons in a quarter, the following
schedule shall apply:
K/Q* $/gallon
6,001 to 9,000 0.0120
9,001 to 12,000 0.0130
a. The township will review the user charges at least annually and revise
the rates as necessary to ensure that adequate revenues are generated
to pay the costs of operation and maintenance including replacement
and that the system continues to provide for the proportional
distribution of operation and maintenance including replacement costs
among users and user classes.
b. The township will notify each user at least annually of the rate being
charged for operation and maintenance including replacement of the
treatment works.
§ 19-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-2.2
AO:741
K/Q* $/gallon
12,001 to 15,000 0.0140
15,001 to 18,000 0.0150
18,001 to 21,000 0.0160
21,001 to 24,000 0.0180
24,001 to 27,000 0.0200
27,001 to 30,000 0.0220
30,001 to 35,000 0.0240
More than 35,000 0.0260
*K - 1,000 gal
Q - quarterly
§ 19-2.3. Billing of Water Charges. [Ord. #00-1141, § 2]
Water meters will be read quarterly by the utility and owners will be billed
accordingly. The owner shall allow access to the premises for reading of the
meter, if necessary. In the event that the meter reader cannot gain access
to the premises, a quantity of water consumed during the period shall be
estimated by the utility. All accounts will be billed for the amount of water
used during the quarterly period, with a minimum charge for water used, at
the rates and charges herein indicated.
Water bills shall be rendered quarterly. The amount charged shall be due
on the date indicated on the bill. Interest will be charged on any overdue
balance at the rate of 8% per annum on balances of $1,500 or less and 18%
per annum on balances greater than $1,500.
In the event water bills are not duly paid as provided for herein, the
amounts due shall be forwarded to the collector of taxes for the Township
of Hopewell. All delinquent unpaid water bills shall become a lien upon the
premises served until paid; the township shall have the same remedy for
the collection thereof together with legal interest, costs and penalties as
presently permitted under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 19-3. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES. [Ord. #00-1141, § 2]
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by any duly authorized
agent or employee of Hopewell Township. Any person found guilty of a
violation of this chapter shall be liable to a penalty of a maximum of $1,000
and/or six months imprisonment. Additionally, the township may take such
other action deemed necessary to halt or restrain such violations.
§ 19-2.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 19-3
AO:742
Chapter 20
RECYCLING
[Editor's Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of
Ordinance No. 818-89.]
§ 20-1. RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. #92-911, § 1]
Pursuant to the Recycling Act, each resident of the Township of Hopewell
shall be required to comply with the recycling plan of the Township of
Hopewell, adopting the Mercer County Recycling Plan to meet the Statemandated
recycling goals. To effectuate and implement the Township of
Hopewell Recycling Plan the following are hereby required.
§ 20-1.1. Municipality. [Ord. #92-911, § 1]
a. The Township of Hopewell hereby adopts this chapter to provide for
recycling within its borders pursuant to the Recycling Act and Mercer
County Recycling Plan as revised as its official municipal recycling
program; and
b. All municipal contracts for solid waste collection and/or disposal with
the Township of Hopewell shall be consistent with this chapter and the
Mercer County Source Separation and Recycling Plan.
c. The Township of Hopewell shall heretofore provide for a collection
system for leaves generated from residential premises, prohibit the
placement of leaves for collection or disposal as solid waste, and
require that persons occupying residential premises within its
municipal boundaries source separate leaves from solid waste
generated at those premises and, unless leaves are stored or recycled
for composting or mulching by the generator, place the leaves for
collection in the manner provided for herein.
Residents will be notified in the area newspapers when township public
works crews will begin the leaf pickup program each year. Signs will be
posted in each neighborhood one week before the township's scheduled
pickup. Residents are requested to rake their leaves to the curb before
the township's scheduled pickup in their area.
Leaves collected will be transported by township public works crews to
the Hopewell Township Composting facility.
d. The Township of Hopewell may deliver tires to the existing transfer
station, or such site as designated by the Mercer County Improvement
Authority for transfer to a tire recycler.
e. The Township of Hopewell shall, at a minimum, within 30 days after the
adoption of this chapter and at least once every six months thereafter,
notify all persons occupying residential, commercial, and institutional
premises within these municipal boundaries of recycling opportunities,
§ 19-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-1.1
AO:743
§ 20-1.2. Residents. [Ord. #92-911, § 1]
and the source separation requirements of its ordinance and the
Mercer County Source Separation and Recycling Plan ("Plan"). The
municipalities shall inform residents concerning collection schedules
and other aspects of recycling at a minimum twice a year.
In order to fulfill the notification requirements of this subsection, this
municipality may, in its discretion, place an advertisement in a
newspaper circulating in the municipality, post a notice in public places
where public notices are customarily posted, include a notice with
other official notifications periodically mailed to residential taxpayers,
or any combination thereof, as the municipality deems necessary and
appropriate.
At least once annually, the Improvement Authority shall be informed in
writing of the manner in which residents were notified.
f. The Township of Hopewell shall, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E99.16(c),
within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter, and at least 36
months thereafter, conduct a review and make necessary revisions to
the master plan and development regulations adopted pursuant to P.L.
1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-1 et seq.), which revisions shall reflect changes
in State, county and municipal policies and objectives concerning the
collection, disposition and recycling of designated materials.
The revised master plan shall include provisions for the collection,
disposition and recycling of recyclable materials designated in this
chapter, and for the collection, disposition and recycling of designated
recyclable materials within any development proposal for the
construction of 50 or more units of single-family residential housing or
25 or more units of multi-family residential housing and any commercial
or industrial development proposal for the utilization of 1,000 square
feet or more of land.
Permits for construction and demolition work, as well as road opening
permits, shall be required to specify the quantity of materials recycled,
where they will be taken and how they will be handled.
a. All residents of the Township of Hopewell, in areas designated for
recycling collection, shall separate for curbside collection on
designated collection days and such additional days as may be
designated by the Mercer County Improvement Authority, those
materials designated in the Mercer County Source Separation and
Recycling Plan for curbside collection as listed below and shall do so in
the manner prescribed by the Mercer County Improvement Authority.
In addition, residents shall be required to recycle all designated
materials not collected as part of the Improvement Authority's curbside
program in the manner designated by the municipality.
§ 20-1.1 HOPEWELL CODE § 20-1.2
AO:744
b. All residents shall recycle, or cause to be recycled, at a minimum, the
following categories of recyclables:
1. Paper, including:
(a) Newspapers.
(b) Magazines.
(c) Corrugated cardboard.
2. Clear, green, and amber glass food and beverage containers.
3. Aluminum food and beverage containers.
4. P.E.T. beverage and H.D.P.E. beverage and laundry detergent
containers.
5. Tin-plate steel containers.
6. Bimetal containers.
7. Tires.
8. Vehicle batteries.
9. White goods.
10. Leaves.
11. Grass.
12. Used motor oil.
13. Ferrous automotive scrap.
The following materials are collected through the Improvement Authority's
residential collection programs: glass, aluminum, plastic, tin-plate steel,
and bimetal containers and paper as identified in paragraphs 1-6 above.
Private contractors servicing multi-family complexes within the Township
of Hopewell are required to collect for recycling, at a minimum, the same
materials as collected through Improvement Authority residential
collection programs.
As part of the Mercer County Source Separation and Recycling Plan the
Township of Hopewell shall provide all residents a means to recycle items
designated in the Plan and shall provide for collection of items designated
in this Plan not collected curbside by the Improvement Authority in the
following manner:
Tires - picked up curbside twice a year
Vehicle batteries - brought by residents to M.C. Hazardous Waste Day
White goods - picked up curbside monthly
Leaves - curbside monthly during spring and fall
§ 20-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-1.2
AO:745
§ 20-1.3. Commercial, Industrial and Institutional Establishments.
[Ord. #92-911, § 1]
Grass - residents encouraged to mulch and leave grass on lawns
Used motor oil - private drop-off at specified locations in the township
Ferrous automotive scrap - picked up curbside monthly
c. Any and all persons having found to have violated provisions of the
Recycling Plan of the Township of Hopewell will be assessed warnings,
penalties and fines pursuant to section 20-3 (Penalties) of this chapter;
and
d. At the time of placement of recyclable materials designated for
collection by the Recycling Plan of the Township of Hopewell at the curb
or streetside of residential units said material shall be considered the
sole property of the Mercer County Improvement Authority.
e. Materials collected from multi-family complexes by private contractors
shall be the property of said private contractor. Private contractors
servicing multi-family complexes shall provide monthly reports to the
municipality on total tonnages recycled from all multi-family complexes
serviced by said private contractor within the municipality. On or before
January 31, private contractors shall file tonnage reports with the
Improvement Authority giving annual totals for tonnages recycled and
markets for individual materials, along with documentation for those
tonnages and markets.
It shall be the responsibility of the landlord, building owner, property
manager, and/or private association to ensure that recycling collection
services are provided to residents of multi-family complexes and that
sufficient space is provided for collection and storage of materials
designated for recycling in this Plan.
If shall be the responsibility of the landlord, building owner, property
manager, and/or private association to inform both current and new
residents, at a minimum annually of the manner, time, and place for
collection of recyclable materials.
f. Any resident may donate or sell designated recyclable materials to any
person, whether operating for profit or not-for-profit, provided that the
receiving person may not perform curbside collection of designated
recyclable materials unless authorized by the Improvement Authority to
do so.
a. Effective with the adoption of this Plan, all commercial, industrial and
institutional establishments located within the Township of Hopewell
shall recycle, or cause to be recycled, the following categories of
recyclables if a waste audit determines they are present in the waste
stream. The Improvement Authority may, in its discretion, add
additional materials to the list of designated recyclables, if it
§ 20-1.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 20-1.3
AO:746
determines markets for those materials are available to the
commercial/industrial/institutional sector.
1. Paper, including:
(a) Acceptable mixed paper.
(b) Corrugated cardboard.
(c) Office paper.
2. Clear, green, and amber glass food and beverage containers.
3. Aluminum food and beverage containers.
4. Tin-plate steel containers.
5. Bimetal containers.
6. P.E.T. beverage and H.D.P.E. beverage and laundry detergent
containers.
7. Tires.
8. Vehicle batteries.
9. White goods.
10. Leaves.
11. Grass.
12. Used motor oil.
13. Ferrous automotive scrap.
b. As of March 15, 1990, all commercial/industrial/institutional
establishments located within the Township of Hopewell shall have
submitted a source separation recycling plan to the Mercer County
Improvement Authority to meet the State recycling mandates
identifying or incorporating the following:
1. All waste material generated, listed by type;
2. All volumes of these waste categories currently recycled;
3. Any agreement with any solid waste or recycling collection
contractor for the recycling of source separated designated
materials as defined in the District Recycling Plan;
4. A description of current or proposed recycling efforts for
designated materials:
5. The name of the person responsible for the recycling plan.
§ 20-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-1.3
AO:747
c. Commercial/industrial/institutional establishments shall submit
updated recycling plans, including a waste audit, to the Improvement
Authority according to the following schedule:
1. Facilities with more than 500 employees by December 31, 1992;
2. Facilities with 250-499 employees by December 31, 1993;
3. Facilities with 100-249 employees by December 31, 1994;
4. Facilities with less than 100 employees by December 31, 1995.
Recycling plans shall be updated once every two years from date of
approval of the waste audit.
d. All commercial/industrial/institutional establishments required to
submit a recycling plan under this chapter, may at their option, submit a
joint recycling plan with any other entity or entities whereby a common
hauler and/or collection point for common pick-ups is set forth.
However, each commercial/industrial/institutional establishment shall
submit a plan identifying that they are part of this joint plan and shall
attach a copy of same, incorporating it by reference. All joint plans must
name all plan participants and designate a coordinator for the joint
plan. If a joint plan is filed, the person or entity serving as coordinator
shall be required to file tonnage reports with the Improvement
Authority. It shall be the responsibility of the joint plan coordinator to
update the list of participants, if necessary, at the time of filing of
recycling tonnage reports.
e. New commercial/industrial/institutional establishments commencing
operations in the Township of Hopewell after January 1, 1991, shall
submit a recycling plan within six months of commencement of
operations. An extension of time for plan submittal and/or plan
implementation of up to 90 days may be granted by the Improvement
Authority on request. Justification for such a request shall be submitted
to the Improvement Authority in writing and shall be verified as
necessary or justified.
f. Commercial/industrial/establishments shall file tonnage reports with
the Improvement Authority annually with documentation on materials
claimed for recycling. Reports are due on or before January 31 of the
year following the end of the reporting period, which is December 31.
The Improvement Authority reserves the right to establish more
frequent reporting periods should the NJ Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy require more frequent reporting.
g. Commercial/industrial/institutional establishments whose waste is
collected through a municipal collection system shall be part of the
municipal collection system for recyclables. All establishments
participating in the curbside collection program shall be required to
recycle designated materials not collected curbside if a waste audit
determines their presence in the waste stream.
§ 20-1.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 20-1.3
AO:748
h. All persons leasing commercial/industrial/institutional space to tenants
shall annually inform such tenants of their responsibilities for recycling
under the terms of this Plan.
i. At the time of placement of recyclable materials designated for
collection by the Plan at the curb or streetside of commercial/industrial/
institutional establishments, said material shall be considered the sole
property of the Mercer County Improvement Authority and shall be
considered a conscious contribution to the County Recycling System for
collection by the Mercer County Improvement Authority or its agent.
j. Any commercial/industrial/institutional recycling plan shall be
consistent with those terms, conditions and goals set forth in the
Mercer County Recycling Plan and this chapter. The failure to submit
said plan or comply with same or any regulations therein, shall subject
the commercial/industrial/institutional establishment to penalties set
forth in this chapter.
k. Pursuant to the Recycling Act, the Township of Hopewell shall have the
right to exempt persons occupying commercial, industrial and
institutional premises within its boundaries from the source separation
requirements of the chapter if those persons have otherwise provided
for the recycling of recyclable materials designated in the chapter from
solid waste generated at those premises. Such exemptions shall,
however, not be effective until such time as approved with a formal plan
amendment by Mercer County related thereto. The Township of
Hopewell shall annually submit to the Mercer County Improvement
Authority a list of those commercial/industrial/institutional
establishments requesting exemptions under this subsection and the
results of its determination with an explanation for said action. To be
eligible for an exemption pursuant to this subsection, a commercial or
institutional solid waste generator shall annually provide written
documentation to this municipality and the Mercer County
Improvement Authority of the total number of tons recycled. Persons
occupying a commercial and institutional premises exempted under this
subsection shall not be exempted from the reporting provisions of
paragraph c.
l. Upon failure of a commercial/industrial/institutional establishment to
meet the source separation recycling provisions of this amended Plan
and/or the provisions of Ordinance #818-89,77 and/or the provisions of
the Mandatory Recycling Act, if not otherwise exempted, the
municipality and/or Improvement Authority shall cause to be provided
said recycling service, and all fees and costs for providing said
recycling services shall be paid to the municipality in which said
commercial establishment is located.
77.Editor's Note: Ordinance #818-89 established the Hopewell Township Recycling Plan and
may be found on file in the office of the township clerk.
§ 20-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-1.3
AO:749
§ 20-2. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. #92-911, § 2]
§ 20-3. PENALTIES.
§ 20-3.1. Residents. [Ord. #92-911, § 3; Ord. #94-979]
§ 20-3.2. Commercial, Industrial and Institutional Establishments.
[Ord. #92-911, § 3]
m. Any commercial/industrial/institutional recycling plan shall be
consistent with those terms, conditions and goals set forth in the
Mercer County Source Separation and Recycling Plan and this chapter.
The failure to submit said plan or comply with the same shall subject
the commercial/industrial/institutional establishment to penalties as set
forth in this chapter.
a. The enforcement of the Recycling Plan of the Township of Hopewell
shall be provided individually and severally by the Township of
Hopewell with regard to enforcement of this chapter, and/or the Mercer
County Improvement Authority, and/or the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
b. The Township of Hopewell hereby designates Eleanor Lauricella as
liaison with the Mercer County Improvement Authority for the
enforcement of this chapter.
a. Any resident of the Township of Hopewell who is found to have violated
the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the following
procedures and penalties:
1. One warning with cessation in collection of garbage containing
recyclable materials from the household until recyclables are
removed from garbage.
2. A fine of up to $500 per day of violation depending upon the extent
and circumstances of the violation to be assessed pursuant to the
Recycling Act, the Mercer County Source Separation and Recycling
Plan, and this chapter.
a. Failure to submit a recycling plan or have an approved recycling plan in
place as required by this chapter shall subject the commercial/
industrial/institutional establishment to a fine up to $100 per day until
plan submittal requirements are met.
b. Any commercial/industrial/institutional establishment located within
Mercer County found to have violated their required recycling plan as
submitted to the county pursuant to section 20-2 of the chapter shall be
subject to the following procedures and penalties:
1. One warning on the first and cessation of waste collection,
thereafter.
§ 20-1.3 HOPEWELL CODE § 20-3.2
AO:750
§ 20-4. AGREEMENTS.
§ 20-4.1. Collection and Marketing Agreement with the Mercer
County Improvement Authority. [Ord. #98-1097]
The Township of Hopewell hereby instructs the Mayor to execute the
attached Collection and Marketing Agreement78 between the Township of
Hopewell and the Mercer County Improvement Authority, which will
continue the municipality's participation in the program for collection of
recyclable materials with service to be provided by the Authority's
contractor.
Chapter 21
TOWING AND STORAGE
§ 21-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. #93-952, § 1; Ord. #11-1526]
To establish rules and regulations, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49, N.J.A.C.
13:45A-31 and N.J.A.C. 17:33-47 and 48, for the towing and storage of
motor vehicles damaged in accidents, utilized in the commission of crimes,
recovered after being stolen, or otherwise impounded by the police
department, from public roadways by operators engaged in the business of
towing and storing motor vehicles.
§ 21-2. SCOPE. [Ord. #93952, § 2; Ord. #11-1526]
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to those businesses that engage in
the towing and storage of motor vehicles within the township through the
police department.
§ 21-3. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #93-952, § 3; Ord. #11-1526]
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which the owner or
operator leaves on a public roadway and fails to notify the police and does
not attempt to repair and remove the same within a reasonable period of
time.
ACCIDENT VEHICLE — Shall mean a motor vehicle which has been
involved in an accident.
BASIC TOW — Shall mean private property towing and other nonconsensual
towing as defined in this section and other ancillary services that include
the following: arriving at the site from which a motor vehicle will be towed;
2. A fine up to $1,000 per day of violation depending upon the extent
of circumstances of the violation and the size of the violating
establishment to be assessed pursuant to the Recycling Act, the
County Recycling Plan and this chapter.
78.Editor's Note: The Agreement referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
township clerk attached to Ordinance #98-1097.
§ 20-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-3
AO:751
15 minutes waiting time; hooking a motor vehicle to, or loading a motor
vehicle onto, a tow truck; transporting a motor vehicle to a storage facility;
unhooking or unloading a motor vehicle from the tow truck; and situating
the motor vehicle in the space in which it will be stored. "Basic tow" also
includes issuing documents for the release of a motor vehicle to its owner
or other person authorized to take the motor vehicle; issuing an itemized
bill; three trips to the motor vehicle in storage, which, if applicable, include
making a vehicle available to an insurance appraiser or adjuster; issuing
documents for the release of a motor vehicle to its owner or other person
authorized to take the motor vehicle; and retrieving a motor vehicle from
storage during the hours in which the storage facility is open.
CONSENSUAL TOWING — Shall mean towing a motor vehicle when the
owner or operator of the motor vehicle has consented to have the towing
company tow the motor vehicle.
CONSUMER — Shall mean a natural person.
DECOUPLING — Shall mean releasing a motor vehicle to its owner or
operator when the motor vehicle has been, or is about to be, hooked to or
lifted by a tow truck, but prior to the motor vehicle actually having been
moved or removed from the property.
DISABLED VEHICLE — Shall mean any motor vehicle which is unable to
operate under its own power.
FLAT BED TOW TRUCK — Shall mean a tow truck designed to transport a
motor vehicle by means of raising the motor vehicle from road level up onto
a hydraulic bed for transporting purposes.
HEAVY-DUTY RECOVERY — Shall mean that recovery of any motor vehicle
over 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight which requires the vehicle to be
up righted or recovered from either on or off the traveled portion of a public
roadway.
HEAVY-DUTY TOWING — Shall mean the towing of any motor vehicle over
10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight.
IMPOUNDED VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which, at the direction of
the police department is taken into police custody because the operator
of the vehicle was engaged in a violation of the law, including but not
limited to the operator being arrested on a DWI charge; operator has been
arrested for driving without registration or insurance; the operator has
been arrested for stealing the motor vehicle; vehicle involved in a serious
accident, e.g.; death by auto.
LIGHT-DUTY TOWING — Shall mean the towing of any motor vehicle up to
10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean and include all vehicles propelled other
than by muscular power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or
tracks and motorized bicycles, motorized scooters, motorized wheelchairs
and motorized skateboards.
§ 21-3 HOPEWELL CODE § 21-3
AO:752
NONCONSENSUAL TOWING — Shall mean the towing of a motor vehicle
without the consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle. "Nonconsensual
towing" includes towing a motor vehicle when law enforcement orders the
vehicle to be towed whether or not the owner or operator consents.
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, sole proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, limited liability company or any other business entity.
PRIVATE PROPERTY TOWING — Shall mean nonconsensual towing from
private property or from a storage facility by a motor vehicle of a
consumer's motor vehicle that is parked illegally, parked during a time
at which such parking is not permitted or otherwise parked without
authorization or the immobilization of or preparation for moving or
removing of such motor vehicle, for which a service charge is made, either
directly or indirectly. This term shall not include the towing of a motor
vehicle that has been abandoned on private property in violation of N.J.S.A.
39:4-56.5, provided that the abandoned vehicle is reported to the
appropriate law enforcement agency prior to removal and the vehicle is
removed in accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.6.
PRIVATE PROPERTY TOWING COMPANY — Shall mean a person offering
or performing private property towing services.
SECURE STORAGE FACILITY — Shall mean a storage facility that is either
completely indoors or is surrounded by a fence, wall or other man-made
barrier that is at least six feet high and is lighted from dusk to dawn.
SITE CLEAN-UP — Shall mean the use of absorbents to soak up any liquids
from a motor vehicle at the site from which a motor vehicle will be towed.
STORAGE FACILITY — Shall mean a space at which motor vehicles that
have been towed are stored.
STORAGE RATES — Shall mean fees charged for the storage of motor
vehicles.
TARPING — Shall mean covering a motor vehicle to prevent weather
damage.
TOW TRUCK — Shall mean a motor vehicle equipped with a boom or booms,
winches, slings, tilt beds or similar equipment designed for the towing or
recovery of motor vehicles.
TOWING — Shall means the moving or removing from public or private
property or from a storage facility by a motor vehicle of a consumer's
noncommercial motor vehicle that is damaged as a result of an accident
or otherwise disabled, recovered after being stolen or is parked illegally
or otherwise without authorization, parked during a time at which such
parking is not permitted or otherwise parked without authorization or the
immobilization of or preparation for moving or removing of such motor
vehicle, for which a service charge is made, either directly or indirectly.
Dues or other charges of clubs or associations, which provide towing
services to club or association members, shall not be considered a service
charge for purposes of this definition.
§ 21-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-3
AO:753
TOWING COMPANY — Shall mean a person offering or performing towing
services.
TOWING LIST — Shall mean a rotating list of all towing services registered
with the township kept by the township chief of police. When the police
require the towing and storage of a motor vehicle from public roadways,
they shall contact the towing service on the top of the rotating towing list
as determined by this chapter.
TOWING RATES — Shall mean fees charged by a towing service for removal
and transportation of the vehicle.
TOWING SERVICE — Shall mean a business engaged in the towing or
storing of motor vehicles which has been approved for the towing list.
TOWING VEHICLE — Shall mean a motor vehicle employed by the towing
service for the purpose of towing, transporting, conveying or removing of
motor vehicles from public roadways.
TRANSMISSION DISCONNECT — Shall mean manipulating a motor
vehicle's transmission, so that the motor vehicle may be towed.
VEHICLE — Shall mean any device in, upon or by which a person or
property is or may be transported upon a highway.
WAITING TIME — Shall mean any time a towing company spends at the site
from which a motor vehicle will be towed, during which the towing company
is prevented from performing any work by another individual, beyond the
time included as part of a basic tow.
WINCHING — Shall mean the process of moving a motor vehicle by the
use of chains, nylon slings or additional lengths of winch cable from a
position that is not accessible for direct hook up for towing a motor vehicle.
"Winching" includes recovering a motor vehicle that is not on the road and
righting a motor vehicle that is on its side or upside down, but does not
include pulling a motor vehicle onto a flatbed tow truck.
WINDOW WRAP — Shall mean any material used to cover motor vehicle
windows that have been damaged.
§ 21-4. TOWING SERVICE REGISTRATION. [Ord. #93-952, § 4; Ord.
#11-1526]
a. No towing service shall be placed upon the towing list for the towing or
storing of motor vehicles within the township, unless the towing service
shall first register with the township. In order to be placed upon the
towing list for light-duty towing, a towing service must be located
within five miles of the geographic center of Hopewell Township or
within Hopewell Township, Pennington Borough or Hopewell Borough.
Registration applications shall be made available by the township police
department. A towing service that has met all the specifications and
requirements of this chapter and has registered with the township shall
be placed on the towing rotation list by the chief of police. No towing
service on the Hopewell Township police department towing rotation
§ 21-3 HOPEWELL CODE § 21-4
AO:754
§ 21-5. INSURANCE. [Ord. #93-952, § 5; Ord. #11-1526]
§ 21-6. RATES AND FEES. [Ord. #11-1526]
list shall exceed the fees set forth in the attached fee schedule,
established in 2011, and adjusted according to section 21-6b. The fee
schedule may be found at the end of this chapter.
b. The towing service owner or its authorized representative shall sign the
registration application form indicating that the full requirements of
this chapter have been met by the towing service applicant.
c. If any information provided by a towing service in its registration
application changes, the towing service is responsible for notifying the
police department of the change in the registration information within
30 days of such change. Failure to comply with this provision will be
deemed a violation of the chapter.
a. The minimum amounts of insurance a towing company shall secure and
maintain are:
1. Motor vehicle liability for a tow truck capable of towing a motor
vehicle that is up to 26,000 pounds, for the death of, or injury to,
persons and damage to property for each accident or occurrence in
the amount of $750,000, single limit; and
2. Motor vehicle liability for a tow truck capable of towing a motor
vehicle that is more than 26,000 pounds, for the death of, or injury
to, persons and damage to property for each accident or
occurrence in the amount of $1,000,000, single limit.
b. A towing company shall also secure and maintain, for every tow truck,
insurance that covers garage keeper legal liability in the amount of
$100,000, and "on-hook" coverage, either as an endorsement on the
insurance required by (a) above or in the amount of $100,000.
c. The insurance required by paragraphs a and b above shall be obtained
from an insurance company authorized to do business in New Jersey.
a. Fees and rates for towing and storage of motor vehicles damaged in
accidents, utilized in the commission or crimes, recovered after being
stolen, or otherwise impounded by the police department shall not
exceed the limits set forth in the attached fee schedule established in
2011, and adjusted according to section 21-6b.
b. All fee limits set by this section shall be increased or decreased by an
amount equal to the annual percentage rate as determined by the U.S.
Department of Labor, Consumer Price Index (CPI) for the Philadelphia
Metropolitan Area. The first adjustment shall be made on July 1, 2012
and each year thereafter.
c. Fees and services covered by this chapter:
§ 21-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-6
AO:755
1. Basic tow, which shall be a flat fee; and
2. In the case of a motor vehicle involved in an accident the following
additional services, if actually performed:
(a) Waiting time in excess of 15 minutes, which shall be calculated
based upon each 15 minutes spent at the site from which a
motor vehicle will be towed, with fewer than 15 minutes
rounded up to 15;
(b) Brush cleaning, including collection of debris that can be
picked up by hand, which shall be a flat fee;
(c) Site cleanup, which shall be calculated based upon the number
of bags of absorbent used;
(d) Winching, which shall be based upon each one-half hour spent
performing winching;
(e) The use of window wrap, which shall be a flat fee;
(f) Tarping, which shall be a flat fee;
(g) Transmission disconnect, a flat fee, which shall be charged
only if a motor vehicle is locked and the towing company is
unable to obtain the keys for the motor vehicle;
(h) Use of a flat bed tow truck, a flat fee, which shall be charged if
a motor vehicle can be transported only by a flat bed tow truck;
(i) Use of special equipment other than the first tow truck to
recover a motor vehicle that cannot be recovered by winching
or pieces of a motor vehicle that cannot be moved by hand,
which may be both a labor and an equipment charge billed in
half-hour increments;
(j) Decoupling;
(k) Storage at a towing company's storage facility;
(l) More than three trips to the motor vehicle in storage, which
may be invoiced as an administrative fee, which shall be a flat
fee; and
(m) Releasing a motor vehicle from a towing company's storage
facility after normal business hours or on weekends, which
shall be a flat fee.
d. A towing company that engages in private property towing or other
nonconsensual towing shall not charge for the use of a flat bed tow
truck if a motor vehicle can safely be towed in an upright position by
another type of tow truck, even if the private property towing company
chooses to use a flat bed tow truck for the tow.
§ 21-6 HOPEWELL CODE § 21-6
AO:756
e. A towing company that engages in private property towing or other
nonconsensual towing shall calculate storage fees based upon full
twenty-four-hour periods a motor vehicle is in the storage facility. For
example, if a motor vehicle is towed to a storage facility at 7:00 p.m. on
one day and the owner of the motor vehicle picks up the motor vehicle
before 7:00 p.m. the next day, the towing company shall charge the
owner of the motor vehicle only for one day of storage. If a motor
vehicle is stored for more than 24 hours, but less than 48 hours, the
towing company may charge for two days of storage.
f. A towing company shall not charge any fee for private property towing
or other nonconsensual towing and related storage services not
included in paragraph c above.
g. If a towing company charges a consumer a fee for a private property or
other non-consensual towing service that is disputed by the consumer,
the parties shall use good faith efforts to resolve the dispute. If the
parties are unable to resolve the dispute and the township
administrator determines the fee to be unreasonable under this chapter
or N.J.A.C. 13:45A-31.5, the township administrator may order the
towing company to reimburse the consumer for an amount equal to the
difference between the charged fee and a reasonable fee, plus interest,
as calculated pursuant to paragraph h below.
h. The interest rate imposed pursuant to paragraph g above shall be based
on the average rate of return, to the nearest whole or 1/2%, for the
corresponding preceding fiscal year terminating on June 30, of the
State of New Jersey Cash Management Fund (State accounts) as
reported by the Division of Investment of the Department of the
Treasury.
i. A towing company performing a private property tow or other
nonconsensual tow shall take the motor vehicle being towed to the
towing company's storage facility having the capacity to receive it that
is nearest to the site from which the motor vehicle is towed.
j. A bill for a private property tow or other nonconsensual tow shall
include the time at which a towed motor vehicle was delivered to a
towing company's storage facility.
k. Unreasonable fees.
1. A fee for private property towing or other nonconsensual towing
services, and storage services, shall be presumed unreasonable if it
is:
(a) More than 25% higher than the fee charged by the towing
company or storage facility for the same services when
provided with the consent of the owner or operator of the
motor vehicle; or
§ 21-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-6
AO:757
§ 21-7. RULES AND REGULATIONS. [Ord. #93-952, § 7; Ord.
#11-1526]
(b) More than 50% higher than the fee charged for such other
nonconsensual towing or related storage service by other
towing companies or storage facilities operating in the
municipality from which the vehicle was towed.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph k1 above, a fee will be presumed
unreasonable if it exceeds the maximum amount that may be
charged for the service according to a schedule of fees set forth in
this ordinance adopted pursuant to section 1 of P.L. 1979, c. 101
(N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49).
a. All towing services placed on the police department towing list shall be
available to respond to a police request for a tow 24 hours a day, seven
days a week, including holidays.
b. All towing companies shall respond to a call in any part of the township
within 30 minutes. If a towing company does not respond within 30
minutes of a call, the towing company next on the list shall be called
and entitled to provide services as needed, and the first towing
company shall lose any claim to compensation.
c. All drivers and operators of towing vehicles shall be properly licensed
to operate a motor vehicle within the State of New Jersey and are
subject to driver's license checks by the township police department at
the time of registration and at least on an annual basis thereafter. All
drivers and operators of towing vehicles shall be Certified Towing
Operators by one of the two nationally recognized towing safety
organizations — WreckMaster or Towing and Recovery Association of
America. All towing vehicles shall be properly registered and inspected
in accordance with any applicable law.
d. All applicants and/or agents must submit to a criminal history check in
compliance with the New Jersey State Police Criminal Information Unit,
State Bureau of Identification (SBI form 212B). The applicant or agent
shall not have received a criminal conviction within the last seven years
for any indictable offense or any offense involving stolen or embezzled
vehicles, fraud relating to the towing business, stolen property, or any
other offense of similar nature.
e. All vehicles must be towed in a safe manner.
f. All towing companies shall be capable of providing reasonable roadside
services to disabled vehicles such as, but not limited to, jump-starting,
changing of flat tires and providing fuel. Such services will only be
performed if they can be done so safely, as determined by the police
officer on the scene.
§ 21-6 HOPEWELL CODE § 21-7
AO:758
§ 21-8. TOWING LIST: ROTATION. [Ord. #93-952, § 8; Ord.
#11-1526]
g. All towing companies shall make available a copy of its basic rates and a
business card to all owners and operators of motor vehicles which will
be towed.
h. Towing companies shall not remove any motor vehicle which has been
abandoned or involved in an accident in any public roadway without
first notifying the township police department.
i. The police department shall not call a towing company to remove a
vehicle from private property. The police department shall provide the
property owner with all available information regarding the ownership
of the motor vehicle on their property, and the property owner will then
be responsible for making their own arrangements to remove the
vehicle.
j. The towing company shall notify the police department of all vehicles
found by the towing company to have been abandoned and not claimed
within 14 days after being stored. The police department shall, upon
notification, expeditiously process the vehicle in accordance with the
New Jersey Motor Vehicle Code concerning abandoned and unclaimed
motor vehicles.
k. The Chief of Police may promulgate an application and minimal
requirements for vehicular towing, which requirements shall not be
inconsistent with this chapter and which shall be enforced pursuant to
the procedures set forth in this chapter.
l. Violations. In addition to the procedures and penalties set forth in
Section 21-13, a violation of any of the rules in this shall be considered
an unlawful practice under P.L. 1960, c. 39 (N.J.S.A. 56:8-1 et seq.).
a. A towing list will be kept with the chief of police. The towing list shall
include all towing companies which have registered with the township.
A towing company shall be placed on the bottom of the towing list upon
registration with the township. The towing list shall be a rotating list as
provided for in paragraphs b, c and d.
b. When the need arises, the police department will call the towing
company on the top of the list. The towing company called, if it shall
perform any of the services covered by this chapter, shall be placed on
the bottom of the towing list and not called again until all other towing
companies on the towing list have been called.
c. If a towing company is unavailable to perform required services when
called by the police department, for whatever reason, said towing
company shall be charged with a call and placed on the bottom of the
towing list, and the next available towing company shall be called. The
towing company that responds in its place shall remain at the top of the
list.
§ 21-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-8
AO:759
§ 21-9. STORAGE FACILITIES. [Ord. #11-1526]
d. If a towing company, after being dispatched, is recalled and does not
perform any duties or services covered by this chapter, the towing
company shall remain on the top of the towing list. However, if a towing
company arrives at the scene of an incident in which its services are
required and cannot perform said services, it shall lose its place on the
towing list, and the next towing company on the list shall be called.
a. All storage facilities operated or used by towing companies shall meet
requirements of the commission of insurance set forth in N.J.A.C.
11:3-38.1 et seq., as well as all local zoning and code requirements, and
must be located within five miles of the geographic center of Hopewell
Township or within Hopewell Township.
b. All towing companies shall have an indoor storage facility at its disposal
for motor vehicles which have been involved in criminal activity and
impounded by the police department.
c. All storage facilities shall have a business office open to the public
between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. at least five days a week, excluding
holidays.
d. All towing companies shall have secure storage facilities.
e. A towing company that engages in private property towing or other
nonconsensual towing shall provide or arrange for after-hours release
of stored motor vehicles.
f. A towing company that does not release a stored motor vehicle to its
owner, or other person authorized to take the motor vehicle, during
normal business hours when requested, as required by paragraph c
above, shall not charge a fee for after-hours release of the stored motor
vehicle.
g. Recordkeeping. All towing companies shall keep accurate records of all
motor vehicles towed and stored at the direction of the township police
department. A copy of such records shall be provided to the township
upon request.
(a) A towing company that performs private property or other
nonconsensual towing shall retain, for three years, the following
records:
(1) Invoices for both consensual towing and nonconsensual towing
services;
(2) Job orders;
(3) Documentation of waiting time;
(4) Logs, which shall include the time when a towed motor vehicle
was delivered to the towing company's storage facility from a
§ 21-8 HOPEWELL CODE § 21-9
AO:760
§ 21-10. TOWING AND VEHICLE EQUIPMENT SPECIFICATIONS.
[Ord. #93-952, § 10; Ord. #11-1526]
private property or other non-consensual tow and the date and
purpose of each trip to the motor vehicle in storage;
(5) Documents relating to private property and other
nonconsensual towing services performed and rates charged
for services; and
(6) Any contracts under which the private property towing
company is authorized to perform private property towing
services.
(b) A towing company that engages in private property towing or other
non-consensual towing shall make records retained pursuant to
paragraph (a) above available for review by the police department
upon request.
a. All towing companies engaged in light-duty towing shall have at least
one rollback truck and one wrecker, with necessary brooms and
equipment to do the complete removal. Each truck must have a
manufacturer's capacity of at least 10,000 pounds, gross vehicle weight
and a manufacturer's boom capacity of four tons. Proof of capacity must
be supplied to the police department at the time of registration.
b. All towing companies engaged in heavy-duty towing shall have one
heavy-duty wrecker with a manufacturer's capacity of not less than
33,000 pounds gross vehicle weight and a boom capacity of not less
than 12 tons independently or 24 tons jointly; air brakes so constructed
as to lock rear wheels; heavy-duty underreach.
c. All towing companies engaged in heavy-duty recovery shall have two
heavy-duty wreckers with manufacturer's capacity of not less than
33,000 pounds gross vehicle weight and boom capacity of not less than
12 tons independently or 24 tons jointly; two power winches with
pulling capacity of not less than 12 tons each; at least 200 feet of cable
at least nine-sixteenths of an inch diameter on each drum; double boom
to permit splitting, or single boom hydraulically elevated and extendible
with a 360° swivel on the end of the boom; air brakes so constructed as
to lock rear wheels; heavy-duty underreach; two snatch blocks with a
12 ton rating and two scotch blocks.
d. All towing vehicles must have radio equipment with a twenty-four-hour
dispatch service or a cellular telephone for the purpose of maintaining
communications with the police department radio desk.
e. All towing vehicles must be equipped with at least one five pound ABCtype
fire extinguisher, safety chains, substances for application to small
liquid spills, and stiff push brooms to clean up debris at scene.
§ 21-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-10
AO:761
§ 21-11. RIGHTS OF OWNERS/OPERATORS OF MOTOR VEHICLES
REQUIRED TO BE TOWED. [Ord. #93-952, § 11; Ord. #11-1526]
§ 21-12. COLLECTION OF FEES. [Ord. #93-952, § 12; Ord.
#11-1526]
All towing companies shall be responsible for collection of all fees for
services rendered.
§ 21-13. COMPLAINTS; VIOLATIONS; HEARINGS. [Ord. #93-952,
§ 13; Ord. #11-1526]
f. Proof of towing vehicle and equipment specifications shall be provided
to the township with the registration application.
g. All towing vehicles are to conform with all applicable State and Federal
laws and shall be subject to inspection by township officials during
normal business hours at the time of registration and on an annual
basis thereafter.
a. If a motor vehicle operator or owner wishes to have his vehicle towed
by a particular towing company, their request shall be honored,
providing the police officer in charge at the scene has not already
dispatched a towing company or the police officer has determined that
the motor vehicle in question will not be removed in an expeditious or
safe manner and will jeopardize the public safety, in which case the
motor vehicle operator or owner shall be required to utilize a
compensated dispatched towing company.
b. The owner or operator of any motor vehicle required to be towed or
stored shall have the right to remove all personal items and effects from
the motor vehicle unless the police department has placed a police hold
on any such items.
c. The motor vehicle owner or his representative shall have the right to
take photographs of any stored vehicles for insurance purposes.
d. Upon request of the motor vehicle owner or his representative, a towing
company shall provide a detailed and itemized bill for all services
rendered.
a. All violations of this chapter and all complaints by the public or police
departments against any towing company shall be forwarded to the
township administrator.
b. The township administrator shall determine if any complaint or
violation against a towing company is of such a serious nature as to
warrant a hearing and possible disciplinary measures. If the township
administrator decides that a hearing is required, he shall upon proper
notice to all interested parties, conduct a hearing in which all parties
may present evidence. If, after a hearing, the township administrator
§ 21-10 HOPEWELL CODE § 21-13
AO:762
Chapter 22
RIGHT TO FARM
§ 22-1. "RIGHT TO FARM" ACTIVITIES PROTECTED. [Ord. #93-957,
§ 1]
Farming activities may be conducted up to and along the property line of the
property being farmed. In accordance with the purposes and preambles set
forth herein, the following farming activities shall be deemed established as
acceptable, recognized and entitled to encouragement and protection as the
collective embodiment of the "Right to Farm" subject in all cases, however,
to any supervening applicable Federal, State or county laws or regulations
respecting the public health, safety or otherwise:
finds that a towing company has violated any provision of this chapter,
the administrator may, depending on the seriousness of the offense:
1. Fine the violating party not more than $1,000;
2. Suspend the violating party from the towing list for not more than
three months for a first offense; not more than six months for a
second offense; not more than one year for a third offense.
3. Permanently remove the violating party from the list for any
violation after its third offense.
c. The violating party shall have the right to appeal a decision of the
township administrator to the Hopewell Township Committee or its
designee.
a. Produce agricultural and horticultural crops, trees and forest products,
livestock, poultry and other related such commodities;
b. Process and package the agricultural output of the commercial farm in
conformance with the applicable zoning;
c. Provide for the wholesale and retail marketing, including "U-Pick"
marketing and sales, of the agricultural output of the commercial farm,
and related products that contribute to farm income, including the
construction of building and parking areas in conformance with
applicable municipal standards;
d. Replenish soil nutrients, including, but not limited to, the spreading of
manure and applying chemical and organic fertilizers;
e. In the interest of best farming practices, use Federally-approved
products, in accordance with labeled instructions or practices, as
recommended by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy, New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station,
N.J. Fish and Game Commission and the U.S. Environmental Protection
§ 21-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1
AO:763
§ 22-2. NOTICE OF FARM USE. [Ord. #93-957, § 2]
For the purpose of giving due notice of nearby farming uses to proposed
new residential areas adjacent to unimproved land then being commercially
farmed or suitable therefor, the planning board shall require an applicant
for an adjacent major or minor subdivision, as a condition of approval of
such application, to include a provision in each and every contract for and
deed conveying all or any portion of the lands thereby subdivided, as well
as on filed final subdivision maps, the following record notice to and waiver
by grantees of such present or future proximate farming uses, which such
provision shall be made to run with the land:
Grantee hereby acknowledges notice that there are presently or may in
the future be farm uses in close proximity to the above described premises
from which may emanate noise, odors, dust and fumes associated with
lawful agricultural practices permitted under applicable Right to Farm laws,
Agency for the control of pests, predators, varmints, diseases affecting
plants and livestock and for the control of weed infestation;
f. Clear woodlands using open burning and other accepted techniques
and install and maintain vegetative and terrain alterations and other
physical facilities for water and soil conservation and surface water
control in wetland areas; (In the event open burning techniques are
used, the farmer proposing the use of same must apply for and procure
any and all applicable State, county, local or Federal permits required);
g. Use irrigation pumps and equipment and undertake aerial and ground
seeding and spraying, using tractors and other necessary equipment;
h. Hire and utilize necessary farm labor;
i. Construct fences;
j. Transport large, slow-moving equipment over roads within the
township;
k. The cutting and removal of trees;
l. Conduct farming activities on holidays and Sundays as well as
weekdays, in the evening and during the day, notwithstanding the
production thereby of normal but unavoidable noise, dust, odors and
fumes caused by such necessary activities when conducted in
accordance with recognized agricultural practices;
m. In the event that a farmer proposes to alter, divert, dam, widen, deepen,
narrow or in any way affect a stream, pond or lake, in connection with
the uses described in paragraph g above, for drainage purposes or
otherwise, or proposes in any way to change a watercourse from its
existing state he/she must apply for and obtain any and all State,
county, local or Federal permits required, excepting activities set forth
in the Freshwater Protection Act.
§ 22-1 HOPEWELL CODE § 22-2
AO:764
regulations and ordinances, and, by acceptance of this conveyance, Grantee
does hereby waive objection to such activities, grantee does also hereby
acknowledge N.J.S.A. 4:17-2 prohibiting trespassing on agricultural lands.
§ 22-3. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #93-957, § 3]
For purposes of interpretation of this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply:
COMMERCIAL AGRICULTURE — Shall mean the production principally for
sale to others of plants and animals or their products, including, but not
limited to, forage and sod crops, grain and feed crops, dairy animals and
dairy products, livestock including beef cattle, poultry, sheep, swine, horses,
ponies, mules and goats; the breeding and grazing of such animals; bees
and apiary products, fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries,
vegetables, nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse products, and tree
farming or woodland management.
FARM — Shall mean an area of land of single or multiple contiguous
or noncontiguous parcels which is actively devoted to agricultural or
horticultural use, including, but not limited to, cropland, pasture, idle or
fallow land, woodland, wetlands, farm ponds, farm roads and certain farm
buildings and other enclosures related to agricultural pursuits.
HOME AGRICULTURE — Shall mean the production principally for home
use or consumption of plants, animals or their products and for sale to
others where such sales are incidental, including, but not limited to,
gardening, fruit production and poultry and livestock products for
household use only.
Chapter 23
HOUSING REHABILITATION PROGRAM
§ 23-1. REHABILITATION MARKETING PLAN.
§ 23-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. #97-1080]
It is the purpose of this chapter to help in meeting Hopewell Township's
fair share housing obligation through provisions designed to facilitate the
voluntary rehabilitation of substandard housing units occupied by low- and/
or moderate-income households.
§ 23-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. #97-1080]
Definitions concerning housing rehabilitation not found below are the same
as those definitions that appear in the rules and regulations adopted by the
Council on Affordable Housing in N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. As used in this plan:
APPLICANT — Shall mean the person or persons applying for technical or
financial assistance for housing rehabilitation according to this plan.
§ 22-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.2
AO:765
COUNCIL ON AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Shall mean the Council
established by the New Jersey Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.,
and also is known as COAH.
HOUSING ADMINISTRATOR — Shall mean a person hired or appointed by
the township to perform the duties as described in this plan.
INSPECTION OFFICER — Shall mean a qualified inspector hired or
appointed by the township to perform the duties described in this plan.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Shall mean a household with a gross
household income equal to 50% or less of the median gross household
income for households of the same size within the housing region in which
the housing is located as determined by the Council on Affordable Housing
in N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. or subsequent rules and regulations.
LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Shall mean housing affordable according to
Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or other
recognized standards for home ownership and rental cost and occupied or
reserved for occupancy by a low-income household.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Shall mean a household with a gross
household income equal to or more than 50% but less than 80% of the
median gross household income for households of the same size within
the housing region in which the housing is located as determined by the
Council on Affordable Housing in N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. or subsequent rules
and regulations.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Shall mean housing affordable
according to Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) or other recognized standards of home ownership and rental cost
and occupied or reserved for occupancy by a moderate-income household.
REHABILITATED UNIT — Shall mean a previously substandard housing
unit that has undergone significant renovation to meet municipal or other
applicable housing code standards as provided in this plan.
REHABILITATION PROGRAM — Shall mean the procedures and provisions
of this plan to provide technical and/or financial assistance for the
rehabilitation of substandard housing units occupied by low or moderateincome
households.
SECTION 8 INCOME LIMITS — Shall mean the schedule of uncapped
income limits published by HUD that defines 50% and 80% of median
income by household size.
SUBSTANDARD HOUSING UNIT — Shall mean a housing unit with health
and safety code violations that require the repair or replacement of a
major system. A major system includes a roof, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems) and/or a
loan bearing structural system.
UTILITY ALLOWANCE — Shall mean an allowance for utilities that is
consistent with the personal benefit expense allowance for utilities as
defined by HUD or a similar allowance approved by COAH.
§ 23-1.2 HOPEWELL CODE § 23-1.3
AO:766
§ 23-1.3. Eligibility. [Ord. #97-1080]
Only owners of dwelling units within the Township of Hopewell are eligible
for the provisions made available through this plan. Eligibility further is
determined by the following criteria:
§ 23-1.4. Administration. [Ord. #97-1080]
a. The homeowner either must live in a low or moderate-income
household or must agree to rent the house to be rehabilitated to a low
or moderate-income household. Proof of the owner's or the prospective
renter's income will be required by the housing administrator.
b. A dwelling unit proposed to be rehabilitated must be considered a
substandard housing unit according to this section.
c. The rehabilitation, upon completion, will result in a safe and sound
dwelling unit and the satisfactory improvement of all deficient
components of the eligible unit to meet municipal or other applicable
housing code standards.
d. The homeowner must agree, in writing, to comply with all of the
requirements set forth in this section.
a. Housing Administrator. The township committee shall appoint or retain
the services of a housing administrator who will report directly to the
township committee. The housing administrator shall establish specific,
regular hours to meet with interested homeowners at a specified
location. The administrator's duties shall include:
1. Affirmative marketing of the township's housing rehabilitation
program through one or more of the following methods:
(a) Holding at least one public meeting, with a block
advertisement published in the official newspaper, to answer
questions about the program;
(b) Providing a poster highlighting the main features of the
program to be hung on the community bulletin board;
(c) Issuing periodic press and/or cablevision releases to the
official newspaper, to inform the public of news related to the
program and to promote interest in the program; and
(d) Preparing information brochures and application packets for
distribution to interested homeowners.
2. Developing necessary application and financial statement forms to
be used by homeowners interested in applying for this program.
The application will clearly say that any owner who uses the
provisions of this plan for rental rehabilitation purposes will agree
to place a deed restriction on his or her property. The application
shall also say that any homeowner who receives a loan under the
§ 23-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.4
AO:767
provisions of this plan will agree to place a lien, as specified in
the rehabilitation program, on his or her property. In addition,
the application shall require proof of ownership and general
information on the property to be rehabilitated. Proposals for
rehabilitation also should include a description and estimated cost
of the work needed to improve the house to meet the parameters
of the rehabilitation program. The financial statements form shall
indicate that the financial information submitted will be kept
strictly confidential.
3. Determining the eligibility of each applicant based on the
requirements of this plan.
4. Maintaining a comprehensive file of all sources of financial
assistance from federal, state and county programs for the
rehabilitation of housing occupied by low and moderate-income
households. The file on each program shall include general
information about the program, application filing procedures and
deadlines, the total appropriation for the program, and funding
specifications for individual projects.
5. Preparing documents for use as applications for grants or loans to
eligible applicants form relevant federal, state or county programs
for the rehabilitation of housing occupied by low and moderateincome
households. In addition, when applicable, the housing
administrator will provide technical assistance to eligible
applicants who must apply directly to federal, state or county
programs to fund housing rehabilitation.
6. Providing technical assistance to eligible applicants to apply to the
township for rehabilitation assistance.
7. Monitoring and overseeing of the deed restrictions and lien placed
on properties that participate in the rehabilitation program.
8. Preparing and presenting an annual report to the township
committee at the close of each fiscal year. The report shall compare
the rehabilitation program's objectives with the accomplishments
of each year. The report shall indicate the status, including any
information available from the inspection officer, of the condition of
each unit that has been or will be rehabilitated and shall include a
full financial accounting of the program. The report may also
contain recommendations for improving either the administrative
or substantive elements of the program. The report shall be
forwarded to the Council on Affordable Housing.
b. Staffing-Inspection Officer. The township committee shall designate a
qualified inspection officer who will report to the township committee.
The duties of the inspection officer shall include:
1. Determining that the dwelling unit proposed for rehabilitation
qualifies as under the provisions of this section. The inspection
§ 23-1.4 HOPEWELL CODE § 23-1.4
AO:768
§ 23-1.5. Funding. [Ord. #97-1080]
officer's evaluation of the dwelling unit deficiencies shall be
reported in writing to the housing administrator.
2. Determining whether or not the proposed description and cost
estimate of work needed to rehabilitate the subject structure will
meet the parameters of the program. The inspection officer's report
on the description and cost of work shall be made in writing to the
housing administrator.
3. Inspecting and, when completed, certifying that the rehabilitated
unit meets all municipal or other applicable housing code
standards. The certification shall bear the date of the inspection
and shall be indicated by a written report to the housing
administrator.
c. Staffing-Other.
1. The township may enlist the assistance of interested volunteers to
serve as an "outreach committee" to carry out a variety of
procedures to market the township rehabilitation program.
Example of the procedures that may be employed include:
(a) Mailing information brochures with annual property tax bills.
(b) Holding informational meetings with:
(1) Civic and religious leaders and organizations;
(2) Senior citizen organizations;
(3) Community groups such as fire companies and PTAs; and
(4) Local social workers and welfare offices.
(c) Contacting households eligible to receive senior citizen
property tax relief to explain the details of the township's
rehabilitation program.
a. The township has included in past annual budgets sufficient funds to
pay for the costs of administering the housing rehabilitation program.
The money expended for preparing and implementing the housing
rehabilitation program, according to the Fair Housing Act, shall be
considered a mandated expenditure exempt from the limitations on
final appropriations imposed pursuant to P.L. 1976, c.68 (C.40A:4-45.1
et seq.).
b. The township treasurer has been authorized to establish and maintain
an interest bearing Fair Housing Trust account. The Fair Housing Trust
account hereby is continued and all funds therein that have previously
been or will hereafter be appropriated by the township committee for
the purposes of funding the township's fair housing obligation hereby
§ 23-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.5
AO:769
are declared to be valid and lawful appropriations of the township for
the purposes set forth herein.
c. The township established development fees and an interest bearing
Housing Trust Fund account to receive development fees paid by
residential and nonresidential developers. Money in this account may
be used for any activity approved by COAH for addressing the
township's low and moderate-income housing obligation including
housing rehabilitation.
d. A minimum of $10,000 per unit shall be provided of which $8,000 shall
be allocated to the actual capital cost of rehabilitation and $2,000 shall
be allocated to administrative costs. The actual capital costs may be
less than $8,000 if, at the end of each two-year period, the
rehabilitation averages at least $8,000 per unit. Costs associated with
any required cost estimates shall be paid as administrative costs of the
program and shall not be charged to applicants.
e. Procedures for Application, Review and Approval.
1. Interested homeowner will be able to secure information and
application packets from the housing administrator or by calling or
visiting the township clerk during office hours.
2. An interested homeowner will submit a completed application to
the housing administrator.
3. The housing administrator will review the application for
completeness and, once an application is complete, determine
whether the applicant either meets income eligibility requirements
or has signed a binding agreement stating his or her willingness to
rent to a low or moderate-income household.
4. Upon a determination that an applicant interested in rehabilitation
is eligible, the inspection officer will inspect the property to rule on
whether it qualifies as "substandard" under the provisions of the
program and whether or not the proposed description and cost
estimate of work needed to improve the house will meet the
parameters of the housing rehabilitation program. The inspection
officer's determination will be submitted in writing to the housing
administrator.
5. If the inspection officer determines that a unit proposed for
rehabilitation qualifies as "substandard" but recommends an
amended description and cost estimate of the work necessary to
rehabilitate the unit, the applicant will be asked to revise the
application to address, satisfactorily, the comments of the
inspection officer.
6. If the inspection officer determines that a unit proposed for
rehabilitation qualifies as "substandard" and that the proposed
description and cost estimate of the work necessary to rehabilitate
§ 23-1.5 HOPEWELL CODE § 23-1.5
AO:770
§ 23-1.6. Township Loans for Housing Rehabilitation. [Ord.
#97-1080]
Based on the appropriations described previously, loans will be made
available from the township to eligible applicants under the terms specified
below.
the unit is satisfactory, the housing administrator will determine
whether or not the applicant is eligible for financial assistance
to complete the work from a federal, state or county program
and whether there is a realistic chance of the applicant receiving
assistance from that program.
7. If the housing administrator determines that an applicant is eligible
for financial assistance for rehabilitation from a federal, state or
county program and there is a realistic chance for the applicant to
receive such assistance, the housing administrator will offer as
much technical assistance as the applicant desires and as the
housing administrator can reasonably provide to prepare an
application for the relevant programs.
8. When the housing administrator determines that an applicant is
eligible for financial assistance to complete the rehabilitation, the
housing administrator will forward the funding request to the
township committee for a case approval. The housing administrator
shall be available to discuss the application with the township
committee at the time of its formal consideration.
9. If the township committee approves the application, the
rehabilitation may begin as soon as the applicant has signed all of
the necessary agreements.
10. If the township committee denies the application for rehabilitation,
the specific reasons for rejection shall be given. The committee
may deny an application only if it can be shown that the applicant is
ineligible or that the proposed work plan is insufficient to bring the
building into conformance with the parameters of the housing
rehabilitation program.
a. Rental Dwelling Unit. The following terms will apply to loans made for
units that are owned be households who do not qualify as low or
moderate income but who will agree to rent the property to a low or
moderate-income household:
1. The township will make a loan to the applicant for the total amount
of the cost of rehabilitation. Although the loan will be made to the
applicant, the proceeds of the loan will be paid to the individual(s)
or business(es) who sell the material and/or labor for the project.
2. The interest rate will be fixed at an annual rate of 5%.
§ 23-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.6
AO:771
§ 23-1.7. Affordability Controls. [Ord. #97-1080]
3. Payments on the loan principle and interest will be deferred for a
ten-year period.
4. Repayments of the loan principle and interest will become payable
in full at the end of the 10 years. Prior to the end of the loan's tenyear
life, the township's housing administrator will submit a letter
to the owner indicating the date that the loan principle and interest
will become due and when the township expects payment.
5. The owner will be required to insure the property for 80% of the
value of the improvement on the property. If necessary, the
township will also lend money for the cost of this insurance. The
insurance policy shall acknowledge the township's lien on the
property.
6. The owner may not rent to a non-income-eligible household.
b. Owner-Occupied Dwelling Units. The following terms will apply to units
that are owner-occupied by low or moderate-income households:
1. The township will make a loan to the applicant for the total amount
of the cost of rehabilitation. Although the loan will be made to the
applicant, the proceeds of the loan will be paid to the individual(s)
or business(es) who sell the material and/or labor for the project.
Homeowners who contribute "sweat equity" will not receive
financial enumeration.
2. The interest rate will be fixed at an annual rate of 0%.
3. Deferred payments on principle will be made available to the
applicant as explained below.
4. Repayment of the loan will not be required until the sale of the
property. At the time of sale, the unpaid principle plus accrued
interest shall be paid to the township.
5. The owner will be required to insure the property for 80% of the
value of the improvement on the property. If necessary, the
township will also lend money for the cost of this insurance. The
insurance policy shall acknowledge the township's lien on the
property.
6. The township committee may waive repayment of loan principle
upon consideration of an applicant's income level under conditions
established by the township committee.
a. Liens of Property. Homeowners who receive financial assistance under
the provisions of this plan shall be required to place a lien on the units
to be rehabilitated. The following shall apply to such liens:
1. The township shall be specified as the lien holder.
§ 23-1.6 HOPEWELL CODE § 23-1.7
AO:772
2. The lien shall specify that the value of the lien equals the unpaid
portion (principle and, when applicable, interest) of the monetary
benefits (including tax abatements) received by the applicant under
the housing rehabilitation program.
3. A record of the lien will be kept on the property tax record, in the
county's tax files in the housing administrator's records and with
the insurance policy as required by this section.
4. If a property under such a lien is sold prior to fulfillment of the
obligations specified in the lien, the applicant will be required to
repay the township for the value of the lien. If the applicant has
made payments on a loan received under the rehabilitation
program, those payments shall be deducted from the value of the
lien to determine the amount due the township.
5. In the event of the death of an applicant, if the property is
transferred or sold to either a surviving family member or
dependent of the applicant and that family member or dependent
lives in a low or moderate-income household, the lien may be
transferred with the property and the surviving family member or
dependent will be required to satisfy the lien under the same
conditions as the original applicant, including the same opportunity
for deferral.
6. All properties will be checked for liens prior to the issuance of a
continuing certificate of occupancy. The issuing officer shall report
any suspected violations of the program to the housing
administrator for further investigation.
7. The homeowner shall notify the housing administrator, in writing,
of the intent to sell a unit that has been rehabilitated under this
program, if such a unit is still under restrictions required by this
program.
b. Length of Affordability.
1. Homeowners who are owner-occupants and receive financial
assistance under the provisions of this chapter shall place a lien on
the property to specify that only a low or moderate-income
household may occupy the housing unit. The lien shall take effect
as soon as an application has been approved and money has been
made available for the rehabilitation project.
2. Homeowners who utilize the provisions of this section and who rent
the designated unit to someone else shall agree to place a deed
restriction on his or her property. The deed restriction will state
that only a low or moderate-income household will occupy a
dwelling that has been rehabilitated under the provisions of this
ordinance. The deed restriction shall be recorded and a copy of the
recorded deed shall be forwarded to the housing administrator. The
deed restriction shall go into effect as soon as the rehabilitation has
§ 23-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1.7
AO:773
§ 23-1.8. Program Compliance. [Ord. #97-1080]
The housing rehabilitation program will comply with all the regulations
of the Council on Affordable Housing and with the applicable rules and
regulations of any funding or other assistance programs that are applied for
and approved.
been completed and shall apply for 10 years. Sale of the deed
restricted property shall not affect the deed restriction.
c. Pricing. Homeowners who intend to rent to new tenants during the
applicable deed restricted period, must follow the rental cost guidelines
as given below, and as further determined in N.J.A.C. 5:92-1 et seq. or
applicable subsequent rules and regulations.
1. Rents, including a utility allowance, shall be set so as not to exceed
30% of the gross monthly income of the appropriate household size.
Maximum rent shall be calculated as a percentage of the current
uncapped Section 8 income limit or other recognized standard
adopted by COAH that applies to the rental housing unit.
2. The following criteria shall be considered in determining rents:
(a) Efficiency units shall be affordable to one person households;
(b) One-bedroom units shall be affordable to two-person
households;
(c) Two-bedroom units shall be affordable to three-person
households;
(d) Three-bedroom units shall be affordable to five-person
households; and
(e) Four-bedroom units shall be affordable to seven-person
households.
Housing units that satisfy the criteria in items (a) through (e) above
shall be considered affordable. Median income by household size shall
be established by the current uncapped Section 8 income limits
published by HUD or other recognized standard adopted by COAH.
d. Annual Indexed Increases. Upon application by the homeowner to the
housing administrator and approval by the township committee, the
rents of affordable housing units may be increased. This increase shall
be based on the percentage increase in median income for each housing
region as determined from the current uncapped Section 8 income
limits, published by HUD or other recognized standard adopted by
COAH.
§ 23-1.7 HOPEWELL CODE § 23-2
AO:774
§ 23-2. HOUSING REHABILITATION PROGRAM POLICY AND
PROCEDURAL MANUAL. [Ord. #01-1191]
The attached Housing Rehabilitation Program "Policy and Procedural
Manual," prepared by Housing Services, Inc., and dated March, 2001, is
hereby approved and adopted by the Township of Hopewell.79
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
This Disposition List provides a list of the ordinances used in the
preparation of Code supplements. The word Special after the ordinance
description or the word NCM in the Disposition column indicates material
that is special in nature/non-Code material and has not been included in the
Code.
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
11-1506 3-28-2011 Underage drinking on private property,
3-23
19
11-1507 3-28-2011 Alcoholic beverage license fees, 10-2 19
11-1508 3-28-2011 Acceptance of public improvements
(Special)
19
11-1509 4-4-2011 Acquisition of property (Special) 19
11-1510 4-11-2011 Bond Ordinance (Special) 19
11-1511 4-25-2011 Standards for keeping chickens, 5-9 19
11-1512 5-9-2011 Mid-block crosswalks, 7-15 and
Schedule XX
19
11-1513 5-9-2011 Vacate portion of street (Special) 19
11-1514 5-9-2011 Deer management advisory committee,
2-5.1, 2-37
19
11-1515 5-9-2011 Vacate portion of street (Special) 19
11-1516 5-9-2011 Bond Ordinance (Special) 19
11-1517 6-13-2011 Refuse containers/dumpsters, 3-24 19
11-1518 6-13-2011 Private storm drain inlet retrofitting,
3-25
19
79.Editor's Note: The manual referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 23-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:775
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
11-1519 6-13-2011 Fees — zoning permits, 10-13.3; bulk
pickup fees, 10-15
19
11-1520 6-27-2011 Sale of property (Special) 19
11-1521 6-27-2011 Salary Ordinance (Special) 19
11-1522 7-5-2011 Appropriation (Special) 19
11-1523 7-25-2011 Bond Ordinance (Special) 19
11-1524 7-25-2011 Bond Ordinance (Special) 19
11-1525 8-22-2011 Conservation easement (Special) 20
11-1526 10-12-2011 Towing and storage 20
11-1527 10-12-2011 Bond (Special) 20
11-1528 10-12-2011 Acquisition of property (Special) 20
11-1529 10-12-2011 Acquisition of property (Special) 20
11-1530 10-12-2011 Acquisition of property (Special) 20
11-1531 10-12-2011 Acquisition of property (Special) 20
11-1532 10-24-2011 Appropriation (Special) 20
11-1533 11-28-2011 Bond (Special) 20
11-1534 11-28-2011 Sewer service agreement between
Hopewell Township, Ewing Township
and the Ewing Lawrence Sewerage
Authority (Special)
20
11-1535 12-12-2011 Sale of property (Special) 20
11-1536 12-12-2011 Public improvements (Special) 20
11-1537 12-12-2011 Truck routes 7-4.1 and Ch. 7 Schedule
V
20
11-1538 12-12-2011 Landscape registration, 4-13; fee,
10-15
20
11-1539 12-12-2011 Drought emergency and water
conservation, 16-5
20
12-1540 1-23-2012 Salary (Special) 20
12-1541 3-26-2012 Yard waste collection, 3-18 21
12-1542 4-9-2012 Appropriation (Special) 21
12-1543 4-23-2012 Bond (Special) 21
12-1544 5-14-2012 Bond (Special) 21
12-1545 5-14-2012 Bond (Special) 21
12-1546 5-29-2012 Criminal history background checks —
employees and volunteers in recreation
programs, 2-15
21
§ DL-1 HOPEWELL CODE § DL-1
AO:776
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
12-1547 5-29-2012 Acquisition of property (Special) 21
12-1548 6-11-2012 Appropriation (Special) 21
12-1549 6-11-2012 Use of park property; 2-33.5; Deer
management, 2-33.16
21
12-1550 6-11-2012 Parks and Recreation fees, 10-18 21
12-1551 6-11-2012 No parking 7-3.3, Schedule I 21
12-1552 6-11-2012 Appropriation (Special) 21
12-1553 7-9-2012 Conveyance of easement (Special) 21
12-1554 7-9-2012 Forest management and tree removal
fees, 10-19; Forest management and
tree removal, 12-4
21
12-1555 8-13-2012 Conveyance of property, Special 22
12-1556 8-13-2012 Bond, Special 22
12-1557 8-13-2012 Salary, Special 22
12-1558 9-10-2012 Acquisition of property 22
12-1559 9-10-2012 Bond, Special 22
12-1560 9-10-2012 Speed limits, 7-13.1 and Schedule XVII 22
12-1561 9-24-2012 Waster service fees, 19-2.2 22
12-1562 10-9-2012 Mid-block crosswalks, 7-15 22
12-1563 11-15-2012 Appropriation, Special 22
12-1564 12-10-2012 Easement, Special 23
13-1565 1-28-2013 CAP Bank, Special 23
13-1566 1-28-2013 Finance Advisory Committee, 2-5.1,
2-17B
23
13-1567 1-28-2013 Bond, Special 23
13-1568 1-28-2013 Bond, Special 23
13-1569 2-11-2013 Purchase agreement, Special 23
13-1570 2-11-2013 Public lands and open spaces-sight
triangle area, 2-33.17
23
13-1571 3-11-2013 Police-fees, 10-8.1 23
13-1572 3-11-2013 Reappropriation, Special 23
13-1573 4-8-2013 Sewer service fees - Stonybrook
Service District, 19-1.2
24
13-1574 4-8-2013 Sewer service fees-(ELSA) Service
District, 19-1.2
24
13-1575 4-22-2013 Bond, Special 24
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:777
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
13-1576 4-22-2013 Bond, Special 24
13-1577 5-13-2013 Bond, Special 24
13-1578 6-10-2013 Bond, Special 24
13-1579 6-24-2013 Appropriation, Special 24
13-1580 6-24-2013 Acquisition of property, Special 24
13-1581 6-24-2013 Appropriation, Special 24
13-1582 6-24-2013 Bond, Special 24
13-1583 9-23-2013 Salary, Special 24
13-1584 10-15-2013 Stop intersections, 7-6.2 24
13-1585 11-12-2013 Bond, Special 24
13-1586 11-12-2013 Bond, Special 24
13-1587 11-25-2013 Salary, Special 24
13-1588 12-9-2013 Sewer matters, 19-1 24
14-1589 1-27-2014 CAP, Special 25
14-1590 1-27-2014 Acquisition of property, Special 25
14-1591 3-24-2014 Township Committee, 2-1; Township
Administrator, 2-2.1
25
14-1592 3-24-2014 Municipal Court, 2-4 25
14-1593 3-24-2014 Bond, Special 25
14-1594 3-24-2014 Reappropriation, Special 25
14-1595 3-24-2014 Appropriation, Special 25
14-1596 3-24-2014 Bond, Special 25
14-1597 5-12-2014 Delete Department of Zoning, create
Department of Community
Development, 2-2.13
25
14-1598 5-12-2014 Salary, Special 25
14-1599 5-12-2014 Application fees and escrow fees for
review, 10-7.1
25
14-1600 6-23-2014 Complete Streets Policy, 15-6 26
14-1601 7-14-2014 Designate Stout Chorley House as
historic landmark, 17-244.4t
26
14-1602 7-28-2014 Salary, Special 26
14-1603 12-8-2014 Designate Atchley-Hunter Farmstead
as historic landmark, 17-244.4u
26
14-1604 12-8-2014 Salary, Special 26
14-1605 12-8-2014 Salary, Special 26
§ DL-1 HOPEWELL CODE § DL-1
AO:778
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
2015-16062-3-2015 CAP Bank, Special 27
2015-16074-13-2015 Accept donation of furniture, Special 27
2015-16084-27-2015 Accept donation of tree and donation of
automated external defibrillator,
Special
27
2015-16095-26-2015 Amends Ch. 2, Administration, 2-35,
Mutual aid agreement-Police services
27
2015-16106-8-2015 Bond, Special 27
2015-16116-8-2015 Reappropriation, Special 27
2015-16126-22-2015 Amend Bond Ordinance 14-1596,
Special
27
2015-16136-22-2015 Salary, Special 27
2015-16147-13-2015 Acceptance of easement, Special 27
2015-16157-13-2015 Accept donation of first responder
devices, Special
27
2015-16168-10-2015 Bond, Special 27
2015-16178-10-2015 Vacation of streets, Special 27
BOH
2013-1
9-9-2013 Amends Ch. 16, Health, 16-7.2,
nuisance defined and prohibited,
16-7.7, recovery of costs by Township
27
2015-161810-26-2015 Accept donation of defibrillator, Special 28
2015-161910-26-2015 Grant of easement, Special 28
2016-16202-8-2016 Amends Ch. 4, General licensing;
4-11.1, raffle and bingo licensing
28
2016-16212-8-2016 Amends Ch. 10, Fees; 10-5.4, records
of vital statistics
28
2016-16222-22-2016 Reappropriation, Special 29
2016-16232-22-2016 Bond, Special 29
2016-16242-22-2016 Bond, Special 29
2016-16252-22-2016 Reappropriation, Special 29
2016-16263-28-2016 CAP, Special 29
2016-16274-11-2016 Amends Ch. 3, Law Enforcement
Regulations; 3-1, Penalty
2016-16285-9-2016 Amends Ch. 10, Fees and Permits;
10-18, Parks and Recreation fees
29
2016-16295-24-2016 Bond, Special 29
2016-16305-24-2016 Bond, Special 29
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:779
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
2016-16316-13-2016 Amends Ch. 19, Sewer and Water
Matters; 19-1.2, Ewing Lawrence
Sewer Authority; 19-1.3, regulations
governing sewers
29
2016-16326-27-2016 Appropriation, Special 29
2016-16336-23-2016 Amends Ch. 2, Administration; 2-33.14,
naming of parks and memorialization,
names Woolsey Park
29
2016-16346-27-2016 Amends Ch. 2, Administration; 2-2.10,
Police Department; deletes Ch. 8,
Police
29
2016-16357-11-2016 Amends Ch. 12, Environmental Control;
12-2, flood damage prevention
29
2016-16367-25-2016 Amends Ch. 3, Law Enforcement
Regulations; 3-13.2, registration of
alarm systems; 3-13.6, penalties for
owners and users of alarm systems or
devices
29
2016-16377-25-2016 Amends Ch. 10, Fees and Permits;
10-6.4, Hawkers, Peddlers and
canvassers; 10-8.1, Police
29
2016-16388-8-2016 Conveyance of conservation easement,
Special
29
2016-16398-8-2016 Conveyance of property, Special 29
2016-16408-8-2016 Conveyance of property, Special 29
2016-16419-12-2016 Bond, Special 30
2016-16429-12-2016 Amends Ch. 12 Environmental Control;
readopts 12-4 Forest Management and
Tree Removal
30
2016-16439-26-2016 Amends Ch. 2 Administration; 2-33.16
Deer Management, Permit Fees
30
2016-16449-26-2016 Amends Ch. 10 Fees and Permits; 10-7
Land Development Fees 10-7.1
Application Fees and Escrow Fees for
Review
30
2016-164511-14-2016 Amends Ch. 17 Land Use; amends
17-138b Zoning Map, Adopts
Pennytown Redevelopment Plan
30
2016-164611-14-2016 Salary, Special 30
§ DL-1 HOPEWELL CODE § DL-1
AO:780
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
2016-164711-28-2016 Amends Ch. 17 Land Use and
Development; 17-244.4v Captain John
Stillwell House designated as Historic
Landmark
30
2016-164811-28-2016 Amends Ch. 17 Land Use and
Development; 17-244.4w Stephen and
Edwin Titus Farmstead designated as
Historic Landmark
30
2016-164911-28-2016 Acceptance of Streets, Easements and
Public Improvements known as
Hamptons at Hopewell LLC, Special
30
2017-16501-23-2017 Accepts Donation of Labor for Harts
Corner Schoolhouse, Special
30
2017-16512-27-2017 Amends Chapter 10 Fees and Permits;
10-15 Public Works Bulk Pick-up Fee
30
2017-16523-13-2017 Appropriation, Special 30
2017-16533-13-2017 Amends Ch. 10 Fees and Permits; 10-18
Parks and Recreation Fees
30
2017-16543-27-2017 Amends Ch. 2 Administration; amends
2-2.13 Department of Community
Development
30
2017-16553-27-2017 Salary, Special 30
2017-16563-27-2017 CAP Bank, Special 30
2017-16574-24-2017 Bond, Special 31
2017-16586-12-2017 Vacation of Street, Special 31
2017-16596-12-2017 Conveyance of Property, Special 31
2017-16606-12-2017 Salary and Wages, Special 31
2017-16616-26-2017 Bond, Special 31
2017-16626-26-2017 Bond, Special 31
2017-16637-10-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-3.3 No Parking
Schedule I
31
2017-16648-28-2017 Abandon and Vacate Detour Avenue,
Special
31
2017-166510-23-2017 Accepts Donation of Bituminous
Concrete for Reading Street Senior
Center, Special
31
2017-166610-23-2017 Amends Ch. 17 Land Use and
Development; 17-138 Zoning Districts,
Zoning Map Amendments, Woodmont
Redevelopment Area
31
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:781
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
2017-166711-13-2017 Conservation Easement, Special 31
2017-166811-13-2017 Accepts Conveyance of Stormwater
Maintenance and Easement, Special
31
2017-166911-27-2017 Amends Ch. 17 Land Use and
Development; 17-138 Zoning Districts,
Map Amendments, CF Hopewell
Redevelopment Area
31
2017-167011-27-2017 Amends Ch. 17 Land Use and
Development; 17-168 RO-1, 2 and 3
Districts: Research/Office Districts;
repeals 17-252 Applicability of Growth
Share; repeals 17-253 Residential
Growth Share Provisions; repeals
17-254 Nonresidential Growth Share
Provisions; adds 17-168(g) Conditional
Use Inclusionary Development in the
RO-1 District; adds 17-253 Mandatory
Affordable Housing Set-Aside in Future
Rezonings or the Grant of Variances
Authorizing Multi-Family Housing
31
2017-167111-27-2017 Amends Ch. 17 Land Use and
Development; 17-138 Zoning Map and
Map Amendments; adds 17-173
Inclusionary Multi-Family - 1 Zone
(IMF - 1)
31
2017-167211-27-2017 Amends Ch. 17 Land Use and
Development; 17-138 Zoning Map and
Map Amendments, Zaitz
Redevelopment Area
31
2017-167312-11-2017 Financial Agreement with Woodmont
Federal Hopewell Urban Renewal, LLC
Redevelopment Area, Special
31
2017-167412-11-2017 Conveyance of Property, Special 31
2017-167512-11-2017 Amends Ch. 4 General Licensing;
deletes 4-6 Shooting Galleries, 4-6.1 —
4-6.5; adds 4-6 Shooting Range 4-6.1 —
4-6.6
31
2017-167612-11-2017 Salary, Special 31
2017-167712-19-2017 Authorize Exchange of Property with
CF Hopewell CC&L, LLC, Special
31
2018-16781-29-2018 Accept Deed for Block 39 from
Pinnacle Towers LLC, Special
32
§ DL-1 HOPEWELL CODE § DL-1
AO:782
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
2018-16791-29-2018 Adopts CF Hopewell Redevelopment
Plan; amends Ch. 17 Land Use and
Development; 17-138 Zoning Map and
Map Amendments
32
2018-16801-29-2018 Amends Ch. 17 Land Use and
Development; Article XVII Affordable
Housing Obligations, 17-257 — 17-280
32
2018-16811-29-2018 Amends Ch. 16 Health; 16-4
Environmental Health Programs, Retail
Food Establishments 16-4.1, Massage
and Bodywork Establishments 16-4.8,
General Provisions 16-4.10
32
2018-16822-13-2018 Amends Ch. 15 Streets and Sidewalks,
15-5 Snow and Ice Removal, adds
15-5.2a Public Streets and Sidewalks;
amends 15-5.4 Removal by Township
32
2018-16832-26-2018 Amends Ch. 16 Health, 16-12.3 Lot
Area Requirements, Individual Sewage
Disposal Code
32
2018-16842-26-2018 Amends Ch. 10 Fees and Permits,
10-5.2 Water, Aquifer Test and Analysis
32
2018-16852-26-2018 CAP Bank, Special 32
2018-16863-26-2018 Salary and Wage, Special 32
2018-16873-26-2018 Adopts Redevelopment Plan for Block
85, Zaitz Non-Condemnation Area,
amends Ch. 17 Land Use and
Development, 17-138 Zoning Districts
32
2018-16883-26-2018 Amends Ch. 2 Administration,
reestablishes Deer Management
Advisory Committee, 2-5.1 Bodies
Established, adds 2-37.9 Goals
32
2018-16894-9-2018 Amends Ch. 2 Administration, adds
2-38 Township Historian, 2-38.1 —
2-38.3
32
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:783
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
2018-16904-9-2018 Amends Ch. 17 Land Use and
Development, 17-168 RO-1, 2 and 3
Districts; Research/Office Districts,
repeals 17-252 Applicability of Growth
Share, repeals 17-253 Residential
Growth Share, repeals 17-254
Nonresidential Growth Share, adds
17-168g, Conditional Use Inclusionary
Development in the RO-1 District, adds
17-253 Mandatory Affordable Housing
Future Rezonings or Grant of Variances
Authorizing Multi-Family Housing,
17-254 Reserved
32
2018-16914-23-2018 Reappropriation, Special 32
2018-16924-23-2018 Bond, Special 32
2018-16936-25-2018 Accepts Right-of-Way Easement from
Public Service Electric and Gas,
Special
32
2018-16946-25-2018 Accepts Deed from Harbourton
Foundation, Special
32
2018-16957-30-2018 Financial Agreement, Special 32
2018-16969-24-2018 Amends Ch. 18 Cable Television and
Communications, 18-1 — 18-26,
extends agreement with Comcast of
Southeast Pennsylvania, LLC
32
2018-169710-19-2018 Omnibus Ordinance Amending and
Supplementing Affordable Housing
Ordinance and Zaitz Redevelopment
Plan and Zaitz Ordinance to Facilitate
the Implementation of the Hopewell
Township Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan, amends Ch. 17 Land Use
and Development, 17-265 Control
Periods for Restricted Ownership
Units, 17-270 Control Periods for
Restricted Rental Units, amends the
Zaitz Ordinance and Zaitz
Redevelopment Plan IMF-X Very Low,
Low and Moderate Income Housing
Requirements, amends Woodmont
Ordinance and Woodmont
Redevelopment Plan
32
§ DL-1 HOPEWELL CODE § DL-1
AO:784
Ord. No. Adoption Title Supp. No.
2018-16989-24-2018 Amends Ch. 10 Fees and Permits,
10-18.1, 10-18.2 Parks and Recreation
Fees
32
2018-169910-9-2018 Reappropriation, Special 32
2018-170011-13-2018 Reappropriation, Special 32
2018-170112-10-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic, 7-3.3 Parking
Prohibited at All Times, Schedule I No
Parking
32
2019-17021-28-2019 CAP Bank, Special 32
2019-17033-4-2019 Amends Ch. 5 Animal Control in
entirety, 5-1 — 5-9
32
2019-17043-4-2019 Amends Ch. 10 Fees and Permits,
10-8.1 Police Special Duty
32
2019-17054-15-2019 Amends Ch. 10 Fees and Permits, 10-6
Publication Fee, 10-15 Public Works
Bulk Pickup Fees
32
2019-17064-15-2019 Bond, Special 32
2019-17074-15-2019 Bond, Special 32
2019-17085-6-2019 Amends Ch. 17 Land Use and
Development, amends 17-217.8
Homeowner Affordability Assistance
Program
32
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-1709 6-6-2019 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Not Yet
Codified
19-1710 6-17-2020 Traffic Amendment Not Yet
Codified
19-1711 6-17-2020 Bond NCM 33
19-1712 6-17-2020 Bond NCM 33
19-1713 6-17-2020 Bond NCM 33
19-1714 6-17-2020 Salaries NCM 33
19-1715 Conveyance of Property NCM 33
19-1716 6-24-2020 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Not Yet
Codified
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:785
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-1717 7-29-2019 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Ch. 17 33
19-1718 7-29-2019 Appropriation NCM 33
19-1719 7-29-2019 Salaries NCM 33
19-1720 10-7-2019 Acceptance of Donation NCM 33
20-1721 1-27-2020 Acceptance of Donation NCM 33
20-1722 1-27-2020 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 33
20-1723 2-18-2020 Salaries NCM 33
20-1724 2-18-2020 Bond Amendment NCM 33
20-1725 2-18-2020 Bond NCM 33
20-1726 2-18-2020 Energy Aggregation
Program
NCM 33
20-1727 4-6-2020 Refunding Bond NCM 33
§ DL-1 HOPEWELL CODE § DL-1
AO:786