Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [New]
This book shall be known and may be cited as "The Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Holmdel, 1996" and is referred to herein as
the Revision or Code.
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS. [New]
For the purpose of this Revision, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
CLERK OR TOWNSHIP CLERK — Shall mean the Municipal Clerk duly
appointed pursuant to law.
COUNTY — Shall mean the County of Monmouth.
DAYS — Shall mean calendar days.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the Township
government established or designated by ordinance or this Revision as a
department, together with any agency or instrumentality of the Township
government assigned to such organizational unit by the Township
Committee.
DEPARTMENT HEAD — Shall mean the Township Administrator, if there be
one appointed, or a department head designated as such by ordinance; or
in the absence of either, the immediate supervisor of an employee.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this Revision.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation where an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath. In such cases the words swear and sworn
shall be construed to be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed.
OCCUPANT — See tenant.
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL AND THE TITLE OF AN OFFICER OR OFFICIAL —
Shall be construed as if the words of the Township of Holmdel followed it.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, including this Revision, so long as it has been adopted
by the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as
it remains in force and effect pursuant to law.
1:1
OWNER — When applied to a building or land shall mean and include
any part owner, any corporation, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part
of such building or land.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any kind thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING — Shall mean next before and next after,
respectively.
PROPERTY — Shall mean real and personal property.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC
PLACES — Shall severally be construed to mean any and every public
ground, public square, public park or other public place within the
Township.
REAL PROPERTY — Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments, all
rights thereto and interests therein.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and
the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding
parkways.
STREET — Shall mean and include an avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, and every
class of road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general
public.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, shall mean and
include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land,
whether alone or with others.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Holmdel in the County of
Monmouth and State of New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE OR COMMITTEE — Shall mean the governing
body of the Township.
WEEK — Shall mean seven days.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [New]
For the purpose of this Revision and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
§ 1-2 HOLMDEL § 1-3
1:2
The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
Shall is mandatory and may is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the Township are closed, that day
shall be excluded.
Writing and written shall include printing, typewriting and any other mode
of communication using paper or similar material which is in general use,
as well as legible handwriting.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Revision, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during
any day in any year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Revision shall
be deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether
or not such designation is included in the citation.
Chapter shall mean one of the major divisions of the Revision identified by
an Arabic number and divided by subject matter.
Section shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
Subsection shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
Paragraph shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY. [1976 Code § 1-10]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Revision shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this Revision.
§ 1-5. GENERAL PENALTY.1
§ 1-5.1. Maximum Penalty. [1976 Code § 1-13.1; 1976 Code § 56-34;
Ord. No. 2002-01 § I; Ord. No. 2006-07 § I]
For violation of any provision of this Revision or other ordinance of the
Township of Holmdel unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided in
connection with the provision violated, the maximum penalty upon
conviction of the violation shall be by one or more of the following:
1. Editor's Note: Penalty provision in compliance with N.J.S.A. 40:49.5.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5.1
1:3
imprisonment in the County Jail or in any place provided by the Township
for the detention of prisoners, for any term not exceeding 90 days; or
by a fine not exceeding $2,000; or by a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days.
In the event that a fine greater than $1,250 is imposed upon an owner for
violations of housing or zoning codes, the owner shall be provided with
a thirty-day period in which the owner shall be afforded the opportunity
to cure or abate the condition and shall also be afforded an opportunity
for a hearing before a court of competent jurisdiction for an independent
determination concerning the violation. Subsequent to the expiration of the
thirty-day period, a fine greater than $1,250 may be imposed if a court
has not determined otherwise, or, upon reinspection of the property, it is
determined that the abatement has not been substantially completed.
§ 1-5.2. Minimum Penalty. [New]
The Township Committee may prescribe that for the violation of any
particular provision of the Revision or of any particular ordinance at least
a minimum penalty shall be imposed which shall consist of a fine which
may be fixed at an amount not exceeding $100. The court before which any
person is convicted of violating any ordinance or Revision provision shall
have power to impose any fine, term of punishment, or period of community
service not less than the minimum and not exceeding the maximum fixed in
the Revision or such ordinance.
§ 1-5.3. Additional Fine for Repeat Offenders. [New]
Any person who is convicted of violating this Revision or an ordinance
within one year of the date of a previous violation of the same provision of
this Revision or of the same ordinance and who was fined for the previous
violation, shall be sentenced by a court to an additional fine as a repeat
offender. The additional fine imposed by the court upon a person for a
repeated offense shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the
maximum fine fixed for a violation of the ordinance or Revision provision,
but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of
the ordinance or Revision provision.
If the Township Committee chooses not to impose an additional fine upon a
person for a repeated violation of any municipal ordinance, the Committee
may waive the additional fine by ordinance or resolution.
§ 1-5.4. Default of Payment of Fine. [New]
Any person convicted of the violation of any provision of this Revision or any
ordinance may, in the discretion of the court by which he was convicted,
and in default of the payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned in
the County Jail or place of detention provided by the Township, for any term
not exceeding 90 days, or be required to perform community service for a
period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-5.1 HOLMDEL § 1-5.5
1:4
§ 1-5.5. Separate Violations. [New]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this Revision or any other ordinance of the Township exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-5.6. Application. [New]
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. At the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court, any lesser penalty, including a nominal
penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular case or
violation.
§ 1-5.7. Solid Waste Disposal Violation. [Ord. No. 2004-17 § I]
For a violation of any ordinance of the Township pertaining to solid waste
disposal, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, the minimum penalty shall be $200,
upon conviction, and the maximum fine shall not exceed $10,000, upon
conviction.
§ 1-6. THE REVISED GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE TOWNSHIP
OF HOLMDEL TO BE MAINTAINED BY TOWNSHIP CLERK. [1976
Code § 1-6; New]
It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk or someone authorized and
directed by the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing "The Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Holmdel,
1996" required to be filed in the office of the Township Clerk for the use of
the public. All changes in the Revision and all ordinances adopted by the
Township Committee subsequent to the adoption of the Revision, which the
Township Committee shall adopt specifically as a part of the Revision, shall,
when finally adopted, be included herein by reference until such change
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to the Revised General
Ordinances, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-7. AMENDMENTS TO CODE. [1976 Code § 1-4]
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Township
Committee to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code of the Township of Holmdel
shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-5.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
§ 1-8. SALE OF CODE BOOK. [1976 Code § 1-7]
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Township Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the
Township Committee, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures
for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH CODE; PENALTIES FOR
VIOLATIONS. [1976 Code § 1-8]
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township of
Holmdel to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section shall
be subject, upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Section 1-5.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
Editor's Note: The form of government in the Township of Holmdel
is the Township form which is established in N.J.S.A. 40A:63-1. Other
enabling laws pertaining to the Administrative Chapter are N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118 et seq., Police Department N.J.S. 2A:8-1, et seq.,
Municipal Court; N.J.S. 40:55D-36, Zoning Board of Adjustment;
N.J.S. 44:8-115 et seq., Board of Assistance; and N.J.S. 26:3-1, et seq.,
Board of Health; regulation of fees for copies of public documents,
N.J.S. 47:1A-2. Other authority to regulate the internal affairs of the
Township is contained in N.J.S. 40:48-2.
§ 1-8 HOLMDEL § 1-9
1:6
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 2-1. TITLE; DEFINITIONS.
§ 2-1.1. Title. [1976 Code § 14-1]
This chapter is known and may be cited as "The Township of Holmdel
Organization Ordinance."
§ 2-1.2. Definitions. [1976 Code § 14-2]
As used in this chapter:
DEPARTMENT OR OFFICE — Shall mean an organizational unit of the
municipal government established or designated by, or pursuant to, this
Organizational Code, which was adopted on March 20, 1972, as a
department or office.
LAW — Shall mean and includes, but is not limited to, where the same are
applicable, the Constitutions of the United States of America and the State
of New Jersey, the United States Code, the New Jersey Statutes, resolutions
of the Township Committee of the Township of Holmdel, and rules and
regulations of administrative agencies of the Township of Holmdel.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the Township of Holmdel in the County of
Monmouth and State of New Jersey.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any and all ordinances of the Township of
Holmdel.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE — Shall mean the governing body of the
Township of Holmdel.
§ 2-1.3. Compliance with Law. [1976 Code § 14-3]
Every municipal department, office, board and employee, whether serving
with or without compensation, mentioned herein shall perform each and
every duty specified herein and the duties specified elsewhere by law, in
accordance with the requirements of law.
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-1.3
1:7

ARTICLE II
Township Committee
§ 2-2. ORGANIZATION AND LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE.
§ 2-2.1. Legislative Authority. [1976 Code § 14-4]
All legislative power and authority of the Township shall be exercised by the
Township Committee pursuant to law.
§ 2-2.2. Organization. [1976 Code § 14-5; Ord. No. 2018-05]
The Township Committee shall organize annually on January 1 at 12:00
noon or during the first seven days of January, at which time it shall elect
a Mayor and Deputy Mayor from among its membership, each elected by a
majority vote of the full membership of the Township Committee, to serve a
one-year term.
§ 2-2.3. Duties of the Mayor. [1976 Code § 14-6; Ord. No. 2014-12;
Ord. No. 2017-08]
The Mayor shall:
a. Preside at all meetings of the Township Committee.
b. Appoint advisory committees to study and make recommendations to
the Township Committee.
c. Appoint advisory committees and or members to certain boards and
commissions, as permitted or required by law.
d. Appoint personnel to represent the municipality on State, County and
regional boards, committees, authorities or commissions when
requested to do so by the County or the State or when the best interests
of the municipality will be served by participation with other
municipalities in regional undertakings. Such appointments shall be
with the advice and consent of the Township Committee unless
otherwise provided by law.
e. Issue proclamations.
f. Serve as the municipality's chief official at meetings and ceremonies.
g. Execute contracts, agreements and other legal documents following
authorization by the Township Committee.
h. Serve as a member ex officio on certain statutory boards and
commissions.
i. Exercise every other power usually exercised by Township Mayors or
conferred upon him or her by law and formal action by the Township
Committee.
§ 2-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-2.3
1:9
§ 2-2.4. Duties of the Deputy Mayor. [1976 Code § 14-7]
In the absence of the Mayor, when the Mayor has informed the Township
Committee of his or her expected absence and the duration thereof, or in
the event the Mayor is incapacitated from performing his or her duties, the
Deputy Mayor shall have all of the powers and duties of the Mayor.
§ 2-2.5. Succession of Mayor and Deputy Mayor. [Ord. No. 2018-05]
In the event of a vacancy in Mayor, the Deputy Mayor shall become Mayor
for the unexpired term. In the event of a vacancy in Deputy Mayor, the office
shall be filled following the election procedure set forth in subsection 2-2.2
for the unexpired term.
§ 2-2.6. Compensation. [Added 12-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-302]
Members of the Township Committee shall be compensated in accordance
with the Township's Salary Ordinance. Members of the Township
Committee are considered part-time employees, and accordingly, shall not
be eligible for or receive any health insurance or similar benefits provided
by or paid in part or in full by the Township of Holmdel.
§ 2-3. MEETINGS OF THE TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE.
§ 2-3.1. Regular Meetings. [1976 Code § 14-8A]
The Township Committee shall determine and announce at its
reorganization meeting in January the places, times and dates of regular
monthly public meetings. The Township Committee may, by resolution,
dispense with or change the date of a regularly scheduled meeting. When
the time for any regular meeting falls on a legal holiday as prescribed by
law, such meeting shall be held at the same place and the same hour on
some other day as established by resolution of the Township Committee.
j. Fee collected by Mayor or designee for performance of a marriage or
civil union: $150 for Holmdel residents and $300 for non-Holmdel
residents.
Effective with the adoption of this paragraph, (adopted May 6, 2014 by
Ordinance No. 2014-12) a budget appropriation will be created for the
anticipated revenue. An annual payment in the amount of fees collected will be
donated in equal halves to the Holmdel Township First Aid Squad and Holmdel
Township Fire Department.
2. Editor's Note: Section 3 of this ordinance states: "Any elected official that receives health
insurance or similar benefits at the time of adoption of this ordinance shall have such
benefits terminate as of December 31, 2019. Following termination, such elected officials
shall be permitted to retain such health insurance or similar benefits at the elected
official's sole cost, in accordance with applicable state and federal laws governing the
right to the temporary continuation of group health plan coverage, including but not
limited to 42 U.S.C. § 300bb-1 et seq., commonly referred to as 'public sector COBRA.'"
§ 2-2.3 HOLMDEL § 2-3.2
1:10
§ 2-3.2. Special Meetings. [1976 Code § 14-8B]
The presiding officer of the Township Committee may call special meetings
(1) when, in his or her opinion necessary or expedient; and (2) upon the
written request of one-fourth of the total membership of the Committee.
The request shall be addressed to its presiding officer or the Township
Clerk. The presiding officer, or in his or her absence the Township Clerk,
shall forthwith call such special meetings. The request and call for a special
meeting shall specify the purpose of the meeting and no business shall
be transacted at any special meeting other than that specified. The call
for a special meeting shall be filed with the Township Clerk and served
upon each Committee member at least 48 hours prior to the time for which
the meeting is called; provided, however, that the presiding officer may
determine that an emergency exists affecting the health or safety of the
people which requires consideration by the Township committee within a
shorter time. Upon such determination, which shall be set forth in the call,
the call may be filed with the Township Clerk not less than three hours prior
to the time set for the meeting. Upon the filing of any call for a special
meeting, the Township Clerk shall forthwith give notice by telephone to
each Committee member, at such place as he or she shall have previously
designated for that purpose, and shall also serve or cause to be served a
written copy of the call upon each Committee member, by delivery of a copy
to him or her personally or by leaving a copy at his or her usual place of
abode. Upon waiver of notice by all members of the Township Committee, a
special meeting may be held without prior notice notwithstanding the above
provisions of this subsection.
§ 2-3.3. Rules. [1976 Code § 14-8C; Ord. No. 2014-05]
In compliance with the Open Public Meetings Law, all regular and special
meetings of the Township Committee shall be open to the public. The
deliberations of the Committee shall be governed by law and the rules of
procedure shall be in accordance with the latest revised edition of Robert's
Rules of Order, except that, by majority vote, the Committee may elect to
set aside procedural rules, provided such setting aside is not in conflict
with statutory requirements, and provided also that the setting aside will
expedite the Township Committee's work or further public understanding
of the issues at hand. The "OPMA Electronic Communication Guidelines"
as promulgated by the Office of the Monmouth County Prosecutor by
Memorandum dated February 18, 2014, and as may be subsequently
amended, are hereby adopted.
§ 2-3.4. Quorum. [1976 Code § 14-8D]
A majority of the whole number of members of the Township Committee
shall constitute a quorum. If a quorum is not present one-half hour after
the appointed time for any meeting, the presiding officer, or, in his or her
absence, the Township Clerk, may declare that there is no meeting.
§ 2-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-3.5
1:11
§ 2-3.5. Agenda. [1976 Code § 14-8E; Ord. No. 2008-01 § 1]
The agenda for each meeting of the Township Committee shall be prepared
by the Township Clerk. Except for important or timely matters which may
be added to the agenda at any time with the approval of a majority of
those present of the Township Committee, the agenda for each meeting
of the Committee shall include only such matters of Committee business
as have been prescribed or delivered to the Township Clerk not later than
eight days preceding the meeting. Copies of the agenda shall be distributed
to each member of the Township Committee, the Township Attorney, the
Township Engineer and the Township Administrator prior to the regular or
special meeting. The Clerk shall post a copy of the approved agenda in a
conspicuous place in Town Hall and the Township website.
§ 2-3.6. Agenda or Conference Meetings. [1976 Code § 14-8F]
The Mayor or, in his or her absence, the Deputy Mayor, may call meetings
of the Township Committee in executive session to consider the tentative
agenda, adopt an approved agenda, and to discuss such other matters as
may require consideration by the Committee. Meetings of the Committee in
executive session may be attended only by such persons as the Committee
may request to attend.
§ 2-3.7. Ordinances and Resolutions. [1976 Code § 14-8G]
§ 2-3.8. Filing of Reports and Resolutions. [1976 Code § 14-8H]
The Township Committee and the Administrator shall file with the Township
Clerk all ordinances, resolutions, reports, petitions, correspondence and
other papers considered by or presented to it, or to him.
§ 2-3.9. Roll Call Votes; Minutes. [1976 Code § 14-8I]
The vote upon every motion concerning a resolution, ordinance or the
expenditure of money shall be taken by roll call and the yeas and nays shall
be entered on the minutes. All other votes may be by voice vote, except that,
upon the request of any Committeeman or at the discretion of the presiding
officer, the vote shall be taken by roll call and yeas and nays shall be entered
a. All proposed ordinances shall be prepared by, or approved by, the
Township Attorney upon the direction of the Township Committee. Prior
to its introduction, each proposed ordinance shall be submitted to the
Township Clerk and the Township Committee.
b. An ordinance or resolution may be introduced and seconded by any two
members of the Township Committee except the presiding officer when
sitting as the Chairman. Each ordinance and resolution shall be limited
to a single subject.
c. All ordinances shall be introduced, passed and advertised in the
manner prescribed by law.
§ 2-3.5 HOLMDEL § 2-3.9
1:12
in the minutes. The minutes of each regular and special meeting shall be
signed by the Township Clerk.
§ 2-3.10. Budget. [1976 Code § 14-8J]
a. Budget Preparation. Pursuant to N.J.S. 40A:4-3 et seq., the budget shall
be prepared by the Township Committee in the form prescribed by law.
The Township Administrator shall require and receive appropriation
requests from the heads of all departments on or before November 15
of each year and he or she and the Chief Financial Officer shall
assemble and be prepared to present the consolidated budget request,
together with their recommendations, to the Township Committee on or
about January 15 of the budget year. Officers and department heads
may be required to appear before the Township Committee at informal
conferences or public hearings to defend their appropriation requests.
The Chief Financial Officer, with the assistance of the officers who
receive such revenue and with the advice of the Auditor, shall prepare
all estimates of revenues anticipated for the support of each annual
budget.
b. Budget Operation. The Treasurer shall supervise the overall
administration of the budget in accordance with the guidelines
established by the Township Committee. He/she shall consult with the
Administrator, Auditor and department heads in the establishment of
quarterly or other periodic allotments of appropriations as may be
considered necessary. The Administrator, with the advice of the
department heads, will plan and administer the expenditure program
within the limits of such allotments. The Chief Financial Officer will
maintain a current register of obligations against each budget account,
reporting the status thereof to the Administrator and department heads
on a periodic basis.
§ 2-3.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-3.10
1:13

ARTICLE III
Establishment of Departments
§ 2-4. DEPARTMENTS ESTABLISHED.
§ 2-4.1. Department Chairpersons. [1976 Code § 14-9; Ord. No.
2003-03 § I]
Members of the Township Committee shall be assigned as Co-Chairpersons
of the several Township Departments by vote of a majority of the Township
Committee at each annual meeting. Each member of the Township
Committee shall be Co-Chairperson of at least one Township Department.
Duties of a Co-Chairperson shall be to:
§ 2-4.2. Departments Enumerated. [Ord. 1976 Code § 14-10; Ord.
No. 89-11; Ord. No. 87-17; Ord. No. 2003-03 § I; Ord. No. 2003-31
§ I; Ord. No. 2017-06]
There shall be the following Departments:
a. Monitor the actions and services of his or her Department and/or be in
liaison with his or her Department and the Township Committee.
b. Meet periodically with the Administrator and Department Head or
Heads.
c. Report on the activities of his or her Department to the Township
Committee when requested.
d. Perform any other actions or services related to the position of a Co-
Chairperson or as directed by a majority of the Township Committee.
a. The Department of Administration which includes:
1. Township Administrator and his/her assistants.
2. Township Clerk and his/her assistants.
3. Purchasing Officer and his/her assistants.
4. Personnel Officer and his/her assistants.
5. Health Officer/Sanitarian, Registrar of Vital Statistics.
b. The Department of Finance which includes:
1. Chief Financial Officer and his/her assistants.
2. Tax Assessor and his/her assistants.
3. Tax Collector and his/her assistants.
c. Department of Public Safety which includes:
1. Chief of Police and all Police Department personnel.
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4.2
1:15
2. Office of Emergency Management.
3. Volunteer Fire Companies.
4. Volunteer First Aid Squads.
5. Municipal Court and all Municipal Court personnel.
d. Department of Community Development which includes:
1. Planning Board.
2. Construction Office.
3. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
4. Code Enforcement Officer.
5. Fire Bureau.
e. Department of Public Works which includes:
1. Director of Infrastructure and Operations and his/her assistants.
2. Sanitation and Recycling.
3. Public Utilities.
4. Department of Public Works, Division of Streets and Roads,
Division of Buildings and Grounds, Division of Fleet Maintenance,
Public Buildings and Grounds.
5. Holmdel Township Sewer Utility System.
f. Department of Information Technology which includes:
1. Director of Information Technology and his/her assistants.
g. Department of Parks and Recreation which includes:
1. Recreation Director and his/her assistants.
2. Senior Services.
§ 2-4.2 HOLMDEL § 2-4.2
1:16
ARTICLE IV
Department of Administration and Finance
§ 2-5. TOWNSHIP ADMINISTRATOR.3
§ 2-5.1. Creation of the Position. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136 et seq., there is hereby created the Office of
Township Administrator to perform those duties as set forth in the statutes
of the State of New Jersey and this section.
§ 2-5.2. Appointment. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
The Township Administrator shall be appointed by a majority vote of the
Township Committee. Any vacancy which may occur in said position,
whether the same occurs by death, resignation, or otherwise, shall be filled
in the same manner.
§ 2-5.3. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 2003-27; amended 7-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-06; 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-10; 9-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-11]
a. The appointment of a Township Administrator shall be solely based on
the administrative qualifications of the appointee, with special regard
as to education, training and actual experience in governmental affairs.
b. No member of the governing body or any other federal, state, county, or
municipal elected office, including boards of education, shall be eligible
for appointment as Township Administrator during his/her term in said
office nor within two years after separation from said office, whether
the same occurs by expiration of term, resignation, or otherwise.
c. No person who previously occupied the position of Township
Administrator shall be eligible for reappointment as Township
Administrator within two years after separation from Township
employment, whether the same occurs by removal, resignation, or
otherwise.
d. No person who has been adjudged to have violated any ethics laws
governing public office or public employment, including but not limited
to the Local Government Ethics Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq., and
any similar statutory or regulatory scheme in any jurisdiction, by a body
of competent jurisdiction over same, including but not limited to the
Local Finance Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.4, a county ethics
board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.13 et seq., and a municipal ethics
board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.19 et seq., shall be eligible for
appointment as Township Administrator.
3. Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1976 Code §§ 14-11; 24-1 —
24-8 and Ordinance No. 2002-05.
§ 2-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5.3
1:17
§ 2-5.4. Term of Office. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
The Township Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the Township
Committee. During such term, the Administrator shall be subject to periodic
review and evaluation of performance.
§ 2-5.5. Removal. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
The Township Administrator may be removed by a 2/3 vote of the Governing
Body. The resolution of removal shall become effective three months after
its adoption by the Governing Body. However, the Governing Body may
provide that the resolution have immediate effect, in which case, the
Administrator shall be paid forthwith any unpaid balance of his (her) salary
and his (her) salary for the next three calendar months following adoption
of the resolution.
§ 2-5.6. Temporary Appointment During Absence or Disability. [Ord.
No. 2003-27]
During any approved absence or disability of the Township Administrator,
the Township Committee may, by resolution, appoint another individual or
any employee or officer of the Township to temporarily perform the duties
and responsibilities of the Township Administrator. After three months of
such absence or disability, the position may be deemed vacant upon
adoption of a resolution of the Township Committee. Compensation, if any,
for duties performed for an appointment under this section will be
determined by the Township Committee.
§ 2-5.7. Compensation. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
The Township Administrator shall receive such compensation as shall be
prescribed by annual salary resolution or ordinance of the Township
Committee. The Township Administrator shall be reimbursed for all
reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of the office.
§ 2-5.8. Full Time Position. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
The Administrator shall perform the duties hereinafter enumerated and
such other duties as may be assigned by the Township Committee. The
Administrator's entire time and effort shall be devoted to the performance
of the duties and functions of the position of Administrator and the
Administrator shall not engage in any other occupation or employment
while employed by the Township, except as approved by the Township
Committee.
e. The person appointed to the Office of Township Administrator need not
be a resident of the Township at the time of their appointment and may
reside outside of the municipality if agreed to by the Township
Committee.
§ 2-5.3 HOLMDEL § 2-5.9
1:18
§ 2-5.9. Political Activity. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
The Township Administrator shall not engage in any political activity, nor
shall make any financial or other contributions to any local political
campaign, nor lobby the elected officials on behalf of a political party or
campaign. However, nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit
the Township Administrator from providing recommendations to the elected
officials of the municipality on issues of concern to the municipality or from
appearing before any other governmental body on behalf of the Township
when authorized or directed to do so.
§ 2-5.10. Duties and Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
The Township Administrator shall act as the chief administrative officer of
the Township. Duties shall include the development of rules and regulations
for administrative procedures governing purchasing practices, operation
of all departments, personnel management and general coordination of
departments, offices, boards and agencies of the municipality, all for the
purpose of increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of the municipal
government and promoting its economic operation. All rules and regulations
promulgated and implemented by the Township Administrator shall be filed
with the Township Committee and shall become Township organizational
policy unless specifically rescinded by the Township Committee.
The Township Administrator shall perform the duties hereinafter
enumerated and such other duties as may be assigned by the Township
Committee.
The Township Administrator shall report annually to the Township
Committee on the progress of each department; shall initiate goals and
objectives to be reviewed on an annual basis with special emphasis on
critical problems and deterrents to the achievement thereof.
The Township Administrator shall be responsible for the organization and
management of the work, personnel and programs in all departments; for
the development and operation of a personnel program for all employees;
and he (she) shall be accountable for the planning, organization, delegation,
staffing, operation control, evaluation and correction in all departments to
achieve maximum results.
The Township Administrator is given broad authority with the approval of
the Township Committee to combine or eliminate functions, to redesign
and reorganize work effort and to assign personnel to achieve maximum
productivity.
The Township Administrator shall make assessments of municipal programs
and operations reporting to the Township Committee on his (her) findings,
setting forth a remediation action plan if necessary or required changes in
Township ordinances and procedures.
§ 2-5.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5.10.1
1:19
§ 2-5.10.1. Personnel. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
The Township Administrator shall:
§ 2-5.10.2. Budget. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
The Township Administrator shall:
a. Supervise all personnel of the Township through the respective
department heads unless otherwise provided for by law or this
ordinance.
b. Advise the Township Committee on all matters of personnel
administration and organization and assign personnel to the
performance of all duties in all departments. Except for the purpose of
inquiry, the Township Committee and its members shall deal with the
administrative service solely through the Township Administrator, and
neither the Township Committee nor any member shall give directives
to any subordinate of the Township Administrator either publicly or
privately.
c. Study, recommend, implement and enforce personnel organization and
policy of the Township and implement personnel leave policies as
established by the Township Committee for all departments, except as
otherwise provided by law for the Police Department.
d. Maintain comprehensive personnel files and evaluation systems of job
performance and duties.
e. Administer and negotiate on behalf of the Township all labor contracts.
f. Serve as the personnel officer of the Township with the authority to
hire, evaluate, transfer, promote, discipline and/or discharge all
employees to the extent not prohibited by law or provided for elsewhere
in the ordinances of the Township. In those instances where the final
authority rests with another agency, the Township Administrator shall
assist that agency by recommending personnel actions which are
consistent with those applied to other Township employees.
g. Investigate the affairs of any employee, officer, department, agency or
authority of the Township when necessary or when directed by the
Township Committee and submit a report relating thereto.
a. Prepare the annual capital and operating budget to be presented to the
Township Committee for adoption. In preparing these budgets, the
Administrator or an officer designated by the Administrator shall obtain
from the head of each department, committee, board, commission,
agency, officer or authority estimates of anticipated expenditures and
supporting data as requested.
b. Prepare and compile budget studies, analysis and schedules; assist in
the conduct of public, departmental, board, committee, and commission
budget hearings; and in conjunction with the Chief Financial Officer,
§ 2-5.10.1 HOLMDEL § 2-5.10.2
1:20
§ 2-5.10.3. Fiscal Affairs. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
The Township Administrator shall:
§ 2-5.10.4. Collective Bargaining and Employee Contracts. [Ord. No.
2003-27]
The Township Administrator shall be responsible for the negotiation of
collective bargaining contracts with agencies representing Township
employees, subject to the approval of the Township Committee, and for
the administration and enforcement of such contracts and the Personnel
Policies and Procedures of the Township.
§ 2-5.10.5. Contracts. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
The Township Administrator shall:
shall assist the Township Committee in such manner as they shall
require in the review of and adoption of the annual budget.
c. Prepare and submit to the Township Committee an explanatory budget
message, including a comparison of prior years revenues,
appropriations and expenditures as well as an analysis of the proposed
revenues and expenditures.
a. Administer the budget after its adoption by the Governing Body, shall
maintain a continuing review and analysis of the budget operation,
work progress and costs of municipal services; and shall assess the
attainment of the Township's budget and service goals, reporting the
same regularly to the Township Committee.
b. Study, recommend, implement, and enforce the financial procedures
and policy of the Township and its departments, after consultation with
department heads and approval of the Governing Body.
a. See that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and privileges
granted by the Township are complied with and provide periodic
reports of said compliance upon request.
b. Negotiate contracts for the Township upon request of the Governing
Body and subject to the approval of the Governing Body.
c. Attend to the letting of contracts, in due form of law and supervise their
performance and faithful execution except insofar as such duties are
expressly imposed upon some other Township officer or official by
statute.
d. See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Township or its
inhabitants in any statute, public utility, franchise or other contract are
faithfully kept and performed, and upon knowledge of any violations,
call the same to the attention of the Township Committee.
§ 2-5.10.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5.10.5
1:21
§ 2-5.10.6. Grants. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
The Township Administrator shall be responsible for researching, initiating
action for, applying for and supervising the implementation of funding
grants from various sources for the improvement and development of
Township capital projects and needs as well as for services to the Township
and its residents.
§ 2-5.10.7. Administration. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
The Township Administrator shall:
e. Advise the Township Committee if professional or other outside
resources should be utilized.
a. Study the governmental and administrative operations and needs of the
Township, and prepare and recommend to the Governing Body
necessary and desirable plans and programs to meet present and
foreseeable needs.
b. Develop, prescribe and enforce rules and regulations for the efficient
management of the Township for the avoidance of any duplication or
overlapping effort among the departments or among the units within a
department, and for the improvement of methods and procedures of
administration.
c. Integrate and coordinate the functions of all departments, boards,
agencies, offices and officials, and also maintain liaison with the Board
of Education.
d. The Administrator shall be responsible for continually improving
communications among the various Township personnel, departments,
agencies, boards and the Governing Body.
e. Recommend the employment of experts and consultants to perform
work and render advice in connection with Township projects or
services.
f. Make recommendations which may increase the efficiency of the
operation of the Township.
g. Continually review and supervise the Township's insurance program.
h. Be responsible for the overall supervision and maintenance of real
property owned by the Township, except as modified through
delegation by the Governing Body or ordinance to autonomous boards
or commissions.
i. Assign office space, furniture, telephone, computer and similar
facilities, and other Township resources among and within
departments.
§ 2-5.10.5 HOLMDEL § 2-5.10.8
1:22
§ 2-5.10.8. Communication and Complaints. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
The Township Administrator shall:
§ 2-5.10.9. Public Improvements. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
The Township Administrator shall make recommendations concerning the
nature and location of public improvements and coordinate and expedite the
execution of public improvements authorized by the Township Committee.
§ 2-5.10.10. Other Duties. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
The Township Administrator shall:
a. Study, recommend, implement and enforce procedures and policy of the
Township and its departments for receipt, dissemination and collation
of responses to communications and requests for information, after
consultation with department heads and receive, distribute and follow
up requests for information and complaints from citizens and keep the
Township Committee informed on such matters.
b. The Administrator or an officer designated by the Administrator shall
investigate and dispose of such complaints and the Administrator shall
keep written record of such complaints and when and what action was
taken in response thereto and provide the Governing Body a copy
thereof when requested to do so.
a. Represent the Township and assert its proper interests in relation to
Federal, State, County and other political subdivisions, and with
respect to Township contracts, franchises and interests.
b. Monitor and evaluate State and Federal legislation as to its impact on
the Township with recommendations for actions by the Township
Committee. The Administrator must be prepared to testify on behalf of
the Township on issues affecting the community on behalf of the
Governing Body.
c. Study the public utility rates and policies and evaluate same and
recommend to the Township Committee an appropriate course of
action.
d. Attend all regular and work session meetings of the Governing Body,
with the right to speak but not vote on agenda items, and attend other
meetings as directed by the Governing Body. The Administrator shall
receive notice of and may attend and participate in all regular and
special meetings of the Governing Body and all advisory committees,
boards, commissions, and other agencies of the Township;
e. Keep the Governing Body informed as to the conduct of the Township
affairs; submit periodic reports, either in writing or orally, on the
condition of the Township finances; and shall submit other reports,
either in writing or orally, as deemed advisable or as the Governing
§ 2-5.10.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5.10.10
1:23
§ 2-5.10.11. Purchasing. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
The Township Administrator shall:
Body shall request; and shall make recommendations to the Governing
Body necessary and advisable for the welfare of the Township.
f. Submit to the Governing Body as soon as possible after the close of the
fiscal year, a complete written report of the administrative activities of
the Township for the preceding year.
g. Implement all policies formulated by the Township Committee unless
specifically directed otherwise by a formal action of the Governing
Body.
h. Advise the Township Committee on all background matters as an aid to
the creation of policy and recommend to the Governing Body adoption
of such measures as may be deemed necessary or expedient.
i. Follow up acts of the Township Committee by correspondence, review
of minutes and personal conferences.
a. Serve as the purchasing officer of the Township, and/or designate an
assistant purchasing officer, and shall purchase, or supervise the
purchase of or delegate the purchase of, in accordance with the
provisions of the governing statutes and sound purchasing practices, all
materials, supplies and equipment of the various agencies, boards,
departments and other offices of the Township. The Administrator shall
keep or cause to be kept an account of all purchases and shall from time
to time or when directed by the Governing Body make a full report
thereof.
b. Establish rules, regulations, standards and specifications to control all
purchases by the Township and recommend to the Governing Body such
standards as to quality, size and variety of articles, equipment and
supplies used by the offices and departments of the Township, to make
possible uniform purchasing practices; and act as purchasing agent in
the purchase of such materials, equipment and supplies, and to issue or
supervise the issuance of the necessary purchase orders for such
materials, equipment and supplies for all departments without
exception; ensure that all purchases are at the most favorable price to
the Township and see to it that the materials, equipment, services or
supplies delivered are correct in number or amount and comply with
the standards and specifications prescribed by the Governing Body as
agreed to at the time of purchase.
c. Cause to be advertised proposals for the furnishing of work equipment
and materials and receive bids therefor at the direction of the
Governing Body.
§ 2-5.10.10 HOLMDEL § 2-5.10.11
1:24
§ 2-5.11. Derogation of Powers. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
Nothing in this section shall derogate from or authorize the Township
Administrator to exercise powers of the elected officials of the municipality.
§ 2-5.12. Short Title. [Ord. No. 2003-27]
This section shall be known and may be cited as "The Township
Administrator Ordinance."
§ 2-6. ADMINISTRATIVE CLERK.
§ 2-6.1. Appointment; Compensation. [1976 Code § 14-11C]
The Township Committee shall appoint an Administrative Clerk subject to
the NJ Department of Personnel rules and regulations. The Administrative
Clerk shall receive such compensation as shall be prescribed by the Salary
Ordinance.
§ 2-6.2. Duties. [1976 Code § 14-11D; Ord. No. 90-4]
The duties shall be as assigned by the Township Administrator.
§ 2-7. TOWNSHIP CLERK.
§ 2-7.1. Appointment and Compensation. [1976 Code § 14-20A]
The Township Committee shall appoint the Township Clerk for a term
of three years beginning January 1 in the year in which the Clerk was
appointed. The Township Clerk is subject to the provisions of law relating to
tenure of office and removal from office. He/she shall receive compensation
as prescribed by the Salary Ordinance and shall give bond, paid for by the
Township, for the faithful performance of the duties of the office.
d. Review, validate and recommend all bills and vouchers for payment
prior to final approval by the Governing Body, and establish procedures
associated with the voucher process.
e. Have no interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract job for work or
materials, or the profits thereof, to be furnished to or performed for the
Township.
f. Require the various departments, boards, commissions, agencies and
programs to furnish annually a complete inventory of all fixed assets;
and recommend the sale of any obsolete or surplus equipment,
materials and supplies, and transfer to or between departments, offices
and agencies and from or to central stores such supplies, material and
equipment as need appears and arrange for the sale of surplus or
obsolete items thereof.
§ 2-5.10.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-7.2
1:25
§ 2-7.2. Duties. [1976 Code § 14-20B]
The Township Clerk shall:
§ 2-7.3. Qualifications. [New]
No person shall be appointed as Township Clerk unless he or she shall have
a Registered Municipal Clerk Certificate issued pursuant to N.J.S. 40A:9-133
et seq.
§ 2-7.4. Township Seal. [1976 Code § 14-20C]
The Clerk shall cause the Township Seal to be affixed to instruments and
writings when specifically authorized by law or when necessary to exemplify
any document or record in the Clerk's office, or to certify any act or paper
which, from the records in the Clerk's office, shall appear to be a true copy
of any public record or proceeding.
§ 2-7.5. Ordinances. [1976 Code § 14-20D]
The Clerk shall ensure the publication of all ordinances in such official
newspaper or newspapers as may be required by law and authorized by
the Township Committee, and shall file in the Clerk's office the affidavits of
publication of such publications.
§ 2-7.6. Licenses. [1976 Code § 14-20E]
The Clerk shall issue and renew licenses regularly, pursuant to
authorizations in existing ordinances and laws and with the assistance of
any appropriate enforcement agencies required for such administration.
§ 2-7.7. Insurance, Surety Bonds and Contracts. [1976 Code
§ 14-20F]
The Clerk shall be the custodian of all official surety bonds furnished by,
or on account of, any Township officer, position holder or employee, except
for that of the Township Clerk, which shall be placed in the custody of
the Township Treasurer; all insurance policies with respect to risks insured
a. Ensure that the minutes and records of the proceedings of the Township
Committee are kept.
b. Preserve and compile all duly passed ordinances, recording them in a
book, with a proper index to be provided for that purpose. Such book
shall remain in the custody of the Township Clerk. Every ordinance
shall be signed in the book by the Mayor and the Township Clerk.
c. Have and take custody of all the official books, papers and documents of
the Township for which no other repository is provided by law, and
preserve and keep them safely.
d. Perform all other duties required by statutory law.
§ 2-7.2 HOLMDEL § 2-7.7
1:26
for the benefit of the Township or to protect it against any claim, demand
or liability whatsoever; and all formal contracts for work, labor, services,
supplies, equipment and materials to which the Township may be a party.
The Clerk shall also have custody of all leases of property owned by the
Township. The Clerk shall be the depository for and have custody of all
performance bonds running to the Township as obligee, and any other forms
of non-cash security given by any contractor, subdivision developer or other
persons on account of work done or to be done for the Township.
§ 2-7.8. Township Mail. [1976 Code § 14-20G]
Correspondence and other communications received through the mails
shall be delivered to the Clerk's office, where it shall be sorted and delivered
immediately to the proper department. Mail addressed to a named
individual shall be delivered unopened. General Township mail and mail
addressed to the Township Committee, unless addressed to a named
Committeeman, shall be opened in the Clerk's office, and the Clerk shall
either reply to the correspondence, or refer the correspondence to the
Township Administrator or department head for action and reply.
§ 2-8. DEPUTY TOWNSHIP CLERK.
§ 2-8.1. Office Created. [1976 Code § 5-1]
There is hereby created the office of Deputy Township Clerk in the Township
of Holmdel.
§ 2-8.2. Duties. [1976 Code § 5-2; New]
The Deputy Township Clerk shall assist the Township Clerk in the operation
of the office by aiding the Township Clerk when requested to do so in
the receipt of license applications and fees, issuance of certain licenses;
registering and transferring of voters; reviewing and verifying payrolls
and claims and preparing checks; making searches and issuing search
certificates; at elections, preparing and distributing election equipment and
supplies; swearing in of election officers and giving instructions to election
officials; receiving election returns, keeping election personnel records and
preparing needed checks; preparing reports dealing with licenses issued
and moneys received and other pertinent matters; assisting in the
preparation of resolutions, ordinances, vouchers and other municipal forms;
assisting in the preparation of minutes of the meetings of the governing
body; preparing suitable official reports for purposes of public record;
preparing periodical reports of cash receipts and accounts for the same;
answering inquiries and giving information of a public nature relating to
municipal affairs; assisting in the arranging for and conducting of public
elections; assisting in the establishment and maintenance of an extensive
record and filing system; and supervising, when requested by the Township
Clerk, of subordinates. In addition to the duties herein set forth, the Deputy
Township Clerk shall perform such duties as may be assigned to him/her
by the Township Clerk under the direction of the Township Committee,
§ 2-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-8.2
1:27
and further, the Deputy Township Clerk shall perform all the duties of
the Township Clerk during such time and for such specific periods as the
Township Clerk shall be absent or disabled.
§ 2-8.3. Term of Office. [1976 Code § 5-3; Ord. No. 86-17; Ord. No.
86-30]
The Deputy Township Clerk shall hold office for a term of two years and
until his or her successor shall have been appointed and qualified. The term
shall commence on January 1 of the year in which the appointment is made.
§ 2-8.4. Compensation. [1976 Code § 5-4]
The Deputy Township Clerk shall receive such compensation as shall be
determined by the Salary Ordinance of the Township of Holmdel.
§ 2-9. CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER.
§ 2-9.1. Appointment and Compensation. [1976 Code § 14-21A; Ord.
No. 89-11; Ord. No. 90-4; Ord. No. 92-15]
The Township Committee shall appoint a Chief Financial Officer, who shall
have the qualifications prescribed by N.J.S. 40A:9-140.1 et seq. The term of
office of the person so appointed shall be four years as required by N.J.S.
40A:9-140.10. The Chief Financial Officer shall receive such compensation
as shall be prescribed by the Salary Ordinance of the Township.
§ 2-9.2. Duties. [1976 Code § 14-21B; Ord. No. 89-11; Ord. No. 90-4]
The Chief Financial Officer shall:
a. Receive funds entrusted to or under the control of any department and
deposit all funds received by him/her in depositories authorized by the
Township Committee by resolution.
b. Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the Township in
fiduciary capacity, except as otherwise provided by law, and keep such
funds and all moneys of the Township not required for current
operation safely invested or deposited in interest-bearing accounts.
c. Have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the Township and
receive and deliver Township bonds or notes for transfer, registration or
exchange.
d. Keep a full account of all cash receipts and disbursements of the
Township and, at least once a month, furnish the Township Committee a
statement of all moneys received and expended by him/her.
e. Review, warrant and pay bills, claims and demands against the
Township when duly authorized and approved by the Township
Committee. Disbursement shall be made by bank check or draft
§ 2-8.2 HOLMDEL § 2-9.2
1:28
§ 2-10. TOWNSHIP AUDITOR.
§ 2-10.1. Appointment and Compensation. [1976 Code § 14-19A]
A registered municipal accountant of the State of New Jersey shall be
appointed by the Township Committee for a period of one year, commencing
on January 1 of the year in which he/she is appointed. The Auditor shall
receive such customary fees and charges for work performed.
§ 2-10.2. Powers and Duties. [1976 Code § 14-19B]
The Auditor shall make the annual audit and shall have the powers and
perform the duties prescribed by law, or rules and regulations of the
Division of Local Finance in the Department of Community Affairs of the
State of New Jersey. He/she shall also perform such duties and render such
services as may be prescribed by the Township Committee.
§ 2-11. TAX ASSESSOR.
§ 2-11.1. Appointment and Qualifications. [New]
The Township Committee shall provide for the appointment of a Tax
Assessor. The Tax Assessor shall hold the Tax Assessor's Certificate
provided for in N.J.S. 54:1-35.25 et seq. and shall have the duty of assessing
property for the purpose of general taxation. Nothing in this section shall
affect adversely the salary or tenure rights acquired pursuant to N.J.S.
54:1-35.31 or any other law. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.
54:3-16, the Assessor, when making assessments, shall be governed by
directions by the Monmouth County Tax Administrator. These directions
shall be pursuant to rules adopted by the Monmouth County Tax Board.
§ 2-11.2. Duties. [1976 Code § 14-15B]
The Tax Assessor shall have, perform and discharge all functions, powers
and duties prescribed for assessors by rules and regulations prescribed by
the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury
of the State of New Jersey and the Monmouth County Board of Taxation and
shall:
individually signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Chief
Financial Officer.
f. Prepare for each regular meeting of the Township Committee a list of
all bills, claims and vouchers presented. Such list shall be prepared in
sufficient copies for each member of the Township Committee and at
least one copy shall be filed with the Township Clerk as a public record
open to examination in that office.
a. Value all real and personal property in the Township for the purpose of
assessments and taxation.
§ 2-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-11.2
1:29
§ 2-11.3. Terms of Office. [New]
The Tax Assessor shall hold office for a term of four years. Vacancies
other than due to expiration of term shall be filled by appointment for the
unexpired term.
§ 2-11.4. Tenure, Compensation. [1976 Code § 14-15A]
The Tax Assessor is subject to the provisions of law relating to tenure
of office and removal from office. He/she shall receive compensation as
prescribed by the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-12. TAX COLLECTOR.
§ 2-12.1. Tax Collector; Appointment. [New]
The Township Committee shall provide for the appointment of a Tax
Collector.
§ 2-12.2. Term of Office; Tenure. [1976 Code § 14-16.1; New]
The Tax Collector shall hold office for a term of four years from January
1 next following his/her appointment. The Tax Collector is subject to the
provisions of law relating to tenure of office and removal from office. He/
she shall receive compensation as prescribed by the Salary Ordinance and
shall give bond, paid for by the Township, for the faithful performance of the
duties of the office.
§ 2-12.3. Qualifications. [New]
No person shall be appointed or reappointed as Tax Collector unless he/she
shall hold a Tax Collector's Certificate issued pursuant to N.J.S. 40:9-145.3.
Any Tax Collector appointed pursuant to this section may obtain tenure
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S. 40A:9-144 or 40A:9-145. Any person
who shall be reappointed Tax Collector subsequent to having received a Tax
Collector's Certificate pursuant to N.J.S. 40A:9-145.3 and having served as
Tax Collector or who has performed the duties of Tax Collector for not less
than four consecutive years immediately prior to such reappointment shall
have acquired tenure and shall hold his or her office during good behavior
and efficiency and shall be removed only for good cause shown and after
a proper hearing before the Director of the Division of Taxation or his/her
designee in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S. 40A:9-145.8.
b. Prepare the tax lists, tax duplicate and maintain adequate assessment
records of each and every parcel of real property assessed or exempted.
c. Have custody of and maintain an up-to-date Township Tax Map and
provide for the recording thereon of all changes in ownership or
character of property assessed.
§ 2-11.2 HOLMDEL § 2-12.4
1:30
§ 2-12.4. Duties. [1976 Code § 14-16B; Ord. No. 97-33]
The Tax Collector shall:
§ 2-12.5. Vacancy in Office. [1976 Code § 14-16A; New]
Vacancies other than due to the expiration of term shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term.
§ 2-12.6. Deputy Tax Collector. [1976 Code § 14-17]
There may be a Deputy Township Tax Collector appointed by the Township
Committee subject to Civil Service Rules and Regulations. The Deputy Tax
Collector shall assist the Tax Collector as he/she may direct and shall
perform each duty of the Tax Collector as permitted by law. The Deputy
Tax Collector shall receive such compensation as shall be prescribed in the
Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-13. TOWNSHIP ATTORNEY.
a. Perform the functions of a collector of taxes including, without
limitation thereto, the rendering of bills for property taxes and the
conducting of tax sales.
b. Receive and collect all current and delinquent real taxes, tax sale fees
and charges, and receive penalties and interest thereon.
c. Deposit, to the credit of the Township, all moneys received, in the
depositories authorized by the Township Committee by resolution.
d. Maintain full and complete records and accounts of all sums collected
and received under the supervision of the Township Auditor and in
accordance with the standards and requirements of the Division of
Local Finance in the Department of Community Affairs of the State of
New Jersey.
e. Report to the Township Committee at least once a month all receipts
and deposits made by him/her and shall, in such report, account for all
moneys for which he/she is responsible.
f. The Tax Collector may issue and execute duplicate tax title certificates.
Prior to the issuance of a duplicate tax title certificate, a letter must be
received from the lienholder guaranteeing that he/she is the owner of
the certificate and has not assigned it to another investor, and the
governing body must adopt a resolution authorizing the Tax Collector to
issue the duplicate. The fee for the duplicate tax title certificate is $50.
g. The Tax Collector may issue certificates of redemption. Prior to the
issuance of a certificate of redemption, the former lienholder must
submit a letter verifying that the lien has been paid and the certificate
has been surrendered. The fee for the certificate of redemption is $25.
§ 2-12.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-13.1
1:31
§ 2-13.1. Appointment and Compensation. [1976 Code § 14-18A]
There shall be a Township Attorney appointed by the Township Committee
for a term of one year beginning on January 1 of the year in which he/she
is appointed. He/she shall be an attorney-at-law of the State of New Jersey
and shall receive such compensation as may be prescribed in the Salary
Ordinance. In addition, the Attorney may receive the customary fees and
charges for extraordinary legal services, provided when, in the judgment
of the Township Committee, extraordinary legal services are required and
authorized and the expenses incidental thereto are justified.
§ 2-13.2. Duties. [1976 Code § 14-18B]
The Township Attorney shall be the legal advisor to the Township
Committee and to all Departments except as may be otherwise provided by
ordinance. He/she shall prosecute and defend actions and proceedings by
and against the Township and every Department thereof. In furtherance of
these general powers, and without limitation thereto, he shall:
a. Advise the Township Committee as to the form and sufficiency of all
ordinances and resolutions prior to their passage.
b. Review and approve all contracts, deeds, documents and instruments
prior to the execution thereof by or on behalf of the Township.
c. Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest of the Township, as he/she may in his/her discretion determine
to be necessary or desirable, or as directed by the Township Committee.
d. Subject to the approval of the Township Committee, have power to
enter into any agreement, compromise or settlement of any litigation in
which the Township is involved.
e. Render opinions in writing upon any question of law submitted to him/
her by members of the Township Committee with respect to their
respective official departmental powers and duties or the powers and
duties of any officer of the Township.
f. Maintain a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters which
relate to the Township's interest and report thereon from time to time
as the Committee may require.
g. Conduct or arrange for the conduct of prosecutions for crimes and
offenses cognizable by the Municipal Court of the Township of Holmdel,
including violations of ordinances of the Township, complaints of any
Department, under State law and violations of rules or regulations duly
promulgated by any Department, except such crimes and offenses as it
may be the duty of the County Prosecutor to prosecute.
h. Perform such other and different functions and duties as may be
provided by ordinance.
§ 2-13.1 HOLMDEL § 2-13.3
1:32
§ 2-13.3. Special Counsel. [1976 Code § 14-18C]
Whenever he/she deems the interests of the Township so require, the
Township Attorney may, with the approval of the Township Committee and
within the limits of available appropriations, appoint special counsel to
assist him/her in the preparation, trial or argument of legal matters or
proceedings as he/she may determine. If the Township Attorney should
be disqualified with respect to any matter, the Township Committee shall
appoint special counsel to represent the Township for and with respect to
such matters.
§ 2-13.4. Records and Papers. [1976 Code § 14-18D]
All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating to
the duties performed and services rendered by the Township Attorney for or
in behalf of the Township shall be and remain the property of the Township.
Upon the termination of his/her service with the Township, the Township
Attorney shall forthwith surrender to his/her successor all such property,
together with a written consent to substitution of his/her successor in all
legal actions and proceedings then pending to which the Township is a
party.
§ 2-14. MUNICIPAL ASSESSMENT SEARCH OFFICER. [1976 Code
§ 14-24; New]
The Township Clerk shall be appointed Municipal Assessment Search
Officer by the Township Committee for an indefinite term beginning January
1 of the year in which he/she is appointed, and shall receive such
compensation as established by ordinance. The Municipal Assessment
Search Officer shall be sworn in by the Township Committee and shall make
examinations and issue assessment search certificates with respect to liens
for municipal assessments or improvements approved but not yet certified.
§ 2-15. TAX SEARCH OFFICER. [1976 Code § 14-25]
The Tax Collector or the Deputy Tax Collector shall be appointed Tax Search
Officer by the Township Committee for an indefinite term beginning January
1 of the year in which he/she is appointed and shall receive the customary
fees as compensation. The Tax Search Officer shall make examinations of
tax records about unpaid municipal liens and certify the results thereof.
§ 2-16. ZONING OFFICER.
§ 2-16.1. Appointment and Compensation. [1976 Code § 14-23A]
The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Township Committee for
a term of one year beginning January 1 of the year in which he/she is
appointed. He/she shall receive such compensation as shall be prescribed in
the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-16.2
1:33
§ 2-16.2. Duties. [1976 Code § 14-23B]
The Zoning Officer shall:
§ 2-17. ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. [1976 Code § 14-22]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall operate under the "Revised Zoning
Ordinance of the Township of Holmdel" which established the Board,
prescribes its membership, and assigns to it certain powers and functions.
§ 2-18. PLANNING BOARD. [1976 Code § 14-14]
The Planning Board operates under a section establishing the Board,
prescribing its membership, and assigning to it certain powers and
functions.
§ 2-19. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE. [1976 Code
§ 14-13]
The Industrial Development Committee operates under Section 2-59,
establishing the Committee, prescribing its membership and assigning to it
certain powers and functions.
§ 2-20. MUNICIPAL COURT PUBLIC DEFENDER. [Ord. No. 97-34
§ I]
a. Administer and enforce the Zoning Ordinance and such other
ordinances as may be specified.
b. Attend meetings of the Board of Adjustment, the Township Committee
and any other meetings as directed by the Township Committee.
c. Be under the direction of the Township Committee and make periodic
reports to, and as required by the Committee.
a. There shall be a Municipal Court Public Defender appointed by the
Township Committee. The Municipal Court Public Defender shall serve
for a term of one year from the date of appointment and until the
successor shall be appointed and qualifies. The Municipal Court Public
Defender shall be an attorney-at-law of the State of New Jersey and
shall provide all necessary and desirable legal counsel and advice
required for the defense of cases in the Municipal Court of the
Township on behalf of those indigent defendants who are entitled by
law to appointment of counsel.
b. A person applying for representation by the Municipal Court Public
Defender shall be required to pay an application fee of $200. The
Municipal Court may waive the required application fee, in whole or in
part, if the Court determines, in its discretion, upon a clear and
convincing showing by the applicant, that the application fee
represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking
representation.
§ 2-16.2 HOLMDEL § 2-21
1:34
§ 2-21. CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL.
§ 2-21.1. Appointment and Compensation. [Ord. No. 2004-26 § 1]
There shall be a Construction Official appointed by the Township
Committee. He/she shall receive such compensation as may be provided in
the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-21.2. Duties. [Ord. No. 2004-26 § 1]
He/she shall, under supervision, have administrative responsibility for
administering and enforcing the provisions of the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code (UCC) and other related duties as required.
§ 2-21.3. Requirements. [Ord. No. 2004-26 § 1]
Possession of a valid Construction Official's License issued by the
Department of Community Affairs; possession of valid New Jersey driver's
license; knowledge of basic principles of management and supervision and
of the administration of a local enforcement agency; knowledge of record
keeping requirements under the UCC; knowledge of legal methods of code
enforcement; knowledge of building subcode provisions including structural
requirements, durability and weatherability requirements, electrical
subcode provisions, elevator subcode provisions, fire prevention code
provisions, plumbing subcode provisions; ability to analyze and interpret
the New Jersey UCC; ability to read, write, speak, understand, and
communicate in English.
§ 2-22. BUILDING INSPECTOR.
§ 2-22.1. Appointment and Compensation. [Ord. No. 2004-27 § 1;
Ord. No. 2005-13 § 1]
There shall be a Building Inspector appointed by the Township Committee.
He/she shall receive such compensation as may be provided in the Salary
Ordinance.
§ 2-22.2. Duties. [Ord. No. 2004-27 § 1; Ord. No. 2005-13 § 1]
He/she shall, under supervision, inspect new and existing buildings and
structures to ensure compliance with the State Uniform Construction Code
and enforce same to ensure public safety, health, and welfare; and other
related duties as required.
§ 2-22.3. Requirements. [Ord. No. 2004-27 § 1; Ord. No. 2005-13
§ 1]
Possession of a valid Building Inspector's License issued by the Department
of Community Affairs; possession of valid New Jersey driver's license;
knowledge of structural design and analysis techniques necessary to check
compliance with the State Uniform Construction Code with regard to wood
§ 2-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-22.3
1:35
framing, light steel, and wall bearing systems including foundation, wall,
floor, and roof framing systems; knowledge of basic material standards,
codes, and enforcement requirements related to weatherability and
durability of installed construction materials; knowledge of basic fire
protection requirements; knowledge of basic inspection tools and test
methods; knowledge of organization and content of the State Uniform
Construction Code; knowledge of the preparation of violation notices and
prescribed inspection record keeping; knowledge of the classification of
structures into class category; ability to analyze and interpret provisions
of the State Uniform Construction Code; ability to prepare building
construction plans and specifications, and to review for accuracy and
feasibility those prepared by others; ability to make investigations and
inspections; ability to prosecute violations of the Building Code by
appearing in court.
§ 2-23. BUILDING SUBCODE OFFICIAL.
§ 2-23.1. Appointment and Compensation. [Ord. No. 2004-34 § 1]
There shall be a Building Subcode Official appointed by the Township
Committee. He/she shall receive such compensation as may be provided in
the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-23.2. Duties. [Ord. No. 2004-34 § 1]
He/she shall, under supervision, administer the Building Subcode of the
State Uniform Construction Code and inspect and/or supervise the
inspection of buildings in construction projects underway to ensure that
compliance with plans and specifications approved in accord with State
Uniform Construction Code is achieved; and other related duties as
required.
§ 2-23.3. Requirements. [Ord. No. 2004-34 § 1]
Possession of a valid license as a Building Subcode Official issued by the
Department of Community Affairs; possession of a valid license as a Building
Inspector; possession of valid New Jersey driver's license; knowledge of
structural design and analysis techniques necessary to check compliance
with the State Uniform Construction Code with regard to wood framing,
light steel, and wall bearing systems including foundation, wall, floor, and
roof framing systems; knowledge of basic material standards, codes, and
enforcement requirements related to weatherability and durability of
installed construction materials; knowledge of basic fire protection
requirements; knowledge of basic inspection tools and test methods;
knowledge of organization and content of the State Uniform Construction
Code; knowledge of the preparation of violation notices and prescribed
inspection record keeping; knowledge of the classification of structures
into class category; ability to analyze and interpret provisions of the State
Uniform Construction Code; ability to prepare building construction plans
and specifications, and to review for accuracy and feasibility those prepared
§ 2-22.3 HOLMDEL § 2-23.3
1:36
by others; ability to make investigations and inspections; ability to
prosecute violations of the Building Code by appearing in court.
§ 2-24. ASSISTANT MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATOR.
§ 2-24.1. Appointment and Compensation. [Ord. No. 2005-03 § 1]
There shall be an Assistant Municipal Administrator appointed by the
Township Committee. He/she shall receive such compensation as may be
provided in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-24.2. Definition. [Ord. No. 2005-03 § 1]
Assist the Municipal Administrator in the administration of municipal
affairs, and in integrating and coordinating activities of the various
departments and other related duties as required.
§ 2-24.3. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 2005-03 § 1]
Bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university; four years
of management experience which shall have involved all of the following
management functions: (1) Setting program organizational goals and
objectives; (2) establishing organizational structure or determining the
need for and developing plans for organizational changes; (3) setting policy
for the organization or program managed by establishing program
emphasis and priorities and developing operating and procedural
guidelines; and (4) directing the work of the organization or program
through subordinate levels of supervision. Possession of a Master's Degree
from an accredited college or university with course study in human
services administration, business administration, or public administration
may be substituted for one year of experience.
§ 2-24.4. Requirements. [Ord. No. 2005-03 § 1]
Knowledge of all phases of municipal business operation; knowledge of
management principles, practices, methods and techniques, and the
administrative process; ability to work effectively and harmoniously with
members of the governing body and other municipal officials; ability to
make plans for the effective utilization of available funds, personnel,
equipment, materials, and supplies; ability to provide heads of departments
and others with advice and assistance when needed; ability to supervise
business operations including financial and personnel records and
paperwork; ability to supervise the purchase, receipt, storage, and issuance
of equipment, materials, and supplies; ability to supervise the budgeting of
funds to departments; ability to see that proper relations are established
and maintained among the personnel; ability to utilize various types of
electronic and/or manual recording and information systems used by the
municipality; ability to read, write, speak, understand, or communicate in
English sufficiently to perform the duties of this position.
§ 2-23.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-25
1:37
§ 2-25. (RESERVED)
§ 2-25 HOLMDEL § 2-25
1:38
ARTICLE V
Department of Public Safety
§ 2-26. DEPARTMENT OF POLICE.
§ 2-26.1. Police Department Established. [1976 Code § 16-1; Ord.
No. 92-24; Ord. No. 2002-24 § I]
a. There is hereby created in and for the Township a Police Department
which shall consist of either a Chief of Police or a Public Safety Director
and such members and officers as shall be deemed necessary by the
Township Committee. The Township Committee shall determine the
number of persons, including temporary officers and members in an
emergency, to be appointed to these positions together with their
compensation.
b. The Police Department shall consist of the following positions:
1. Chief of Police — One position. The Chief of Police is responsible for
the overall operations of the Police Department. The Chief of Police
establishes policy and direction; is responsible for planning;
develops the Department's budget and hires and disciplines all
other members of the Police Department.
2. Captain — One position. The Captain is assigned as a Command
Officer. The Captain oversees and directs the day-to-day operations
of the Police Department. The Captain assists the Chief of Police
with planning, the budget and policies of the Police Department
and assumes responsibility in the Chief of Police's absence. The
Captain further receives additional responsibilities as assigned.
3. Lieutenants — Four positions. The Lieutenants are assigned as
Commanding Officers who supervise certain divisions of the Police
Department. The Lieutenants are further responsible for
personnel, purchasing and equipment, the Lieutenants serve as
Watch Commanders and receive additional responsibilities as
assigned.
4. Sergeants — Nine positions. The Sergeants are assigned as
Supervisory Officers of certain squads or units of the Police
Department. The Sergeants are responsible for overseeing actions
of members of its squad or unit and receive additional
responsibilities as assigned.
5. Patrolmen — Thirty-two positions. Patrolmen patrol a designated
area of the Township of Holmdel to provide assistance and
protection to the community. They further respond to calls for
service, enforce all criminal and motor vehicle laws of the State of
New Jersey and Ordinances of the Township of Holmdel. Patrolmen
receive additional responsibilities as assigned.
§ 2-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-26.1
1:39
§ 2-26.2. Duties and Purposes. [1976 Code § 16-2; Ord. No. 92-24]
The Police Department shall preserve the public peace, protect life and
property, detect, arrest and prosecute offenders of the laws of the State of
New Jersey and/or ordinances of the Township; direct and control traffic;
provide attendance at and protection during emergencies; provide
appearances in Court; cooperate with all other law enforcement agencies;
and provide training for the efficiency of its members and officers.
§ 2-26.3. Appropriate Authority. [1976 Code § 16-3; Ord. No. 92-24]
The Township Committee is hereby designated as the "appropriate
authority" as required by N.J.S. 40A:14-118. The Township Administrator
shall serve, in accordance with all statutory limitations and requirements,
as the full-time agent of the Township Committee regarding the operations
and functions of the Police Department established hereby. For purposes
of this section, the term "agent" includes the duties and functions of the
Township Administrator as defined by Section 2-5 of the Code of the
Township of Holmdel.
The Township Committee shall adopt, and may supplement and amend by
resolution, Rules and Regulations for governing of the Police Department.
§ 2-26.4. Appointment. [1976 Code § 16-4; Ord. No. 92-24; Ord. No.
94-36 § 16-4; Ord. No. 99-27 § I; Ord. No. 2001-03 § I; Ord. No.
2001-13 § I]
6. Dispatcher — Six positions. The dispatchers receive and transmit
emergency service calls and other requests for services by
residents of the Township of Holmdel. Dispatchers receive
additional responsibilities as assigned.
7. Dispatcher (P/T) — Four positions.
8. Secretary/Clerical — Five positions.
c. The New Jersey Department of Personnel Job Specifications Guidelines
are incorporated by reference herein as to additional examples of work,
definition of each ranking of the Police Department and requirements
and abilities of each rank.
d. All appointments previously made to any position within the Police
Department are hereby ratified and confirmed.
a. No person shall be appointed to the Police Department who is not
qualified as provided by the laws of the State of New Jersey including
the Civil Service rules and regulations. Applicants seeking appointment
to the Police Department shall successfully complete a physical, mental
and psychological examination which examination shall be conducted in
accordance with all applicable laws and administrative regulations of
the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-26.1 HOLMDEL § 2-26.4
1:40
§ 2-26.5. Chief of Police/Public Safety Director: Duties and
Responsibilities. [1976 Code § 16-5; Ord. No. 92-24]
The Chief of Police or Public Safety Director (which titles are hereinafter
used interchangeably) shall be the head of the Police Department and shall
be directly responsible to the Township Committee and its designated agent
for the department's efficiency and day to day operations. Pursuant to
policies established by the Township Committee, the Chief of Police shall:
b. All duly qualified applicants for the position of Holmdel Township Police
Officer shall be classified in the following classes:
1. Residents of Holmdel Township.
2. Other residents of Monmouth County.
3. Other residents of the State of New Jersey.
4. All other qualified applicants.
c. All appointments to the position of Holmdel Township Police Officer
shall be made in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-123.1a, with all those
in Class 1 to be appointed first and then those in each succeeding class
in the order above listed.
d. All applicants classified in Class 1 must be residents of Holmdel
Township as of the announced closing date of the Civil Service
examination for the position.
a. Develop, administer, recommend to the Township Committee and
enforce Rules and Regulations for the governance of the Police
Department and issue special emergency directives for the disposition
and discipline of the force and its officers and personnel;
b. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
force;
c. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel;
d. Delegate such of his/her authority as he/she may deem necessary for
the efficient operation of the force to be exercised under his/her
direction and supervision;
e. Report at least monthly to the Township Committee and its agent in
such form as shall be prescribed by the Township Committee, regarding
the operation of the force during the preceding month, and make such
other reports as may be requested by the Township Committee or its
agent.
§ 2-26.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-26.6
1:41
§ 2-26.6. Appointment of Special Officers. [1976 Code § 16-6; Ord.
No. 92-24; New]
The Township Committee may appoint special law enforcement officers in
accordance with New Jersey Statutes for terms not exceeding one year.
Such appointees shall possess and exercise all the powers and duties
provided by statutes during their term in office, but shall not be continued
as regular members of the Police Department and shall not be entitled to
tenure. In accordance with N.J.S. 40A:14-146.11, the Chief of Police may
authorize special law enforcement officers, when on duty, to exercise the
same powers and authority as regular members of the Police Department
including the carrying of firearms and the power of arrest.
§ 2-26.7. Suspension and Removal of Members and Officers. [1976
Code § 16-7; Ord. No. 92-24; Ord. No. 94-21 § 16-7]
No permanent member or officer of the Police Department shall be removed
from his office, employment or position for political reasons or for any
cause other than incapacity, misconduct, or disobedience of the Rules and
Regulations established for the government of the Police Department, nor
shall such member or officer be suspended, removed, fined or reduced
in rank from or in office, employment, or position, except for just cause
as hereinabove provided and then only upon a written complaint setting
forth the charge or charges against such member or officer. Said complaint
and disposition shall be filed in the office of the Township Administrator
pursuant to N.J.S. 40A:14-147 and a copy of the complaint shall be served
upon the member or officer so charged, with notice of a designated hearing
date thereon which shall not be less than 10 nor more than 30 days from
the date of the service of the complaint.
a. Minor Discipline. In the case of minor discipline, which, for the
purposes of this section is defined as a maximum five-day suspension or
a fine equivalent to five days' pay, the Chief of Police shall serve as the
hearing officer. The Chief of Police shall have the power and authority
to dispose of the charges against the accused; if, in the opinion of the
Chief of Police, the accused is not guilty of the offense charges, the
Chief of Police shall so advise the complainant in writing. In the event
that the accused is found guilty of the charges, the Chief of Police may
impose such penalty or penalties as are within his/her powers. The
Chief of Police may not impose a penalty, however, exceeding a five-day
suspension or a fine exceeding the equivalent of five days' pay in minor
discipline cases.
b. Major Discipline. In a case where the Chief of Police believes that the
charges, if proved, would warrant suspension for greater than five days
or imposition of a fine greater than the equivalent of five days' salary,
the Chief of Police shall refer the case to the Township Committee or its
designated representative for hearing and disposition. Any disciplinary
charge, either of a minor or major nature, either against the Chief of
Police or against any member when the charge is brought by the Chief
of Police, shall be referred to the Township Committee or its designated
§ 2-26.6 HOLMDEL § 2-26.7
1:42
§ 2-26.8. Hearing Procedures. [1976 Code § 16-8; Ord. No. 92-24]
§ 2-26.9. Special Duty Assignments. [1976 Code § 16-9; Ord. No.
92-24; Ord. No. 2001-07 § I]
representative by the Township Clerk for hearing and disposition. If the
Chief of Police is absent for a period of 30 days or more, the Township
Administrator shall fulfill the duties of the Chief of Police hereunder.
a. The Township Committee shall have the power to subpoena witnesses
and shall have the benefit of the advice of the Township Attorney at the
hearing. The Township Committee may appoint special counsel to
prosecute charges and present evidence. All parties shall attend a
hearing unless excused by the Township Committee. Every party to a
hearing shall be entitled to:
1. Present his case and be represented by legal counsel;
2. Request a subpoena of witnesses to testify or produce pertinent
documentary evidence;
3. Cross-examine witnesses or participants at a hearing and any other
persons who may have investigated any matter involved in the
hearing;
4. Impeach any witness and present any affidavit, exhibits or other
evidence which the Township Committee considers pertinent to the
hearing.
b. The New Jersey Rules of Evidence shall apply as a general guideline for
the orderly presentation of evidence at said hearing but shall not be
binding.
c. The Township Committee shall render a written decision as soon as
possible after the conclusion of the hearing and without undue delay
and cause a copy to be recorded in the Township Committee minutes of
the hearing and a true copy to be served upon each party to the hearing
personally or by certified mail.
a. Any and all extra duty assignments for Police personnel shall be
determined and approved by the Chief of Police or his/her designee. No
Police Officer shall perform special duty assignments for private parties
for compensation other than through the procedure set forth in this
section. The Chief shall obtain such information as he/she determines
necessary and is authorized to approve such special duty police work in
accordance with this section. The Chief of Police may assign a patrol
vehicle for use in performing extra duty if and in the event it is
determined that the use of a patrol vehicle is necessary to perform the
contracted duty. The Chief may deny the assignment or use of Police
Officers or vehicles and/or impose any condition or requirement as in
his sole discretion and determination as in the best interest of the
Township and/or the Police Officers or public safety. The Chief shall be
§ 2-26.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-26.9
1:43
guided by the nature of the assignment and should avoid those with
conflicts of interest and/or high risk or injury. The Chief of Police may
assign a patrol vehicle for use in performing extra duty if and in the
event it is determined that the use of a patrol vehicle is necessary to
perform the contracted duty.
b. The work to be performed shall be considered "special assignment from
independent contractors" and will not be considered a direct
assignment. The taking of any and all extra duty assignments shall be
on a voluntary basis in accordance with a fair and reasonable system
established and administered by the Chief of Police.
c. Officers engaged in special duty assignments shall be deemed on-duty
and shall conform to the Police Department rules, regulations and
procedures. All such agreements for special duty assignments shall be
contracted for in writing by the completion of a form available from the
Police Department which contracts shall be kept on record as other
such public documents. All payments due under such agreements shall
be paid 15 days from the date of billing. Interest shall be charged at the
rate of 12% per annum on any amount billed for which payment has not
been made within 15 days. Delinquent parties shall be liable for all
costs, fees, and attorneys' fees associated with the collection of any
amounts due.
d. All special duty assignments shall be with the municipality, unless
specific written approval is given by the Chief to the officer to work
outside of the municipality. The Chief of Police may contact adjoining
municipal Police Departments to see if they are willing to perform such
special assignments.
e. All payment for special duty assignments shall be made through a
special Police fund established by the Municipal Treasurer from which
payment shall be made to the individual Police Officers performing such
service. All payments from the trust fund shall be made to the Police
Officers subject to required deductions and an administrative fee to be
retained by the Township. The charges for such services shall be set
forth annually in a resolution adopted by the Governing Body and
amended as determined by the Governing Body. Any dispute between
the contractor and the Police Officer on assignment as to services
required or compensation due shall be determined by the Chief. His/her
decision shall be final and binding.
f. The minimum hire out is four hours for road jobs and three hours for all
other jobs. If any assignment is canceled by the vendor on less than an
hour's notice, there shall be a charge for a three or four-hour minimum
imposed dependent upon the type of job.
g. The Chief of Police has the authority to order any Police Officer to
vacate or terminate any special duty assignment in response to
emergency situations or whenever the assignment creates an
unacceptable risk to health, safety and welfare of the Police Officer and/
§ 2-26.9 HOLMDEL § 2-26.9
1:44
§ 2-26.10. Training Cost Reimbursement. [Ord. No. 2002-03]
The Township shall be entitled to reimbursement for training costs pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-178 if any Township police officer resigns his/her position
within two years of commencement of employment and, within 120 days
of resignation, is appointed to another State, County or municipal law
enforcement agency or the New Jersey Transit Corporation. All terms used
herein shall be defined as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-178.
§ 2-27. through §2-28. (RESERVED)
§ 2-29. FIRE DEPARTMENT.4
§ 2-29.1. Statutory Authority. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
The Holmdel Township Fire Department, (sometimes hereafter "Fire
Department") is hereby designated as the authorized fire protection agency
in the Township of Holmdel in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-68.
§ 2-29.1A. Fire Department Organization. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
The Fire Department shall be comprised of the Holmdel Fire Company No.
1 and the Holmdel Fire and Rescue Company #2. Both companies shall
adhere to the authority of the Fire Chief and the rules, regulations standard
operating procedures and policies of the Fire Department as it relates to
the fire protection of the Township, emergency response and the day-today
operations of the department. This shall not serve to interfere with
or public in the sole determination and discretion of the Chief. The
contractor shall not be responsible for any compensation for the time
that the Police Officer is away from the special duty assignments and
shall have no claim for any costs or damages against the Township, the
Chief, or the Police Officer arising from the termination of special duty
assignment other than the prorated return of any costs prepaid to the
Township or to the municipality.
h. The Township shall be responsible to provide all necessary insurance
coverage as required by law, including but not limited to workers'
compensation, public liability, and claims for damage, for personal
injury including death or damage to property which may arise as a
result from the municipality's performance under the contract.
i. This subsection shall not apply to police officers serving on any
prosecutorial task forces as may, from time to time, be established, or
other duty assignments during which police officers are assisting any
law enforcement agencies.
4. Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1976 Code §§ 9-1-9-5 and
Ordinance Nos. 10-64, 25-74, 94-2, 99-7, 2005-36, 2006-28, 2009-08, 2010-14, 2013-12,
2013-28 and 2014-11.
§ 2-26.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-29.1A
1:45
the management of individual internal or business operations and affairs of
each Fire Company as stipulated in subsection 2-29.21.
§ 2-29.2. Municipal Supervision and Control. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-68, the members of the Fire Department shall
be under the supervision and control of the Township of Holmdel at all
times, acting through its Township Administrator or his/her designee, and
in performing fire duty shall be deemed to be exercising a governmental
function.
§ 2-29.2A. Emergency Services Committee. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
The Fire Department is a Department of the Township of Holmdel, and
therefore falls within the Township's Table of Organization directly under
the Township Administrator. The Administrator or his/her designee will
manage the Fire Department with the advice of the Emergency Services
Committee, which will consist of the department heads of the Police, Fire,
First Aid, and Office of Emergency Management.
§ 2-29.3. Members; Maximum/Minimum Number. [Ord. No.
2016-08]
At no time shall there be more than 40 firefighters serving in each Fire
Company. No person shall be permitted to serve in the Fire Department
unless and until such person shall have made a volunteer's application to
the Fire Department.
In order to ensure the safety of all Fire Department members as well as
that of the population of Holmdel, at no time will the membership of a Fire
Company fall below eight active members. If this occurs the Fire Chief will
immediately notify the Township Administrator who will determine, assure
and/or arrange for appropriate fire services to the Township. If the Fire
Chief fails to report drop in membership, action will be taken as allowed for
in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, General Penalty.
If the Company is suspended due to a lack of membership it can be restored
upon meeting the membership requirement with the approval of the
Township Committee.
§ 2-29.4. Background Checks. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
The Company Chief will have potential members complete an application
pursuant to Chapter 9, Section 9-11 et seq.
§ 2-29.5. Approval of Members. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
When recommending an applicant for approval, the Fire Chief will discuss
the results of the background investigation and any other pertinent
information obtained with the members of the Township Committee. The
Township Committee of the Township of Holmdel will either approve or
§ 2-29.1A HOLMDEL § 2-29.5
1:46
deny such application by resolution or motion adopted at a regular
Township meeting.
Fire Department members must be approved by the Township Committee
prior to any performance of fire service. Additionally, prospective
firefighters will be required to have a pre-appointment physical by a
physician designated by the Township Committee.
§ 2-29.6. Classes of Membership; Qualifications. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
Classes of membership and requisite qualifications for membership in the
Holmdel Fire Company shall be as follows:
a. Active Members.
1. Must be at least 18 years of age;
2. Must be a citizen of the United States or resident alien, a resident
of the Township of Holmdel, or must reside within three miles of
any border of the Township of Holmdel, or must be employed within
the Township of Holmdel; and
3. Must be a certified firefighter.
4. Must respond annually to 20% of calls, and attend 50% of trainings.
b. Non-Active/Associate/Probationary Members/Fire Police.
1. Must be at least 18 years of age;
2. Must be a citizen of the United States or resident alien, a resident
of the Township of Holmdel, or must reside within three miles of
any border of the Township of Holmdel, or must be employed within
the Township of Holmdel; and
3. Must be fire or fire-police certified or actively applying to become
fire or fire-police certified at the time of appointment.
c. Junior Firefighters' Auxiliary/Explorer Members.
1. Creation of Auxiliary or Establishment of Explorer Program. The
volunteer Fire Company may have a Junior Firefighters' Auxiliary
or Explorer Program whose members shall not be required to
perform duties which would expose them to the same degree of
hazard as an active member.
2. Rules and Regulations. Each junior firefighter/explorer shall be
governed by the following rules and regulations:
(a) A junior firefighter/explorer may attend after joining.
(b) A junior firefighter shall be between the ages of 16 and 18. An
explorer shall have completed the eighth grade and is 14 years
§ 2-29.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-29.6
1:47
§ 2-29.7. (Reserved)
§ 2-29.8. Fire Department Officers. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
Together, the Fire Chief and Line Officer's carry out the day to day
operations of the Fire Department as it relates to fire protection of the
Township.
of age, or 15 years of age but have not yet reached their 21st
birthday.
(c) A junior firefighter/explorer must be a citizen of the United
States or a resident of the State of New Jersey.
(d) A junior firefighter/explorer shall wear full turnout gear while
riding fire apparatus and performing fire duties.
(e) At no time during a fire shall a junior firefighter/explorer enter
a burning structure or any hazardous atmosphere.
(f) A junior firefighter/explorer may deliver such items as hand
lights, exhaust fans, axes, and pike poles from the fire
apparatus to the active/non-active firefighters fighting fires,
but only to those firefighters outside the structure.
(g) At the scene of a fire, a junior firefighter/explorer may roll hose
or help repack hose onto the fire apparatus.
(h) Once a fire has been extinguished a junior firefighter/explorer
may, upon the instruction of and the direction of a line officer,
assist in the inside cleanup operations.
(i) A junior firefighter/explorer may only ride in the jump seat or
cab of the apparatus.
(j) Under the instruction and at the direction of a line officer, a
junior firefighter/explorer during drills may perform certain
duties such as holding water lines, ladder work, and practice
rescue work and pumper operations.
(k) A junior firefighter/explorer shall assist in keeping the fire
apparatus, firehouses and grounds clean and shall also assist
in all Fire Company and Department activities.
3. Parental Consent. A copy of the rules and regulations and of any
additional rules and regulations imposed by the volunteer Fire
Company whose auxiliary the junior member or explorer member
wishes to join shall be given to the parents or guardian of the
junior/explorer firefighter. A copy of the rules and regulations
signed by the parents or guardian and of written permission to
participate in the auxiliary/explorer program shall be required from
each junior/explorer member prior to membership in an auxiliary.
§ 2-29.6 HOLMDEL § 2-29.8
1:48
The Fire Chief and Line Officers shall meet at least monthly. The Fire
Chief shall appoint committees as necessary to provide research and
recommendations regarding Fire Department operations and procedures.
a. Fire Chief.
1. The Fire Department shall be managed, supervised and
commanded by the Chief of the Department (sometimes hereafter
"Fire Chief"). Pursuant to the procedure set out in subsection
2-29.8A, the Fire Department shall elect a Chief of the Department
to serve a two-year term and a Deputy Chief to serve a two-year
term. The Fire Chief shall report to the Township Administrator or
his/her designee.
2. The Fire Chief will serve, in accordance with applicable laws and
ordinances, recognized standards, Fire Department rules,
regulations and policies and Fire Company membership bylaws.
b. Fire Chief Qualifications.
1. Minimum Experience and Membership Requirements:
(a) Shall be an Active Member of the Fire Department.
(b) Shall be a Member in Good Standing according to Fire
Company bylaws.
(c) Shall have served as a member of a Fire Company or
Department for a minimum of six years.
(d) Shall have served as a Line Officer for a minimum of five years,
one of which shall have been served as Captain.
2. Minimum Training Requirements:
(a) Shall posses a Firefighter I certification from the State of New
Jersey.
(b) Shall be a qualified operator of all Departments Class A
Engines and Aerial Devices and have intimate knowledge
regarding the operation of all other department apparatus.
(c) Shall possess an IMS Level III certification from the State of
New Jersey.
(d) Shall posses Haz-Mat Awareness and Operational certifications
from the State of New Jersey.
(e) Shall possess a Fire Officer I certification from the State of
New Jersey.
(f) Successful completion of an Incident Safety Officer course.
(g) Successful completion of an Emergency Response to Terrorism
course.
§ 2-29.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-29.8
1:49
(h) Successful completion of a Rapid Intervention Awareness
course.
(i) Successful completion of an Introduction to Motor Vehicle
Extrication course.
c. Duties of the Fire Chief.
1. In all cases of fire threatening danger or destruction of property
within a particular area of the Township, the Fire Chief shall take
prompt and efficient measures and use all the means of the Fire
Department to extinguish the fire. The Fire Chief shall, at such
time, and on all occasions of fire alarm, have sole and absolute
control and command over all the apparatus and all members of the
Fire Department. The Fire Chief shall have sole control and
command of all other fire apparatus and persons aiding and
assisting the Fire Department in cases of actual fire pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-54.1, Powers of Fire Chief to supersede local police
authority within fire lines.
2. The Fire Chief shall periodically inspect all apparatus and satisfy
himself/herself that it has been properly cleaned, maintained, and
made ready for use when needed. The Fire Chief shall call upon a
sufficient number of firefighters to assist in the work of putting and
keeping everything in readiness for service. The Fire Chief shall
keep closely informed to the physical condition of the equipment,
apparatus, and firehouses and take all necessary measures to have
all portions thereof, ready for instant use. To this end, he/she shall
make, or cause to be made, frequent visits for the purpose of
inspections at least quarterly at the firehouse, and shall keep a
record of such inspection by date and in detail as to the conditions
then existing. Information/details obtained through these
inspections will be included by the Fire Chief as part of his next
monthly status report to the Township Administrator.
The Emergency Services Committee will authorize a representative
of the Township's Joint Insurance Fund (JIF) to conduct an annual
inspection of all Fire Company buildings, vehicles, apparatus, and
related equipment for compliance with all applicable laws and rules
and to ensure for the safety of Fire Department personnel.
3. The Fire Chief shall render to the Township Committee through the
Township Administrator an annual report giving in detail a record
of the services of the Fire Department during the previous year.
The report shall include and describe each actual fire and the cause
as well as the loss estimate sustained. In addition, the report shall
also include full information as to the organization, personnel,
equipment, apparatus, firehouse(s) and shall be accompanied by a
financial statement of the company, if necessary, as provided by
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-34. The Fire Chief shall also make
recommendations for the maintenance and betterment of the fire
§ 2-29.8 HOLMDEL § 2-29.8
1:50
service. Furthermore, the Fire Chief shall make specific reports on
matters relating to the Fire Department whenever directed to do so
by the Township Administrator and/or Township Committee.
4. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the proper management,
discipline, and training of Fire Department members. He/she shall
approve all tools, appliances, equipment and apparatus used by the
Fire Department.
5. The Fire Chief shall have the authority to establish, organize, and
manage subdivisions of the Fire Department to carry out its
mission subject to review and approval of the Township
Administrator or his/her designee.
6. The Fire Chief shall set Fire Department policy, establish rules and
regulations, and standard operating guidelines for the efficient
operation of the Fire Department. The Fire Chief shall solicit the
input of all Department Line Officers when considering new
policies and procedures or when making changes to existing
policies and procedures.
7. By October 1st of each year, the Fire Chief shall submit to the
Township Administrator a proposed budget for the following
calendar year which shall be considered by the Township
Committee as part of the Township's budgeting process.
8. The Fire Chief shall administer discipline he/she deems necessary
for the orderly and efficient functioning of the Fire Department
when necessary or when recommended by the Disciplinary Review
Board. The Fire Chief shall prescribe the specifications for, and the
manner of wearing of, all Fire Department uniforms and personal
protective clothing used in the Department.
9. Attend (or send a designee) to a minimum of two Township Safety
Awareness Committee (SAC) Meetings per year.
10. Required to submit monthly status reports to the Township
Administrator by the 15th of the following month.
d. Line Officers.
1. Each Fire Company shall elect its own Line Officers according to
recognized standards, applicable laws and ordinances, mandatory
certification requirements, Department policies and Fire Company
Bylaws as it relates to membership in good standing. Line Officers
shall report to the Fire Chief.
2. The Fire Companies shall continue to determine how many Line
Officer positions shall be required to adequately oversee
operations, with the advice and consent of the Township
Administrator or his/her designee and subject to this section.
§ 2-29.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-29.8
1:51
§ 2-29.8A. Election of Fire Chief. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
3. At no time shall the number of Line Officers exceed the following
number per position:
(a) Captain [not to exceed one].
(b) Lieutenant [not to exceed four].
a. Eligibility to Vote.
1. Only Department Active Members may vote in the Chief election
process; and
2. Voting members must be members in Good Standing according to
Fire Company Bylaws.
3. The Secretary of each Fire Company will be required to provide the
Township Clerk with a list of eligible voters prior to the election.
b. Eligibility for Nomination.
1. Only Department Active Members are eligible to run for the
position of Fire Chief or Deputy Chief.
2. Meet all of the Qualifications in subsection 2-29.8 prior to
nomination.
c. Nominations, Review Board and Company Election.
1. Each Fire Company shall hold nominations during the regular
business meeting of September in an election year.
2. The nominee or nominees shall be forwarded to the Eligibility
Review Board (hereafter the "Review Board").
(a) The Review Board is responsible for verifying the nominees
meet all of the requirements for the position of Fire Chief.
(b) The Fire Department shall be represented on the Review
Board, but shall also be comprised of impartial parties from the
Township.
(c) The Review Board shall be comprised of the sitting Fire Chief,
the Presidents of both Fire Companies, the Township
Committee member who serves on the Emergency Services
Committee and the OEM Director.
(d) If the Review Board confirms a nominee or nominees, the Fire
Company shall hold an election of the nominees. The election
shall be held during the regular business meeting of November
in an election year.
§ 2-29.8 HOLMDEL § 2-29.8A
1:52
3. The winner must obtain a majority vote of at least 51% of the
ballots cast. If a nominee runs unopposed, the voting members
shall cast a yes or no vote.
d. Department Elections.
1. The election of Fire Chief shall be held on the first Saturday of
December in an election year.
2. The election shall be hosted by the Fire Company whose member is
to be promoted to the office of Fire Chief of the Department.
3. The election shall be ballot style.
4. The nominee must obtain a majority vote of 51% of the ballots cast.
5. Polls for voting shall open at 7:00 p.m. and close at 9:00 p.m.
6. The President and Secretary of the hosting Fire Company, or in
their absence or inability to act, the Vice President and Treasurer
shall act as judge and clerk of all elections.
7. In the event a nominee does not receive a majority vote, the
nominating Fire Company shall hold another nomination vote
within 10 days of the Department election.
8. If the nominee has not previously been approved by the Review
Board, the nominee shall be reviewed.
9. A new Department election shall be held within seven days of
approval of the nominee(s) by the Review Board.
e. Alternate Candidate.
1. The nomination of an alternate member to the position of Fire Chief
of the Department or Deputy Fire Chief shall be permitted only if
the member who is currently serving in the position resigns or is
found to be serving "unjustly" by no less than 80% of the voting
membership who shall indicate so in writing to the Fire Chief of the
Department and Township Administrator. In the event that an
alternate nominee is permitted, the entire voting membership must
be notified in writing by the Township Clerk of the intent to
nominate an alternate as well as the date, time and place in which
such nominations/elections will take place.
f. Rotation and Term Limits.
1. The Fire Chief will serve two-year terms.
2. Deputy Fire Chiefs who successfully complete their terms shall
automatically be promoted to and sworn in to the position of Fire
Chief of the Department.
§ 2-29.8A GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-29.8A
1:53
§ 2-29.9. (Reserved)
§ 2-29.10. Powers and Duties of Officers. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
The Fire Chiefs and all Line Officers of the Fire Department shall be
responsible to the Township Administrator or his/her designee, for
implementing and carrying out the fire protection and fire prevention
services within the Township as required by law.
§ 2-29.11. Insurance. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
The members and officers of the Fire Department shall comply with any and
all requirements as set forth by the Mid-Jersey Joint Insurance Fund or any
other insurance carrier designated by the Township.
§ 2-29.12. Certificates; Register. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
The Township Clerk shall keep a list of each Company's membership. Said
list will include the name of each member, the date of his/her acceptance,
current address, current telephone number, and driver's license number.
It shall be the responsibility of the Fire Chief to notify the Township Clerk
of any changes in such list and status as they occur throughout the year. By
December 1st of each year, the Fire Chief will furnish the Township Clerk
with a complete list with the information listed above, of each member of
the Company and their status within said Company.
§ 2-29.13. Fire Police. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
There may be active or associate members of the Fire Department who
may also be designated as fire police pursuant to N.J.S.A. 15:8-4. These
members shall serve at the direction of the Fire Chief or designee. Before
commencing their duties as fire police, such members must qualify as fire
police by taking and subscribing to an oath to be administered by the
Municipal Clerk that they shall justly, impartially and faithfully discharge
their duties to the best of their ability and understanding. Fire police shall
perform their duties under the supervision of the fire officer in charge of the
fire or fire drill. Such duties shall include:
3. The rotation of Fire Chief will commence the first January following
the adoption of this ordinance (Ordinance No. 2016-08, 5-17-16)
and continue to rotate as follows indefinitely.
(a) Years 1 & 2 — Chief = HFRC2, Deputy = HFC1.
(b) Years 3 & 4 — Chief = HFC1, Deputy = HFRC2.
(c) Years 5 & 6 — Chief = HFRC2, Deputy = HFC1.
a. Protection of property and contents;
b. Establishing and maintaining fire lines;
§ 2-29.8A HOLMDEL § 2-29.13
1:54
§ 2-29.14. Drivers. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
§ 2-29.15. Apparatus. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
c. Performing such traffic duties as necessary, from the fire station to and
at the vicinity of the fire, fire drill, or other emergency call, until the
arrival of a duly authorized police officer;
Nothing set forth in this subsection is intended to give the fire police the right
to supersede a duly authorized police officer.
a. Certified Drivers. Certified drivers shall operate the Fire Company's
assigned apparatus. Each driver must complete Coaching the
Emergency Vehicle Operator (CEVO) class and an approved Driver
Training Program must be completed prior to being certified.
b. Eligibility as Certified Driver. To be eligible as a certified driver of Fire
Department apparatus, a member must be at least 21 years of age,
possess a valid State of New Jersey driver's license, hold IMS Level I
State Certification and qualify annually on each apparatus.
c. Duties of Driver. In addition to driving the apparatus, all drivers shall
see that the apparatus are in serviceable condition when returned to
the fire station after a call.
d. Effect of Loss of Driver's License. Any Fire Department member whose
license is expired, suspended, revoked, or otherwise forfeited or
cancelled shall immediately notify the Fire Chief. If this situation
occurs, the driver shall become disqualified. Additionally, drivers shall
be subject to control of the Fire Chief, who may, for just cause, remove a
driver or impose a suspension.
e. The Township Administrator will ensure that driver's license checks are
done on all Fire Department members annually.
a. Use of Apparatus. Fire apparatus representing the Township of
Holmdel shall be removed from the firehouses in which they are housed
only upon dispatch to an incident or for training, maintenance,
refueling or other approved reason. Frivolous use of fire apparatus is
prohibited. The Fire Chief shall report any violations of this provision to
the Township Administrator or his/her designee, and may suspend or
remove the driver responsible.
b. Cleaning and Care. The drivers shall be responsible for the cleaning
and care of all Township fire apparatus.
c. Apparatus Leaving Township. No portion of the equipment or apparatus
of the Fire Department shall be permitted to leave the Township to
attend social functions (parades, musters, etc.) except with the
approval of the Township Administrator or his/her designee. Response
to calls for aid outside of the municipality shall be in accordance with
State, County, and local mutual aid protocols. In such cases, the Fire
§ 2-29.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-29.15
1:55
§ 2-29.16. Discipline. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
It shall be the duty of all officers and members to maintain proper discipline
and decorum at all times. All members shall faithfully and promptly obey the
rules, regulations, policies, and procedures set forth by the Fire Department
and the lawful orders of superiors. Written charges may be filed against any
member by any other member, a member of the public, or a public or private
entity. The Fire Chief shall have the authority to summarily discipline any
offender, or he/she may choose to convene a Disciplinary Review Board.
Chief shall designate which portion of equipment or apparatus may be
sent.
d. Speed of Fire Apparatus.
1. No fire apparatus shall be driven upon any street at a speed
exceeding that permitted by law, provided that when answering an
alarm of fire any apparatus so engaged may proceed at a safe rate
of speed commensurate with conditions.
2. Fire apparatus shall be driven at all times with due regard to the
safety of persons and property upon the streets, roads and
highways.
a. Options. Disciplinary action may take the form of a verbal warning,
written notice to improve performance, official written reprimand,
revocation of privileges, suspension not to exceed one year, or
expulsion from the Fire Department.
b. Authority to Impose. The Fire Chief may administer all levels of
disciplinary action. An expulsion order shall only be drawn up upon
recommendation from the Disciplinary Review Board.
c. Disciplinary Review Board.
1. Composition. A Disciplinary Review Board shall consist of three
individuals as follows: the Township Administrator or his/her
designee, and the Fire Chief and the Police Chief. When the Board
meets, the Administrator/designee shall chair the proceedings. If a
prospective Board member is a party in the case, or has some other
conflict of interest, he/she shall be disqualified from serving on that
particular case and be replaced by the chief officer from another
Fire Company, the County Fire Marshal or his/her designee, or a
representative of the New Jersey Division of Fire Safety.
2. Duties. The Disciplinary Review Board shall conduct impartial
hearings to review formal charges brought against members. After
hearing testimony from both sides, the Board shall deliberate and
render a decision. If the decision sustains the charges, the Board
shall also recommend disciplinary action.
§ 2-29.15 HOLMDEL § 2-29.16
1:56
§ 2-29.17. (Reserved)
§ 2-29.18. Fire Appropriations. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
3. Within 10 days of reaching a decision, the Board shall provide
written copies of its findings to both parties.
4. Proceedings. A hearing shall commence before the Disciplinary
Review Board within a reasonable time following submission of
written charges. The accused shall be provided an opportunity to
present his/her defense, with or without the assistance of an
attorney, and to present witnesses and cross-examine any person
testifying against him/her. All testimony shall be given under oath.
If deemed necessary, a court reporter may be hired to record and
transcribe the proceedings, with the total costs thereof being
evenly split between the accused and the Fire Company of the
accused.
5. Implementation of Decision. The Fire Chief shall implement
disciplinary action upon a guilty finding by the Disciplinary Review
Board. Implementation shall begin after the time period for appeal
has expired, or immediately after an appeal has been denied.
6. Appeals. An appeal may be taken to the appointing authority if
written notice of appeal is served on the Administrator within five
calendar days of receipt of the decision of the Disciplinary Review
Board. If notice of appeal is not served within this time period, the
right to appeal shall be deemed waived. The appointing authority
shall make their determination based upon the written findings
and/or transcript, if one has been prepared, by the Disciplinary
Review Board. The appointing authority may elect to hear
additional testimony. The decision of the appointing authority shall
be final.
a. On or before October 1st of every year following adoption of this
section, the Fire Company shall be required to submit to the Township
Administrator or designee budget requests for equipment, supplies and
materials for consideration as part of the Fire Department budget
process for the following calendar year which shall be considered by
the Township Committee as part of the Township's overall budget
process.
b. The Township may disburse funds to the Fire Company for the purchase
of fire equipment, supplies and materials as provided by N.J.S.A.
40A:14-34. In order to receive such disbursements from the Township,
the Fire Company must submit a detailed description of each proposed
expenditure to the Township Administrator or designee. Authorization
of the requested funds may be dispersed to the Fire Company pursuant
to Township purchasing procedures.
§ 2-29.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-29.19
1:57
§ 2-29.19. Rights of Volunteer Firemen Unaffected. [Ord. No.
2016-08]
This section shall not affect the term of service or exemption rights acquired
by any volunteer firefighter of the Township.
§ 2-29.20. Length of Service Awards Program. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
Eligible members of the Fire Department shall be participants in the
Township's Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) in accordance with
Chapter 2, subsection 2-34.1 of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Holmdel.
§ 2-29.21. Fire Companies. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
§ 2-30. OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
a. Management. The volunteer Fire Companies shall have latitude in the
management of its firehouse and in the conduct of internal affairs,
consistent with the purpose for which it was organized and maintained,
and with the ordinances of the Township, the rules and regulations of
the Fire Department and the laws of the State of New Jersey.
b. Constitution and Bylaws. The constitution and bylaws of each Fire
Company shall conform to the provisions of this section and Statutes.
The Fire Companies may adopt bylaws, which impose stricter standards
than would otherwise be imposed by ordinance, Fire Department rules
and regulations, or Statute, as long as the by-law is not in conflict or
does not violate any Township ordinance, Fire Department rule or
regulation, or Statute.
c. Elections. Fire Company elections shall be held in the final quarter of
the year as provided for in the bylaws of the company. The term of
elected officers shall commence at 12:00 p.m. on the succeeding
January 1st. The Fire Companies in accordance with its bylaws shall fill
a vacancy.
d. Financial Statements. The budget year of the Fire Company shall be the
calendar year. An annual financial statement, prepared by a Certified
Public Accountant and an IRS 990 form, covering the full fiscal year
shall be rendered by the company over the signature of the President
and Treasurer, and attested to by its Secretary, under the seal of the
company, and shall show in detail the sources of all receipts from the
Township and the purpose of all disbursements made from funds
received by the Township pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-34. Such reports
shall be subject to audit at the discretion of the Township Administrator
or Chief Financial Officer. These reports shall be included as part of his/
her annual/monthly report to the Administrator/Township Committee.
The Company may, but is not required to, include receipts from other
sources, or disbursements made from funds received from other
sources.
§ 2-29.19 HOLMDEL § 2-30.1
1:58
§ 2-30.1. Coordinator of Emergency Management. [1976 Code
§ 14-27]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. APP.A:9-40.1 there shall be a Coordinator of Emergency
Management appointed by the Mayor for a term of three years. He/she shall
be a resident of the Township and shall serve without compensation. The
Coordinator of Emergency Management shall have the powers, functions,
and duties prescribed by law.
§ 2-31. VOLUNTEER FIRST AID SQUADS.
§ 2-31.1. Establishment. [1976 Code § 14-30]
There shall be one or more independent, incorporated volunteer First Aid
Squads recognized by the Township Committee. The Captains of the First
Aid Squads shall act according to rules and regulations consistent with
law, which they shall establish independently or in accord with regional
associations of First Aid Squads. The Township Committee in their
municipal budget may contribute aid to the volunteer First Aid Squads as
permitted by law.
§ 2-31.2. Background Checks. [Ord. No. 2001-18 § I]
a. Any person desiring membership to the Holmdel First Aid Squad shall
submit an application to the Volunteer First Aid Squad, the form of
which may be prescribed by the Volunteer First Aid Squad, but which
shall contain the following information about the applicant:
1. Name;
2. Home address;
3. Birth date;
4. Social Security Number;
5. Driver's License Number;
6. Any conviction of violations of N.J.S.A. 2C:17-1 a. aggravated arson;
or b. arson; or c. failure to control or report a dangerous fire or
directly or indirectly pay or accept any form of consideration for
the purpose of starting a fire or explosion; any conviction of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:33-3 regarding false public alarms; any
conviction of any crime or disorderly persons violation; and any
such other information as the First Aid Squad deems relevant to the
application provided said information is not privileged or
prohibited by law.
b. Following the filing of such application, the Volunteer First Aid Squad
shall transmit one of the application forms to the Chief of Police who
shall conduct an investigation to ascertain the truth of the statements
made by the applicant upon his or her application and any such other
§ 2-30.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-31.2
1:59
§ 2-31.3. First Aid Services for Patient Care Facilities. [Ord. No.
2018-13]
investigation of the applicant's background as the Chief deems
necessary for the protection of the public good. If as a result of such
investigation the applicant is found to have been convicted of a violation
of N.J.S.A. 2C:17-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:33-3 or any other criminal or
disorderly persons offense or other information is uncovered which
will indicate the applicant may be a threat to the public health, safety
or welfare, the Chief of Police shall report such information and the
particulars thereof to the Chief of the Company to which the application
was made.
c. The applicant shall submit to fingerprinting and the Chief of Police is
authorized to submit the applicant's fingerprint card to the Division of
State Police/State Bureau of Identification and receive from said
agencies a State Criminal History Record Information Sheet for use in
evaluating the suitability of the applicant. All investigative materials
shall be kept confidential and shall only be available to the reviewing
authority of the First Aid Squad.
d. Random background and criminal history checks may be performed on
members if determined to be necessary by the approving authority of
the Volunteer First Aid Squad provided, however, that the subject of the
proposed investigation be notified in writing by certified mail 10 days in
advance of the commencement of the investigation.
This investigation shall be completed within 30 days of receipt of the
application and the fingerprinting of the applicant.
a. The purpose of this subsection is to preserve and enhance the
availability of volunteer first aid squad services for legitimate medical
emergency situations in the Township by regulating the use of
volunteer first aid squad services in certain nonemergency situations.
b. For purposes of this subsection, the following definition applies:
Patient care facility is defined as all State-licensed nursing homes,
rest homes, health maintenance organizations, assisted living facilities,
health-care facilities providing in-patient services, and other licensed
or unlicensed medical care providers with the capacity to treat 10 or
more outpatients simultaneously.
c. All patient care facilities located within the Township are hereby
required to own, lease, rent or have promptly available by contract
sufficient appropriately staffed private ambulance services for the
treatment and transport of patients in need of non-emergency medical
care. Such ambulance services shall be available 365 days per year and
24 hours per day.
d. In order to satisfy the requirements of subsection (c), each patient care
facility subject to this chapter shall file proof of the availability of
§ 2-31.2 HOLMDEL § 2-31.3
1:60
§ 2-32. INCENTIVES FOR VOLUNTEER EMERGENCY SERVICE
MEMBERS.
§ 2-32.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 94-41 § 14-28A.1]
The purpose of this section is to establish an incentive program to increase
enrollment in Volunteer Fire Companies and First Aid Squads within the
Township of Holmdel and to reward such volunteers for their tireless
efforts, and their many hours spent to preserve and protect the health,
safety, property and welfare of the residents of the Township of Holmdel, 24
hours per day, 365 days per year, without compensation.
§ 2-32.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 94-41 § 14-28A.2]
As used in this section:
private ambulance services with the Township Clerk within 60 days
after final passage of this chapter, and on or before September 1 of
each year thereafter. For purposes of this subchapter, proof of private
ambulance availability shall consist of a contract with no less than two
private ambulance service providers under which such providers are
obliged to respond promptly to the patient care facility. Alternatively, if
a patient care facility elects to own and operate its own ambulance(s),
such proof shall consist of documentation of the make, model, year,
color, serial number, license plate number, location, and staffing of
such ambulance(s). As part of the proofs required under this section,
the resident director, manager or authorized corporate officer of each
patient care facility shall make and file with the Township Clerk a
signed certification that adequate private ambulance services are
available, and that all agents and employees of such facility involved
with patient care have been apprised of and trained in the use of such
private ambulance services. The failure of a patient care facility to
comply with the requirements of this subsection shall constitute an
ordinance violation by the patient care facility and its resident director,
manager, or authorized corporate officer punishable by a fine not to
exceed $1,000.
e. In the event that an employee or agent of a patient care facility located
in the Township takes actions resulting in the dispatch of a volunteer
first aid squad regulated pursuant to the provisions of subsection
2-31.1, and the responding volunteer first aid squad determines in its
sole discretion that the basis for dispatch did not constitute
circumstances requiring the use of an advanced life support or
paramedic unit, the volunteer first aid squad shall certify accordingly to
the Township and the private care facility shall be subject to a volunteer
first aid services dispatch fee of $750. This fee shall be payable to the
Township of Holmdel. The Township of Holmdel may contribute fee
revenue generated under this subsection to the volunteer first aid
squads, consistent with subsection 2-31.1.
§ 2-31.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-32.2
1:61
MEMBER IN GOOD STANDING — Shall mean any person who has been
certified in writing by the Chief Executive Officer of a Volunteer Fire
Company or Volunteer First Aid Squad within the Township of Holmdel
to have served at least one year of continuous volunteer service in the
company or squad, to possess the necessary certification(s), license(s) and/
or training required by the company or squad.
VOLUNTEER — Shall mean any individual contributing services to a
Volunteer Fire Company or Volunteer First Aid Squad within the Township
of Holmdel without remuneration or without a formal agreement or contract
for hire.
§ 2-32.3. Qualification for Benefits. [Ord. No. 94-41 § 14-28A.3]
The provisions of this section shall be limited solely to those persons who
are volunteers in any Volunteer Fire Company or Volunteer First Aid Squad
within the Township and who are certified by the Chief Executive Officer of
their respective volunteer organization as "members in good standing" of
the organization.
Reports detailing the attendance of members of each company or squad
shall be filed quarterly with the Township Clerk by the Chief Executive
Officer of each company or squad. The certification referred to in the
preceding paragraph shall be filed annually, not later than January 15 with
the Township Clerk by the Chief Executive Officer of each Volunteer Fire
Company or Volunteer First Aid Squad. A new certification must be filed
each year and the certification from the preceding year shall be null and
void.
§ 2-32.4. Benefits. [Ord. No. 94-41 § 14-28A.4]
Every certified member in good standing of a Volunteer Fire Company or
Volunteer First Aid Squad shall be entitled to the following benefits from the
Township:
Exemption from the payment of any Holmdel Township fees for the
Township swim club, Township Recreation activities, Township training
programs, Township licenses and permit fees, fees for the use of Township
buildings and facilities and Township programs up to a maximum of $300
per year, provided the fee or charge is for the personal and nonprofit use of
such member in good standing. Where fees include monies payable to the
State and/or County, only the municipal portion of these fees may be waived.
§ 2-32.5. Procedure for Exemption. [Ord. No. 94-41 § 14-28A.5; Ord.
No. 97-7 § I]
a. Identification Card. Every member certified to be in good standing of a
Volunteer Fire Company or Volunteer First Aid Squad within the
Township shall be issued an annual identification card from the
Township Clerk on or before February 1st and expiring January 31st of
the following year, upon which shall be printed a serial number.
§ 2-32.2 HOLMDEL § 2-32.5
1:62
§ 2-32.6. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 94-41 § 41-28A.6; Ord. No. 97-7
§ II]
The Township Clerk is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this
section.
§ 2-32.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 94-41 § 14-28A.2]
Any person committing an offense against the provisions of this section shall
be guilty of a violation to be punished by a fine not to exceed $300.
§ 2-33. A LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM (LOSAP).5
[Ord. No. 2002-08; Ord. No. 2004-24 § I; Ord. No. 2007-31 § I]]
b. Incentive Voucher. At the time the member seeks an exemption from
fees, he or she shall present his or her identification card to the
Township Clerk. Upon initial presentation, the Township Clerk shall
issue a signed incentive voucher in the amount of $300. The member
shall then present the voucher to the appropriate authorized official or
representative who shall note the amount of the incentive used with
remaining balance, use, signature of the department head and date.
The voucher shall be returned to the Township Clerk for notation in a
ledger which shall, on an annual basis, reflect the balance of the $300
still available to each member. The Township Clerk shall subsequently,
upon request of a member, issue incentive vouchers for unused
balances.
a. A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997 to reward volunteer
members of the Holmdel Township Fire Department and First Aid
Squad for their loyal, diligent, and devoted services to the residents of
the Township of Holmdel.
b. The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a tax
deferred income account for each volunteer member that meets the
criteria set forth below; that such contributions shall be made in
accordance with a plan that shall be established by the Township of
Holmdel pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 388; and that such plan shall be
administered in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey,
the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, and this Ordinance.
c. The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible
member that accumulates 50 points during a calendar year pursuant to
the point system attached hereto and made a part hereof.
d. The annual contribution amount for each year of future service for each
eligible volunteer member shall be $1,150 per person. The estimated
5. Editor's Note: The Length of Service Awards Program of the Township of Holmdel (LOSAP)
was approved by the electorate of the Township of Holmdel at the General Election of
November 5, 2002.
§ 2-32.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-33
1:63
annual cost of this provision of the LOSAP shall be based on 38
members for a total cost of $43,700.
LOSAP POINT SYSTEM
VOLUNTEERS IN HOLMDEL FIRE DEPARTMENT
1. Earning 50 points will award an eligible year of service.
2. Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for
volunteer services provided to the Holmdel Fire Department in
accordance with the following point system:
A. Participation in Department Responses:
25 points for responding on the minimum number of calls as
outlined below:
1 — Total number of calls volunteer company responds to annually
- 0-300.
2 — Minimum number of calls volunteer firefighters must run
annually in order to receive 25 points credit - 20%.
B. Drills — 20 points maximum.
1 — 1 point per drill, minimum two-hour drill.
C. Training Courses — 25 points maximum.
1 — Courses under 20 hours duration - One point per hour with a
maximum of five points.
2 — Courses of 20 - 45 hours duration - one point per hour for each
hour over initial 20 hours with a maximum of 10 points.
D. Attendance at Meetings - 15 points maximum.
— Attendance at any official meeting of the volunteer fire company
- One point per meeting.
E. Elected or Appointed Positions - 25 points maximum.
— Elected or appointed means Line Officers and Department
Officers which include President, Vice President, Secretary, and
Treasurer of the Fire Company.
F. Work Nights or Special Work Details - 25 points maximum.
— One point for any two-hour work detail attended.
3. Members are vested after five qualifying years of service.
4. Annual contribution of $1,150 per member who has earned a
qualifying year.
§ 2-33 HOLMDEL § 2-33
1:64
Holmdel Volunteer First Aid Squad
Length of Service Award Program (LOSAP)
1. Earning 50 points will award an eligible year of service.
2. Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for
volunteer services provided to the first aid squad in accordance with
the following point system:
First aid call responses: = 1 point per response to 2
calls
Regular squad meeting: = 2 points each (no maximum)
Training courses: = 1 point every two hours
Fund raising events: = 1 point per 2 hours (max. 10
points)
Night crew assignment: = 1 point every three nights
(15 maximum)
Work details = 1 point per 2 hours
(maximum 12)
Teaching recognized first aid courses
to Holmdel recognized organizations
(e.g. CPR, first aid, AED, first
responder, etc.):
= 1 point each hour of course
Community relations to Holmdel
recognized organizations (e.g.
speaking engagement, community
day, public appearances):
= 1 point each hour
Elected officers: = 20 Points
EMT certification: = 15 Points
Appointed positions:
(Rescue Lieutenant) (LOSAP
Administrator) (11th District Rep.)
= 15 points
Life members: = 25 Points
3. Members are vested after five qualifying years of service.
4. Annual contribution of $1,150 per member who has earned a
qualifying year.
§ 2-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-33
1:65

ARTICLE VI
Public Works
§ 2-34. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
§ 2-34.1. Manager of Public Works. [1976 Code § 14-30A; Ord. No.
87-17; New]
§ 2-34.2. Township Brush and Leaf Collection. [Added 9-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-16]
a. Position Created. Pursuant to N.J.S. 40A:9-154.6A, there is hereby
created the position of Manager of Public Works, who may be appointed
by the Township Committee.
b. Duties. The Public Works Manager shall be responsible for the
supervision of the Department of Roads, Public Buildings and Grounds,
including maintenance of the physical plant and grounds used for
recreational activities, and the Swim and Tennis Center. He/she shall
also coordinate the activities of the Board of Health, Planning Board,
Construction Office, Engineering and Public Utilities as they relate to
public works activities.
c. Authority. The Public Works Manager shall be considered a Department
Head with the authority to discipline those individuals in the
Departments under his/her supervision in accordance with Civil Service
procedures and established Township personnel policies covering rules
and procedures.
d. Term. This position shall not be a classified Civil Service position. It
shall not have tenure. The Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the
Township Committee. He/she may have a contract with the Township
Committee which may include provisions as to appropriate notice of
termination and severance. He/she may be removed with or without
cause by the Township Committee.
a. Subject to appropriation by the governing body, the Township
Department of Public Works shall conduct brush and leaf collections
three times per year, which shall be completed substantially upon the
terms contained in this subsection.
b. On an annual basis, the Township Department of Public Works shall
establish a brush and leaf collection schedule, providing for three
pickups per year, which shall delineate the specific time period in which
the Township will complete brush and/or leaf collection from a specific
area in the Township, hereafter referred to as the "collection period."
c. The following provisions shall govern brush and leaf collections
completed pursuant to this subsection:
§ 2-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-34.2
1:67
1. No property owner shall place or cause to be placed any brush or
leaves for collection more than one week prior to the start of the
collection period established under Subsection b.
2. Property owners shall be limited to one brush or leaf pickup per
collection period.
3. Brush and leaves for collection shall be neatly placed in piles at or
near the property line, and shall not be placed on roadways or
sidewalks.
4. Brush and leaf collection is strictly for Township residents, and
shall not be used by or for the benefit of any non-Township resident.
5. Brush and leaf collection shall be limited to residential properties,
and commercial property owners shall be responsible for their own
brush and leaf removal.
6. Brush and leaf collection is strictly for use by Township residents in
their personal maintenance of their properties, and, accordingly,
brush and leaf collection shall not be used for brush or leaves that
are compiled by landscapers or similar professionals.
d. The following provisions shall govern brush collection completed
pursuant to this subsection:
1. Tree branches and limbs for collection must be six inches in
diameter or smaller.
2. Brush shall not be mixed with stumps, roots, leaves, grass,
dimensional lumber, firewood, or oversized material.
3. Brush for collection shall not exceed three individual piles of
branches, and each individual pile shall not exceed four feet in
height, four feet in width, or six feet in length.
4. Brush shall be located with at least six feet of unobstructed space
on all sides of a brush pile.
5. Brush shall not be placed within 10 feet of a stormwater inlet or
basin.
e. The following provisions shall govern leaf collection completed
pursuant to this subsection:
1. Leaves shall not be placed in any bag or container.
2. Leaves shall not be mixed with brush, grass clippings, or any type
of general debris.
3. Leaves shall be placed in a "wind-row" type pile.
4. Leaves shall not be placed within 10 feet of a stormwater inlet or
basin.
§ 2-34.2 HOLMDEL § 2-35
1:68
§ 2-35. DEPARTMENT OF ROADS.
§ 2-35.1. Department Established; Functions. [1976 Code § 14-32;
Ord. No. 87-17]
§ 2-35.2. Public Buildings and Grounds. [1976 Code § 14-33; Ord.
No. 87-17; Ord. No. 2003-25 § I]
§ 2-35.3. Public Utilities. [1976 Code § 14-34]
Public utilities serving any part of the Township are regulated by law.
The Township Administrator shall serve as liaison between the various
public utilities and the Township Committee. The determination of the
need for streetlighting shall be made by the Township Committee upon the
a. There shall be a Department of Roads which shall consist of a Road
Supervisor, a Road Foreman and such equipment operators and
laborers as may be appointed.
b. Functions. The Road Department shall, under the supervision of the
Public Works Manager and technical guidance of the Township
Engineer:
1. Maintain and repair all municipal roads.
2. Maintain and repair all municipal storm and drainage systems.
3. Provide for and carry out snow removal and sanding or salting
operations on municipal roads.
4. Construct and reconstruct such municipal streets as may be
authorized.
5. Maintain and repair, or arrange for the repair of, municipal trucks
and equipment.
6. Maintain and repair municipal parks and grounds and outdoor
recreational areas, except School Board property.
7. Perform such other services as may be directed by the Township
Committee or the Township Administrator.
a. There shall be a Custodian of Public Buildings and Grounds and such
assistants as may be required. The custodial personnel shall clean and
maintain the public buildings and facilities and perform minor repairs
as required.
b. The building maintenance worker shall be responsible for performing
varied simple and moderately physically strenuous tasks involved in
cleaning and maintaining offices, furniture, buildings and grounds, may
assist in making minor repairs to buildings or equipment, and other
related duties as required in the New Jersey Department of Personnel
Job Specification 00929.
§ 2-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-35.3
1:69
recommendation of the Department Chairman and with due consideration
of the desires of local residents and current funds availability.
§ 2-36. TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
§ 2-36.1. Appointment; Term. [1976 Code § 14-38A; New]
There shall be a Township Engineer appointed by the Township Committee
for a term of three years commencing on January 1 of the year in which
appointed. He/she shall be a licensed professional engineer of the State of
New Jersey, and he/she shall receive such compensation as is prescribed in
the Salary Ordinance. In addition, the Engineer shall receive the customary
fees and charges for work performed in connection with specific projects
approved by the Township Committee.
§ 2-36.2. Duties. [1976 Code § 14-38B]
The Township Engineer shall, as authorized by the Township Committee:
§ 2-36.3. Records and Papers. [1976 Code § 14-38C]
All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating
to the duties performed and services rendered by the Township Engineer
for or in behalf of the Township shall be and remain the property of the
Township. Upon the termination of his/her services with the Township,
the Township engineer shall forthwith surrender to his/her successor all
such property, together with a written consent of substitution of his/her
a. Prepare, review and approve specifications for municipal works
contracts, supervise and inspect the execution of such contracts, and
certify satisfactory completion of work to authorize progress payments
pursuant to the contract.
b. Provide and maintain maps, plans and specifications, surveys and other
records as may be required on municipal property work and facilities
and maintain the Tax Map and all related records and reports, and
abstract changes on a current basis.
c. Attend meetings of the Township Committee.
d. Perform professional engineering functions as required by the
Township Committee.
e. Prepare such special reports, surveys and drawings as may be
authorized by the Township Committee.
f. Provide technical supervision over the operation of the Township-leased
contractor-operated municipal sewage treatment plant.
g. Review subdivision plans and maps and inspect subdivision
construction progress and status pursuant to the Land Subdivision
Ordinance and as directed by the Township Committee.
§ 2-35.3 HOLMDEL § 2-36.3
1:70
successor in all actions and proceedings then pending to which the
Township is a party.
§ 2-37. REGIONAL SEWERAGE AUTHORITY. [1976 Code § 14-36]
The Bayshore Regional Authority exists through the enactment of separate
ordinances by several municipalities, including the Township of Holmdel.
The Township Committee shall appoint two members to the Bayshore
Regional Sewerage Authority for terms of five years, which members shall
receive compensation from the Authority. The Authority operates under
provisions of law and concordant ordinances and resolutions of the member
municipalities.
§ 2-38. through §2-44. (RESERVED)
§ 2-36.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-38
1:71

ARTICLE VII
Department of Health and Welfare
§ 2-45. BOARD OF HEALTH.
§ 2-45.1. Citizen Board of Health Established. [1976 Code § 2-1]
There is hereby established in and for the Township, pursuant to N.J.S.
26:3-1, Subdivision B, governing the organization and personnel of local
Boards of Health, a local Citizens Board of Health composed of five persons,
who shall be residents of the Township.
§ 2-45.2. Terms of Office. [1976 Code § 2-2; New]
Each member of the Board shall be appointed by the Township Committee
for a period of three years. The term of office of not more than three
members shall expire in any one year.
§ 2-45.3. Vacancies. [1976 Code § 2-3]
Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Board shall be filled in the
same way and manner as the original appointment, but for the unexpired
portion of the term only.
§ 2-45.4. Organization; Officers; Employees. [1976 Code § 2-4]
§ 2-45.5. Meetings; Records; Procedures. [1976 Code § 2-5]
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as the Board may deem
necessary to govern its procedure. It shall meet regularly at least once a
month for the hearing of complaints, reports and general business and at
such other times as the Board may determine or at the call of the Chairman.
A notice of the place, day and hour for such regular meeting shall be
posted in the Township Hall and be published in the Township newspaper in
accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act. A meeting of the Board at
which official action is to be taken on any matter within its jurisdiction shall
a. The Board shall organize annually on or before the first Monday in
January after January 1.
b. The Board of Health shall elect a Chairman and a Vice Chairman from
among its members and shall appoint a Secretary6 who may but need
not be a member of the Board, who shall serve at the pleasure of the
Board and who shall receive such compensation as the Board may
determine, subject to the budgetary approval of the Township
Committee. The Board shall also be permitted to engage such
professional and other services as may, in its discretion, be required,
subject to budgetary approval of the Township Committee.
6. Editor's Note: See Board of Health Code § 1-3 for the duties of the Secretary of the Board
of Health.
§ 2-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-45.5
1:73
be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of all of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if any member
shall be absent or fail to vote, the minutes shall indicate such facts. The
records shall be filed with and kept with the Secretary and shall be a public
record.
§ 2-45.6. Powers and Duties. [1976 Code § 2-6]
The Board shall administer and enforce all health ordinances of the
Township now in effect and shall adopt any other powers as have been
or may be granted to it, and shall perform such other duties as may be
required by any Statute of the State of New Jersey which is now in effect.
§ 2-46. SEWER UTILITY SYSTEM. [1976 Code § 14-40.1]
The municipal sewer system within the Township is established in Section
18-1 as a publicly owned utility of the Township. The ordinance provides for
the regulation and use of the sewers, the proper operation, protection and
preservation of the system, the fixing of amounts and charges therefor and
providing rules and regulations therefor.
§ 2-47. REGISTERED ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SPECIALIST
(SANITARY INSPECTOR).
§ 2-47.1. Appointment and Compensation. [Ord. No. 2004-20 § 1]
There shall be a Registered Environmental Health Specialist (entitled
Sanitary Inspector under Civil Service) appointed by the Township
Committee. He/she shall act under the statutes, rules and regulations of
the State of New Jersey, the State and local Board of Health, and the State
Department of Health. He/she shall receive such compensation as may be
provided in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-47.2. Duties. [Ord. No. 2004-20 § 1]
The Registered Environmental Health Specialist (Sanitary Inspector) shall
perform sanitary inspection work involved in enforcement of relevant public
health laws within the Township of Holmdel; inspect restaurants and other
places serving and handling food; investigate nuisances and violations of
the Sanitary Code; give testimony in court cases; review applications for
licenses or permits pertaining to food-handling establishments, hotels,
tourist areas, private water supplies, swimming pools, and sewage disposal
plants; survey and investigate communicable diseases and epidemics which
may be traceable to lack of environmental sanitation; review and analyze
records/reports and make recommendations as to laws and regulations
required for proper control of environmental sanitation; assemble, review
and utilize articles, bulletins, demonstrations and other education methods
and materials concerning varied phases of environmental sanitation; act
in a liaison capacity with the local Board of Health in all areas of
§ 2-45.5 HOLMDEL § 2-47.2
1:74
environmental health; maintain records and files; and perform additional
responsibilities as required.
§ 2-47.3. Requirements. [Ord. No. 2004-20 § 1]
Possession of a valid Registered Environmental Health Specialist License
issued by the State Commissioner of Health on behalf of the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:1A-38
et seq., possession of a valid driver's license, knowledge of problems/
procedures involved in sanitary inspection work, and knowledge in
enforcement of relevant public health laws.
§ 2-48. REGISTRAR OF VITAL STATISTICS. [1976 Code § 14-43]
§ 2-49. TOWNSHIP MEDICAL OFFICER.
§ 2-49.1. Appointment; Term. [1976 Code § 14-44A]
There shall be a Township Medical Officer appointed by the Township
Committee for a term of one year commencing January 1 of the year in
which appointed. He/she shall be a licensed physician of the State of New
Jersey and shall be actively engaged in the practice of medicine. He/she
shall receive such compensation as is provided in the Salary Ordinance
and, additionally, he/she shall receive the customary fees and charges for
medical services, including examination and treatment, rendered to
Township employees when such examination or treatment is authorized and
directed by the Township Committee or the Board of Health and is not at
the initiation of the patient himself.
a. The Board of Health shall appoint a Registrar of Vital Statistics and an
Alternate Registrar of Vital Statistics in accordance with N.J.S. 26:8-11,
26:8-16, for a term of three years. The Registrar and the Alternate
Registrar shall receive the customary fees as compensation in
accordance with N.J.S. 26:8-56 to 26:8-65.
b. Duties of the Registrar and the Alternate Registrar of Vital Statistics
shall be as prescribed in N.J.S. 26:8-25, including, but not limited to, the
following:
1. Secure reporting of births, marriages, deaths, fetal deaths and
reportable diseases.
2. Make copies of vital records, transmitting original certificates and
copies to agencies as required by law.
3. Issue licenses, permits and copies of vital records as provided by
law.
§ 2-47.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-49.2
1:75
§ 2-49.2. Appointment of Additional Medical Officers. [1976 Code
§ 14-44B]
The Township Committee may appoint such additional medical officers as
may be required.
§ 2-49.3. Duties. [1976 Code § 14-44C]
The Medical Officer(s) shall:
§ 2-50. MUNICIPAL ALLIANCE COORDINATOR. [Ord. No. 2004-01
§ 1]
The Municipal Alliance Coordinator shall be responsible for coordinating
all Alliance activities, maintain current status of finances, correspondence,
updating needs assessment and renewal applications, grantwriting and
reporting, fundraising, maintain resource library, maintain and promote
community relations, develop calendar of events, provide after school
workshops, conduct community surveys, facility self-paying programs
within the community and other related duties as required.
§ 2-51. (RESERVED)
§ 2-52. BLOODBORNE PATHOGEN COMPLIANCE.
§ 2-52.1. Compliance Officer. [Ord. No. 96-5 § A]
The Holmdel Township Bloodborne Pathogen Compliance Officer shall be
the Designated Infection Control Officer in compliance with the Federal
Register, Part V, March 21, 1994, Department of Health and Human
Services, Ryan White Comprehensive Aids Resources Emergency Act;
Emergency Response Employee; Notice.
§ 2-52.2. Compliance. [Ord. No. 96-5 § B]
Any person employed within the Police Department or at the Swim Club
and any person accepted as a member of the Fire Department or First Aid
Squad shall within 10 days of employment or membership be in compliance
with the Federal Register, December 6, 1991, Part II Department of Labor,
Occupational Safety and Health Administration 29 CFR 1910.1030
a. Provide professional advice on the broad spectrum of public health and
medicine as requested by the Township Committee or the Board of
Health.
b. Conduct physical examinations of applicants and employees of the
Township referred to him/her by the Township Administrator.
c. Serve as Police Physician for the Township Police Department, advising
the Police in the collection and evaluation of medical evidence and in
the examination of persons at the request of the Police.
§ 2-49.2 HOLMDEL § 2-52.2
1:76
Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogen; Final Rule. The
appropriate department head or entity shall ensure full compliance with this
section.
§ 2-52.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-52.2
1:77

ARTICLE VIII
Department of Recreation
§ 2-53. RECREATION AND LIBRARY.
§ 2-53.1. Recreation Advisory Council. [Ord. No. 2003-31 § II]
The Recreation Advisory Council operates under Section 2-61 establishing
the Council, prescribing its membership and assigning to it certain powers
and functions.
§ 2-53.2. Library. [1976 Code § 14-46]
Library services shall be provided the citizens of the Township at facilities
owned by the Township and operated by the Monmouth County Library
Commission.
§ 2-53.3. Tennis Center; Tennis Advisory Committee; Recreation
Positions. [1976 Code § 71A-2; Ord. No. 91-9; Ord. No. 2003-25 § II;
Ord. No. 2003-31 § II]
a. Supervision, Maintenance and Operation. Overall budgetary
jurisdiction and control shall be in the Township Committee assisted by
the Director of Parks and Recreation and the Tennis Committee. The
operating agency for the Center shall be known as the Tennis
Committee (Committee). The Committee shall be made up of not more
than five residents of the Township appointed as of January 1 of each
year by the Township Committee, and shall be a recommendatory
agency of the Township which shall meet monthly and make
recommendations dealing with all aspects of operation of the Center,
including employment of personnel, use of facilities, maintenance,
repair, fees and charges. All budget items, contracts and permissions
for expenditures and income, if not previously provided for by the
ordinance, or in an amendment or supplement thereto, shall be
determined by the Township Committee. All employees of the Center
hired by the Township Committee shall be considered temporary
employees, and they shall be subject to General Department of
Personnel Rules and Regulations, and the General Policies of the
Township. All payments for salaries shall be in accordance with the
Salary Ordinance of the Township, and all payments for goods and
services shall be upon voucher to the Township Committee. All income
shall be promptly deposited in properly established accounts in the
name of the Township of Holmdel.
b. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be responsible for all
preparations necessary for proper and timely opening of all facilities for
the season. He/she shall be a person who is qualified for such
employment by education and training. The Director of Parks and
Recreation shall be responsible for the day-to-day operations of all
facilities. He/she shall see to it that all facilities are well maintained,
§ 2-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-53.3
1:79
§ 2-53.4. Swim Center; Pool Advisory Committee. [1976 Code § 69-2;
Ord. No. 19-83; Ord. No. 2003-31 § II; Ord. No. 2006-05 § I]
§ 2-54. through §2-57. (RESERVED)
clean and safe. He/she shall see to it that all personnel are trained
in their jobs and that they all render courteous, efficient and proper
service to all members and guests.
c. The Tennis Committee, subject to budgetary limitations, shall annually
recommend to the Township Committee for approval such other
personnel as may be necessary to operate the facility, including any
workers that the Committee may deem necessary.
d. The Recreation Director shall be responsible for planning, organizing,
coordinating parks and recreation programs and other related duties as
required as outlined in the New Jersey Department of Personnel Job
Specification 01652.
a. Overall budgetary jurisdiction and control shall be in the Township
Committee assisted by the Director of Parks and Recreation and the
Pool Advisory Committee. The operating agency for the Center shall be
known as the "Pool Advisory Committee" ("Committee"). The
Committee shall be made up of not more than five residents of the
Township, appointed as of January 1 of each year by the Township
Committee, and shall be a recommendatory agency of the Township,
which shall meet monthly and make recommendations dealing with all
aspects of operation of the Center, including employment of personnel,
use of facilities, maintenance, repair, fees and charges. All budget
items, contracts and permissions for expenditures and income, if not
previously provided for by this section or in an amendment or
supplement thereto, shall be determined by the Township Committee.
All employees of the Center hired by the Township Committee shall be
considered temporary employees, and they shall be subject to general
civil service rules and regulations and the general policies of the
Township. All payments for salaries shall be in accordance with the
Salary Ordinance of the Township, and all payments for goods and
services shall be upon voucher to the Township Committee. All income
shall be promptly deposited in properly established accounts in the
name of the Township of Holmdel (swim pool account).
b. (Reserved)
c. The Pool Advisory Committee, subject to budget limitations, shall
annually recommend to the Township Committee for approval such
other personnel as may be necessary to operate the facilities, including
qualified lifeguards, instructors, maintenance and gate personnel,
snack bar manager and attendants and recreation counselors and any
other workers that the Committee may deem necessary.
§ 2-53.3 HOLMDEL § 2-54
1:80
ARTICLE IX
Officers and Employees
§ 2-58. APPOINTMENTS; REGULATIONS GOVERNING.
§ 2-58.1. Temporary Appointments. [1976 Code § 14-47]
Whenever any officer or employee of the Township is temporarily absent,
disabled or disqualified, the Township Committee may designate some
person to act in place of any such officer or employee during his/her
temporary absence, disability or disqualification.
§ 2-58.2. Adoption of Rules and Regulations. [1976 Code § 14-48]
The Township Committee is empowered to adopt by resolution rules and
regulations for the purpose of implementing this chapter and establishing
policies and procedures to guide the Township officers, employees and
position holders in the exercise of their responsibilities and privileges of
their employment or positions.
§ 2-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-58.2
1:81

ARTICLE X
Boards, Committees and Commissions
§ 2-59. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE.
§ 2-59.1. Committee Established. [1976 Code § 11-1]
An Economic Development Committee is hereby established and shall be
known as the "Economic Development Committee of the Township of
Holmdel."
§ 2-59.2. Membership; Qualifications; Terms of Office; Vacancies.
[1976 Code § 11-2; Ord. No. 90-10]
The Economic Development Committee shall consist of seven members
appointed by the Township Committee, one of whom shall be a member of
the Township Committee, whose term thereon shall coincide with his/her
term as a member of the Township Committee. The remaining six members
of the Economic Development Committee shall consist of persons who are
residents of the Township, one of whom shall be a Class IV member of
the Planning Board of Holmdel Township.7 All members of the Economic
Development Committee shall be appointed on the basis of their experience,
qualifications and fitness for service to the Committee. Appointments of
members whose terms have expired shall be for the term of three years.
Vacancies in the membership of the Economic Development Committee
occurring for whatever cause shall be filled by appointment of a
replacement in the same manner as appointments are hereinbefore
provided for the unexpired term. Members shall serve for their respective
terms and until their successors are appointed and qualified.
§ 2-59.3. Compensation. [1976 Code § 11-3; Ord. No. 90-10]
The members of the Economic Development Committee shall serve without
compensation.
§ 2-59.4. Officers. [1976 Code § 11-4; Ord. No. 90-10]
The members of the Economic Development Committee shall choose from
among its members a Chairman, a Secretary and such officers as it may
deem necessary.
§ 2-59.5. Duties. [1976 Code § 11-5]
The duties of the Economic Development Committee shall be as follows:
a. To conduct a study and survey of the opportunities of the Township for
the development and expansion of business enterprises;
7. Editor's Note: As to Class IV members of the Planning Board, see Chapter 15, Planning
Board, Section 15-2.
§ 2-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-59.5
1:83
§ 2-59.6. Assistance to Committee; Access to Municipal Records.
[1976 Code § 11-6]
The Committee shall receive from all officials and all authorized boards,
departments and offices of the Township such assistance as may be required
by the Committee in performing its duties, and the Committee shall also
be given access to all municipal records and information which may be
appropriate in assisting the Committee in the performance of its duties.
§ 2-59.7. Annual Appropriation. [1976 Code § 11-7; Ord. No. 90-10]
There shall be appropriated in each annual budget of the Township such
sum as may be determined by the Township Committee to be necessary
for the proper operation and functioning of the Economic Development
Committee, and the Committee is authorized to use and expend such funds
for such purposes upon the adoption of the annual budget.
§ 2-60. BUYER.8
§ 2-60.1. Appointment and Compensation. [Ord. No. 2004-22 § 1]
There shall be a Buyer appointed by the Township Committee. He/she shall
receive such compensation as may be provided in the Salary Ordinance.
b. To analyze the various business trends of the nation with a view to
ascertaining the types of enterprises best suited to the economy and
social improvements of the Township;
c. To promote the advantages of the Township for business settlement;
d. To encourage the expansion of existing businesses to the best interest
of the Township;
e. To prepare, develop and distribute any and all types of material and
information advertising the advantages of the Township to new
industry;
f. To recommend to the Township Committee and to the Planning Board
desirable and suitable areas within the Township for the location of
business enterprises; and
g. To hold not less than six meetings of the Committee each calendar year;
to establish procedures governing the conduct of such meetings and to
make quarter-annual reports to the Township Committee, setting forth
therein and detailing the activities and operations of the Committee
during the preceding three months.
8. Editor's Note: Former Section 2-60, Local Assistance Board, previously codified herein and
containing portions of 1976 Code §§ 12-1 — 12-5 and Ordinance No. 33-78 was repealed in
its entirety by Ordinance No. 2004-22.
§ 2-59.5 HOLMDEL § 2-60.2
1:84
§ 2-60.2. Duties. [Ord. No. 2004-22 § 1]
He/she shall under supervision select, prepare orders and arrange for
purchase of one or more types of equipment, materials and supplies used by
various departments or agencies, and other related duties as required.
§ 2-60.3. Requirements. [Ord. No. 2004-22 § 1]
Possession of a bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university
(two years experience in the large scale purchase of commodities,
materials, equipment and/or supplies may be substituted for the educational
requirement); possession of a valid New Jersey driver's license; knowledge
of methods and procedures involved in the purchase of equipment,
materials, and/or supplies; knowledge of laws, regulations, policies,
standards, and procedures relating to a government purchasing
department.
§ 2-61. RECREATION ADVISORY COUNCIL.9
§ 2-61.1. Creation. [Ord. No. 2003-31 § III]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:63-7d there is hereby created a Recreation
Advisory Council of the Township of Holmdel.
§ 2-61.2. Appointment of Members; Term; Vacancies. [Ord. No.
2003-31 § III; Ord. No. 2004-08 § I; Ord. No. 2011-01; Ord. No.
2017-04]
The Recreation Advisory Council ("RAC") shall consist of 10 members and
two alternates. The members shall be residents of the Township and shall be
appointed by the Township Committee. Eight members of the ten-member
RAC shall be comprised of one representative of the Board of each of
the following entities: the Board of Education, the Duncan Smith Theater,
the Holmdel Youth Activities Association, Holmdel Pop Warner, Holmdel
Half Century Club, Holmdel Stallions, Holmdel Soccer Club and Mavericks
Lacrosse. The other two members and the two alternates shall be membersat-
large who are not representatives of the Board of any of the eight entities
listed above. The terms of all members shall be for one year.
All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Any member who
attends less than two-thirds of the meetings for any calendar year, or
otherwise is deemed to have vacated his/her membership pursuant to law,
may be discharged from the RAC by resolution of the Township Committee
and in this event a successor shall be appointed to serve for his/her
unexpired term. There shall be no compensation to members for their
services.
9. Editor's Note: Former Section 2-61, Board of Recreation Commissioners, previously
codified herein and containing portions of §§ 18-1 — 18-8 was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 2003-31.
§ 2-60.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-61.3
1:85
§ 2-61.3. Election of Officers; Meetings. [Ord. No. 2003-31 § III]
The RAC shall hold its organizational meeting in the month of January
of each year at which meeting the members of the RAC shall annually
elect from their own number a chairperson and such other offices it deems
necessary. With the consent of the Township Committee, the RAC may adopt
bylaws and make amendments from time to time.
§ 2-61.4. Open Public Meetings Act Compliance. [Ord. No. 2003-31
§ III]
The RAC shall meet periodically, but no less than six times each year
to carry out its duties and for the consideration of matters affecting the
recreation programs of the Township. Even though the RAC is an advisory
body, it shall conduct its business in full compliance with the Open Public
Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 2-61.5. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2003-31 § III]
The RAC shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Director of Parks and
Recreation and to the Township Administrator as to matters affecting the
recreation programs of the Township and the RAC's recommendations shall
be forwarded to the Township Committee for its consideration and decision
as necessary. The scope of RAC's advisory capacity on matters affecting
recreation programs may include the following:
§ 2-62. SHADE TREE COMMITTEE.
§ 2-62.1. Establishment. [1976 Code § 23-1]
A Shade Tree Committee for the Township of Holmdel is hereby established.
a. Advise on matters involving recreation programs of the Township of
Holmdel, including recreational activities, events and facilities.
b. Advise on the planning, scheduling and maintenance of recreational
fields and facilities, including the usage of facilities as they relate to
recreational programs, activities and events.
c. Advise on the repair and maintenance of parks and playgrounds.
d. Provide recommendations for changes in use and design of recreational
facilities.
e. Research and investigate new trends in recreation programs and
activities.
f. Advise on the budget for recreational activities including fees and
expenses.
g. Recommend rules for the use of Holmdel Township parks and
recreational facilities.
§ 2-61.3 HOLMDEL § 2-62.2
1:86
§ 2-62.2. Membership; Term of Office; Vacancies. [1976 Code § 23-2;
Ord. No. 96-31]
The Shade Tree Committee shall consist of seven members who shall be
residents of the Township and who shall be appointed by the Township
Committee. The term of each member of the Shade Tree Committee shall
be for one year and members shall serve for their respective terms and
until their successors are appointed and qualified. The members of the
Shade Tree Committee shall be appointed at the organization meeting of the
Township Committee in January of each year. Vacancies in the membership
of the Shade Tree Committee, occurring for whatever cause, shall be
promptly filled by the Township Committee.
§ 2-62.3. Compensation. [1976 Code § 23-3]
The members of the Shade Tree Committee shall serve without
compensation.
§ 2-62.4. Officers; Meetings; Bylaws. [1976 Code § 23-4]
The members of the Shade Tree Committee shall choose from among its
members a Chairman and such other officers as it may deem necessary. The
Shade Tree Committee shall hold its organizational meeting in January of
each year and elect its officers at the organizational meeting. The Shade
Tree Committee may adopt bylaws and make amendments to such bylaws
from time to time as it may deem necessary.
§ 2-62.5. Duties. [1976 Code § 23-5]
The duties of the Shade Tree Committee shall be as follows:
a. To exercise, subject to review by the Township Committee, full and
exclusive control over the regulation, planting and care of shade and
ornamental trees and shrubbery now located or which may hereafter be
planted in any public highway, public park or public lands owned or
under the jurisdiction of the Township of Holmdel, including the
planting, trimming, spraying, care and protection thereof.
b. To move or require the removal of, subject to the approval of the
Township Committee, any tree or part thereof dangerous to public
safety.
c. To encourage the planting of shade and ornamental trees and
shrubbery throughout the Township of Holmdel on public and on
private property and to assist the various public boards, bodies and
agencies of the Township in their efforts with regard to the
encouragement of planting shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery.
d. To prepare, develop and distribute information with respect to the
growing of and care for shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery.
§ 2-62.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-62.5
1:87
§ 2-62.6. Appropriation of Funds. [1976 Code § 23-6]
There shall be appropriated in each annual budget of the Township such
sum or sums as may be determined by the Township Committee to be
necessary for the proper operation and functioning of the Shade Tree
Committee; and the Committee is authorized, subject to approval of the
Township Committee, to use and expend such funds for such purposes upon
the adoption of the annual budget. All payments for services rendered to the
Shade Tree Committee shall be on standard Township vouchers and shall be
approved by the Township Committee before payment.
§ 2-63. ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
§ 2-63.1. Commission Established; Appointment of Members; Term;
Vacancies. [1976 Code § 4-1]
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Township Committee by virtue
of N.J.S. 40:56A-1 et seq., there is hereby established an Environmental
Commission to be known as the "Environmental Commission of the
Township of Holmdel in the County of Monmouth," which shall consist of
seven members appointed by the Mayor, one of whom shall be a member of
the Holmdel Township Planning Board, and all of whom shall be residents
of the Township. The members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation except as hereinafter provided. The Mayor shall designate
one of the members to serve as Chairman and presiding officer of the
Commission. Members shall be appointed for terms of three years and
until the appointment and qualification of their successors. The Township
Committee may remove any member of the Commission for cause, on
written charges served upon the member and after a hearing thereon at
which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel.
A vacancy on the Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of
a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the
original appointment.
e. To provide for or administer treatment to or provide for the removal of
any trees situate upon private property which are believed to harbor a
disease or insects readily communicable to neighboring healthy trees in
the care of the Township, and to enter upon private property for that
purpose; provided, however, that the consent of the property owner is
first obtained in writing, and provided further that the suspected
condition is first confirmed by certificate issued by or on behalf of the
appropriate State or Federal agencies.
f. To make quarter-annual reports to the Township Committee setting
forth therein and detailing the activities and operations of the Shade
Tree Committee during the preceding three months.
§ 2-62.5 HOLMDEL § 2-63.2
1:88
§ 2-63.2. Powers and Duties. [1976 Code § 4-2]
The Environmental Commission shall have power to conduct research into
the use and possible use of the open land areas of the Township and may
coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes
and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans
and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary for its purposes.
The Commission shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately
owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order
to obtain information on the proper use of such areas, and may from time
to time recommend to the Planning Board and to the Township Committee
plans and programs for inclusion in the Municipal Master Plan and for the
development and use of such areas.
§ 2-63.3. Acquisition of Property. [1976 Code § 4-3]
The Environmental Commission may, subject to the approval of the
Township Committee, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name
of the Township by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any
of its purposes and shall administer the same for such purposes subject to
the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire
ownership or any lesser interest, development right, easement (including
conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right, including a
conveyance on conditions, or with limitations or reversions, as may be
necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of,
or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and
water areas in the Township.
§ 2-63.4. Records and Annual Report. [1976 Code § 4-4]
The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the Township Committee.
§ 2-63.5. Appropriation for Expenses. [1976 Code § 4-5]
The Township Committee may appropriate funds for the expenses incurred
by the Environmental Commission. The Commission may appoint such
clerks and other employees as it may require and as shall be within the
limits of funds appropriated to it.
§ 2-63.6. Alternate Members. [1976 Code § 4-7]
Two alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor. The alternates
shall be residents of the Township and shall serve without compensation.
The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that
the terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be for two years
for Alternate No. 1, and one year for Alternate No. 2, so that the term
of not more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year. A
vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the
appointing authority for the unexpired term only.
§ 2-63.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-63.6
1:89
An alternate member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in which
he/she has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest.
An alternate member may, after public hearing if he/she requests one, be
removed by the Township Committee for cause.
An alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member.
A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead
of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
§ 2-63.7. Environmental Officer. [1976 Code § 4-8; Ord. No. 82-17;
Ord. No. 2001-20 § I]
a. Position Established. The position of Environmental Officer and two
Assistant Environmental Officers are hereby established.
b. Duties. The duties and responsibilities of the Environmental Officer and
Assistant Environmental Officers shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
1. The planning, coordination and implementation of such
Environmental Education Programs as may be developed by the
Environmental Commission. This involves implementing
environmental policies and/or priorities as a liaison to the
Environmental Commission and the Planning Board.
2. Review of plans and Environmental Impact Statements submitted
by applicants before the Planning Board and Zoning Board and the
issuance of reports thereon to said agencies.
3. The conduct of on-site inspections of construction sites to insure
compliance with soil erosion and sediment control plans and all
other applicable environmental protection ordinances, rules and
regulations.
4. Interpretation and enforcement of State, County and local laws,
rules, regulations, and codes of an environmental nature including
regulations concerning the preservation of the natural
environment, soil erosion, sediment control, stormwater control
plans, stream encroachments and conservation easements, etc.
5. Investigation of environmental complaints and recommendation of
procedures for abatement of environmental problems.
6. Review and analysis of rules, regulations and laws pertaining to
environmental issues adopted by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy, the United States
Environmental Protection Agency and any other agency or
legislative body and the preparation of periodic summaries and
reports concerning said rules and regulations. These reports or
summaries are to be supplied to the Township Committee, the
§ 2-63.6 HOLMDEL § 2-63.7
1:90
§ 2-64. HUMAN RELATIONS COUNCIL.
§ 2-64.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 95-15 § 19-1]
There is hereby established a Human Relations Council within the Township
to prevent bias and promote understanding and tolerance among all
residents of Holmdel regardless of ethnicity, race, color, creed, national
origin, ancestry, age, disability, marital status, gender, or sexual orientation.
The Council may bring to the attention of various Township organizations
any above issues to be addressed.
§ 2-64.2. Membership; Terms. [Ord. No. 95-15 § 19-2]
The Human Relations Council shall consist of nine members. The Mayor
or his/her designee from the Township Committee shall be a member plus
eight members appointed by the Township Committee. All members shall
serve without compensation. Membership shall be made up from the
following categories:
Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment and Environmental
Commission.
7. Participation in municipal events such as fairs, and other festivities
where the public can be informed and educated about
environmental issues of concern to the Township.
8. Such other duties as may be assigned to the Environmental Officer
and Assistant Environmental Officers from time to time by the
Township Committee of the Township of Holmdel.
9. The activities of the Assistant Environmental Officers shall be
subject to direction and coordination of the Environmental Officer.
c. Appointment and Term of Officer. The Environmental Officer and up to
two Assistant Environmental Officers shall be appointed by the
Township Committee to a term of one year. There shall be no
compensation for the person so appointed.
a. Mayor or designee from Township Committee, one.
b. Law Enforcement, one member.
c. Educator, one member.
d. Members at Large, six members - to consist of persons reflecting the
ethnic diversity of the Township.
§ 2-63.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-64.2
1:91
§ 2-64.3. Officers. [Ord. No. 95-15 § 19-3]
The officers of the Council shall consist of a Chairperson, a Vice-
Chairperson selected by the Council, and a Secretary selected by the
Council. The Council shall submit to the Township Committee the name of
the person to serve as Chairman, whose appointment to that position shall
be subject to the advice and consent by affirmative vote of a majority of the
full membership of the Township Committee. Upon vacancy of the Chair,
his or her replacement shall be subject to the aforementioned advice and
consent of the Township Committee.
§ 2-64.4. Meetings. [Ord. No. 95-15 § 19-4]
The Council shall meet at least quarterly on date or dates to be designated
by it. Special meetings may be called at the discretion of the Chairperson or
the governing body member with not less than seven days' notice in writing
to all Council members.
§ 2-64.5. Vacancy. [Ord. No. 95-15 § 19-5]
A vacancy on the Human Relations Council occurring other than by
expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment of
the Township Committee.
§ 2-64.6. Removal for Cause. [Ord. No. 95-15 § 19-5; Ord. No. 95-25]
Any member of the Council may be removed during his or her membership
term for cause upon affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of
the Township Committee. Any member being considered for such removal
shall be advised of the proposed reasons for removal and given an
opportunity to address the Township Committee before the removal vote is
taken. Notwithstanding the procedure set forth above, the procedure for
removal of a member for failure to attend meetings shall be governed by
N.J.S. 40A:9-12.1g.
§ 2-64.7. Powers and Duties of the Council. [Ord. No. 95-15 § 19-7]
The Human Relations Council shall have the following powers and duties:
The members shall serve three-year terms; however, each member shall
initially serve until December 31 of the year of their initial appointment.
Thereafter, the term of the Mayor or designee from the Township Committee
shall expire each December 31. The Township Committee shall stagger the
terms of the remaining eight members so that the terms of two members
shall be for one year, the terms of three members shall be for two years
and the terms of three members shall be for three years. Subsequently, each
appointment of the eight general members shall be for a three year term.
a. To foster and promote good will, cooperation and conciliation among all
inhabitants of Holmdel Township, including facilitating the mediation of
cultural problems and incidents of bias.
§ 2-64.2 HOLMDEL § 2-64.7
1:92
§ 2-65. OPEN SPACE ADVISORY COUNCIL.
§ 2-65.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 99-22 § I]
There is hereby established an Open Space Advisory Council within the
Township to review and recommend parcels of land to be included in the
Open Space Plan, to recommend acquisition and preservation of lands
within the Township of Holmdel, and to undertake such other activities as
are authorized hereafter.
§ 2-65.2. Membership; Terms. [Ord. No. 99-22 § I; Ord. No. 2006-08
§ I]
The Open Space Advisory Council shall consist of nine members. The Mayor
or his/her designee from the Township Committee shall be a member plus
eight members appointed by the Township Committee. All members shall
serve without compensation. Membership shall be made up from the
following categories:
b. To conduct, facilitate, and cosponsor educational forums that will stress
sensitivity to diversity in ethnicity, race, creed, color, national origin,
ancestry, gender, age, marital status, and sexual orientation; to review
stereotyping or bias incidents that may occur.
c. To cooperate with other units of government or agencies concerned
with purposes similar to that of the Council.
d. To make recommendations to the Mayor and Township Committee for
the development of policies, procedures and programs that will aid in
the prevention and elimination of all types of discrimination based upon
race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status or sex.
e. To make an annual report to the Mayor and Township Committee of its
activities.
a. Mayor or designee from Township Committee, one member.
b. A member of the Township Committee other than the Mayor, one
member.
c. A member of the Planning Board, one member.
d. A member of the Environmental Commission, one member.
e. A member of the Recreation Advisory Committee, one member.
f. Residents of the Township, four members. ("Members at Large").
§ 2-64.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-65.2
1:93
§ 2-65.3. Officers. [Ord. No. 99-22 § I]
The officers of the Council shall consist of a Chairperson, a Vice-
Chairperson selected by the Council, and a Secretary selected by the
Council. The Township Committee shall appoint the Chairperson. Upon
vacancy of the Chair, his or her replacement shall be appointed by the
Township Committee.
§ 2-65.4. Meetings. [Ord. No. 99-22 § I]
The Council shall meet at least quarterly on date or dates to be designated
by it. Special meetings may be called at the discretion of the Chairperson
or the Mayor with not less than seven days' notice, in writing, to all Council
members.
§ 2-65.5. Vacancy. [Ord. No. 99-22 § I]
A vacancy on the Council occurring other than by expiration of a term shall
be filled for the unexpired term by appointment of the Township Committee.
§ 2-65.6. Removal for Cause. [Ord. No. 99-22 § I]
Any member of the Council may be removed during his/her membership
term for cause upon affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of
the Township Committee. Any member being considered for such removal
shall be advised of the proposed reasons for removal and given an
opportunity to address the Township Committee before the removal vote
is taken. Such notice shall be given not less than 30 days prior to the
date scheduled for the appearance before the Township Committee.
Notwithstanding the procedure set forth above, removal of a member for
failure to attend meetings shall be governed by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-12.1g.
§ 2-65.7. Powers and Duties of the Council. [Ord. No. 99-22 § I]
The Council shall have the following advisory powers and duties:
The terms of the members in categories a–e shall expire each December 31. The
Members at Large shall serve staggered three-year terms; however, initially the
term of one member shall expire December 31, 2000, the term of one member
shall expire December 31, 2001, and the terms of two members shall expire
December 31, 2002. Subsequently, each appointment of a Member at Large
shall be for a three-year term.
a. Prepare a report to the Township Committee, setting forth the Council's
recommendation of which parcels of property within the Township
should be acquired in fee and/or those parcels of property within the
Township from which the Township should acquire development rights.
b. Devise a plan and methodology for ranking properties recommended
for acquisition and/or property from which development rights should
be acquired.
§ 2-65.2 HOLMDEL § 2-65.7
1:94
§ 2-65.8. Alternate Members. [Ord. No. 2004-33 § 1]
Two alternate members shall be appointed. The alternates shall be residents
of the Township and shall serve without compensation. The terms of the
alternate members shall be for two years except that the terms of the
alternate members first appointed shall be for two years for Alternate No. 1
and one year for Alternate No. 2.
An alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member.
§ 2-66. CIVIC RESPONSIBILITY ACT.
§ 2-66.1. Intent and Purpose. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I]
The purpose of this section is to foster the openness of government and
provide citizens with information concerning the various appointed
municipal positions which exist within the Township of Holmdel. The section
further provides for a procedure whereby a citizen can indicate his/her
desire to serve in a particular appointed position. Finally, the section
provides for a notification process so that those citizens who have indicated
a desire to hold a position will be notified when that position is under
consideration for appointment and will ultimately be notified as to the
action that was taken.
§ 2-66.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I]
The following terms as used in this section shall have the meaning set forth
below unless the context within which the term is used clearly provides for
a different meaning:
c. Based upon the methodology adopted in paragraph b above, produce a
prioritized list of properties to recommend for acquisition and/or
properties from which development rights should be acquired. The
initial prioritized list shall be filed with the Township Committee no
later than September 30, 2000.
d. On or before September 30 of each year update the prioritized list.
e. Advise the Township Committee regarding the availability of funds for
acquisition of such property and aid the Township in applying for such
funds.
f. Recommend employment of professional advisors, including property
appraisers, all subject to approval of the Township Committee.
g. Foster and promote the preservation of open space within the
Township.
h. Help create and disseminate information promoting open space
preservation.
§ 2-65.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-66.2
1:95
APPOINTED MUNICIPAL POSITION — Shall mean any appointed position
within the Township government which is created either by statutory law
or by ordinance or resolution. Examples of such positions are Municipal
Historian, member of any board, commission, agency, council or committee
of the municipality.
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the official or body which by virtue
of statutory law or by ordinance or resolution is given the authority to
appoint a person to hold a particular appointed municipal position.
§ 2-66.3. Registry of Appointed Municipal Positions. [Ord. No.
2005-15 § I]
The Municipal Clerk or designee shall cause a register of appointed
municipal positions to be prepared and maintained. Such register shall be
made available on the Township's website and at Town Hall and shall set
forth at least the following:
§ 2-66.4. Vacancies. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I; Ord. No. 2006-09 § I]
The Municipal Clerk or designee shall maintain a current updated listing
of all existing vacancies for each appointed municipal position within the
municipality. Such list shall be made available at the Municipal Clerk or
designee's office and shall, in addition, be posted on a bulletin board
maintained for public announcements in Town Hall. Further a press release
shall be prepared by the Municipal Clerk and forwarded to the local papers
and the vacancy shall be posted on the Township web site.
§ 2-66.5. Filling Vacancies. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I; Ord. No. 2006-09
§ I]
Unless essential for the proper functioning and/or carrying on of business of
the local agency upon which the vacancy has occurred, a vacancy shall not
be filled for a period of 30 days from its posting in order to allow interested
persons time to submit applications as provided in subsection 2-66.6 below.
a. Title of each appointed municipal position.
b. Brief description of the position's powers and duties.
c. Any special credentials or qualifications required to hold the position.
d. The length of the term for the position.
e. The name of the person currently holding the position, the expiration
date of his or her term, and the number of vacant seats on the board or
commission.
f. The dates/times and frequency of any meetings which the holder of the
position must attend.
§ 2-66.2 HOLMDEL § 2-66.6
1:96
§ 2-66.6. Applications. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I]
The Municipal Clerk or designee shall maintain an application form to be
completed by any person interested in serving in an appointed municipal
position. Such application shall, at a minimum, contain the following
information:
§ 2-66.7. Filing Applications. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I]
Any person interested in serving in an appointed municipal position may
file an application for such position with the Municipal Clerk or designee.
Such application(s) may be filed at any time, whether or not the appointed
municipal position sought is vacant. A person may withdraw his or her
application at any time.
§ 2-66.8. Maintaining Applications. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I]
The Municipal Clerk or designee shall maintain all filed applications in a file
or binder, segregated for each board or commission. Applications shall be
considered void after two years unless renewed by the applicant.
§ 2-66.9. Filling Voluntary Municipal Positions. [Ord. No. 2005-15
§ I]
Prior to filling any appointed municipal position, the appropriate appointing
authority shall review each application filed for that position. Each person
having submitted an application for an appointed municipal position under
consideration to be filled shall be notified of said vacancy. The appointing
authority shall conduct such review, investigation and/or interviews, as the
appointing authority deems necessary or advisable, in its discretion. After
a decision is reached to fill a vacant appointed municipal position, all those
who had submitted an application for that position shall be notified of the
appointing decision.
§ 2-67. through §2-75. (RESERVED)
a. Name.
b. Address.
c. Telephone number.
d. E-mail address.
e. Appointed municipal position sought.
f. Qualifications/experience for position.
g. Signature.
§ 2-66.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-67
1:97

ARTICLE XI
Municipal Court
§ 2-76. MUNICIPAL COURT FOR THE TOWNSHIP OF HOLMDEL.
§ 2-76.1. Court Established. [1976 Code § 13-1]
A Municipal Court for the Township is hereby established pursuant to the
provisions of New Jersey Statutes 2A:8-1 to 4.
§ 2-76.2. Name of Court. [1976 Code § 13-2]
The name of said Court shall be "Municipal Court of the Township of
Holmdel, in the County of Monmouth."
§ 2-76.3. Seal. [1976 Code § 13-3]
The Municipal Court shall have a Seal which shall bear the impress of the
name of the Court.
§ 2-76.4. Judge of the Municipal Court; Appointment and Term of
Office. [1976 Code § 13-14]
There shall be a Judge of the Municipal Court, who shall be appointed by
the Township Committee, and the Judge shall serve for a period of three
years from the date of his/her appointment and until his/her successor is
appointed and qualifies.
§ 2-76.5. Annual Salary of Judge. [1976 Code § 13-5]
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall receive an annual salary which shall
be paid in the same manner as the salaries of other municipal officers
are paid, and the salary shall be in lieu of all fees, costs and any other
allowances whatsoever.
§ 2-76.6. Functions, Powers, Duties and Jurisdiction of the Court.
[1976 Code § 13-6]
The Municipal Court and the Judge thereof shall have, possess and exercise
all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred by the provisions
of N.J.S. 2A:8-12 and 2A:8-19 to 2A:8-41, and any other applicable laws.
§ 2-76.7. Court Employees. [1976 Code § 13-7; Ord. No. 16-80; Ord.
No. 90-26; New]
a. There shall be a Court Administrator who shall be appointed by the
Township Committee subject to civil service rules and regulations.
b. There shall be a Deputy Court Administrator of the Municipal Court
appointed by the Township Committee subject to civil service rules and
regulations.
§ 2-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-76.7
1:99
§ 2-76.8. Time of Court. [1976 Code § 13-8; Ord. No. 16-80; New]
The Municipal Court shall be held in the Holmdel Township Hall on Monday
and Wednesday of each week from 9:00 a.m. until the calendar is completed
and at such other times as the business of the Court may require, subject to
the rules applicable to Municipal Courts.
§ 2-76.9. Duties of the Deputy Court Administrator. [New]
The Deputy Court Administrator shall assist the Municipal Court
Administrator in supervising and/or performing the specialized clerical
work in the operation of the Holmdel Municipal Court, together with serving
as the Violations or Assistant Violations Clerk, if necessary.
§ 2-76.10. (Reserved)10
c. There may be a Violations Clerk and Assistant Violations Clerk of the
Municipal Court appointed by the Township Committee subject to civil
service rules and regulations.
d. There may be such other clerical personnel as required, appointed by
the Township Committee subject to civil service rules and regulations.
e. Compensation of the Municipal Court employees shall be as provided in
the Salary Ordinance.
10.Editor's Note: Former subsection 2-76.10, Fee for Representation by the Municipal Public
Defender, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 97-26, was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 97-34. See Section 2-20 for Municipal Court
Public Defender.
§ 2-76.7 HOLMDEL § 2-76.10
1:100
ARTICLE XII
Code of Ethics
§ 2-77. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CODE OF ETHICS.
§ 2-77.1. Code of Ethics Established. [1976 Code § 7-1; Ord. No.
91-17]
There is hereby established a Code of Ethics to regulate the conduct and
activities of the officials and employees of the Township of Holmdel.
§ 2-77.2. Purpose and Authority. [1976 Code § 7-2; Ord. No. 91-17]
§ 2-77.3. Definitions. [1976 Code § 7-3; Ord. No. 91-17]
a. It is the purpose of this section to provide a method of assuring that
standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure requirements for
officers and employees of the Township shall be clear, consistent,
uniform in their application, enforceable, and to provide those officers
or employees with advice and information concerning possible conflicts
of interest which might arise in the conduct of their public duties.
b. It is the further purpose of this section to implement the provisions of
the Local Government Ethics Law, N.J.S. 40A:9-22.1 et seq.
c. This section enacted under the authority of the Local Government
Ethics Law, N.J.S. 40A:9-22.1 et seq. and under the further authority
granted to the Township under the provisions of Title 40 and Title 40A
of the New Jersey Statutes.
a. Except as otherwise herein further defined, the definitions established
in the Local Government Ethics Law shall control.
b. For the purpose of this section, "officer" shall mean any person whether
compensated or not, whether part-time or full-time who is one of the
following:
1. Member of the Township Committee.
2. Township Administrator.
3. Public Works Director.
4. Recreation Director.
5. Chief Financial Officer/Assistant Chief Financial Officer.
6. Chief of Police.
7. Township Assessor.
8. Township Clerk/Deputy Clerk.
9. Township Attorney.
§ 2-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-77.3
1:101
§ 2-77.4. Ethical Standards. [1976 Code § 7-4; Ord. No. 91-17]
In addition to the provisions of N.J.S. 40A:9-22.5, officers and employees
of the Township shall comply with the following additional ethical standard
provisions:
10. Township Engineer.
11. Township Planning Consultant.
12. Township Auditor.
13. Township Prosecutor.
14. Planning Board member.
15. Planning Board Attorney.
16. Planning Board Engineer.
17. Zoning Board of Adjustment member.
18. Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney.
19. Zoning Board of Adjustment Engineer.
20. Local Assistance Board member.
21. Director of Public Assistance/Welfare Director.
22. Fire Hydrant Examiner.
23. Tax Collector/Assistant Tax Collector.
24. Zoning Officer.
25. Construction Code Official/Subcode Officials.
26. Board of Health member.
27. Health Officer/Sanitarian.
28. Board of Recreation Commission members.
29. Environmental Commission members.
30. Any other person who is a managerial executive or confidential
employee of a local government agency, as defined in Section 3 of
the "New Jersey Employer/Employee Relations Act," N.J.S.
34:13A-1, but shall not mean any employee of the school district or
member of the School Board.
c. For the purpose of this section, "officer or employee" shall mean an
officer or employee of the Township of Holmdel or of any agency under
the authority of or appointed by the Township of Holmdel.
§ 2-77.3 HOLMDEL § 2-77.4
1:102
§ 2-77.5. Financial Disclosure Statements. [1976 Code § 7-5; Ord.
No. 91-17]
Officers of the Township of Holmdel shall annually file a financial disclosure
statement on the forms approved by the Local Finance Board of the
Department of Community Affairs and shall include the information
required under N.J.S. 40A:9-22.6.
§ 2-77.6. Complaints. [1976 Code § 7-6; Ord. No. 91-17]
Any person may file a signed written complaint alleging a violation of this
section or of the Local Government Ethics Law, N.J.S. 40A:9-22.1 et seq.
with the Local Finance Board of the Department of Community Affairs. Such
complaint shall be processed and a determination made concerning same
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S. 40A:9-22.9.
§ 2-77.7. Advisory Opinions. [1976 Code § 7-7; Ord. No. 91-17]
Any officer or employee of the Township may request and obtain from
the Local Finance Board an advisory opinion as to whether any proposed
activity or conduct would in its opinion constitute a violation of the
provisions of this Act pursuant to the procedures established in N.J.S.
40A:9-22.8.
§ 2-77.8. Reimbursement of Costs. [1976 Code § 7-8; Ord. No.
91-17]
In the event any complaint shall be filed against a Township Official or
employee for an act or omission arising out of or in the course of his/her
duties that are regulated under this section or the Local Government Ethics
Law, the Township, upon a not guilty determination, shall reimburse the
Official/employee for any and all costs of defending such action including
reasonable counsel fees and expenses, together with costs of appeal, if
any. The Official/employee shall have the sole discretion in hiring of any
such attorney for such defense, subject, however, to prior approval by the
Township as to the rate and charges for same.
§ 2-77.9. Penalty. [1976 Code § 7-12; Ord. No. 91-17]
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of the terms of
this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$500 which penalty may be collected in a summary proceeding pursuant to
"The Penalty Enforcement Law" (N.J.S. 40A:9-22.10).
a. No officer or employee shall, without proper legal authorization
therefor, disclose any confidential information concerning the property,
government, personnel or affairs of the Township; nor shall be or she
use such confidential information to advance the financial or other
private interests of himself/herself or others.
§ 2-77.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-78
1:103
§ 2-78. PROHIBITION OF POLITICAL FUNDRAISING ON OR BY
USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
§ 2-78.1. Short Title. [Ord. No. 2000-32 § I]
This section shall be known as "An Ordinance Prohibiting Political
Fundraising on or by Use of Public Property.
§ 2-78.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2000-32 § I]
As a result of the laws of the State of New Jersey not presently banning
solicitation or acceptance of political contributions by public office holders
and employees while in any room or building occupied in the discharge
of public duties, the Township Committee finds that solicitation and
acceptance of political contributions in rooms and buildings occupied in
the discharge of official Township business undermines the efficiency of
government by taking officials and employees away from the people's
business, and leads to the appearance of improper influence of political
contributions on government functions. The Township Committee further
finds that prohibiting this solicitation and acceptance of political
contributions in rooms and buildings occupied in the discharge of official
duties will address these harms and leave open ample alternative venues
for political fundraising.
As a result of the laws of the State of New Jersey not presently recognizing
the misuse of public personal property for political fundraising as a distinct
offense, the Township Committee finds and determines the Township's
interests in an independent and efficient government workforce and a
government that is undermined by neither the fact nor appearance of
improper influence of political contributions on government decisions
require the prohibition of political fundraising in rooms or buildings
occupied in the discharge of official duties or through the use of public
personal property.
§ 2-78.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2000-32 § I]
a. CANDIDATE – Shall mean (1) any individual seeking election to a public
office of the Federal, State, County or municipal government, or school
district or political party, and (2) any individual who shall have been
elected or failed of election to any such office.
b. POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION – Shall mean any loans and transfers of
money or other things of value to any candidate, elected official, or
representative of any political organization, or other commitments or
assumptions of liability to make any such transfer. Political
contributions shall be deemed to have been made upon the date when
such commitment is made or liability assumed.
c. POLITICAL ORGANIZATION – Shall mean any two or more persons
acting jointly, or any corporation, partnership or other incorporated or
unincorporated association which is organized to, or does, aid or
§ 2-78 HOLMDEL § 2-78.3
1:104
§ 2-78.4. General Regulations. [Ord. No. 2000-32 § I]
promote the nomination, election or defeat of any candidate or
candidates for Federal, State, County, municipal or school board office
or political party office. Political organization includes, but is not
limited to, organizations defined in N.J.S.A. 19:44A-3 as political
committee, joint candidates committee, continuing political committee,
political party committee, candidate committee, or legislative
leadership committee.
d. ROOM OR BUILDING OCCUPIED IN THE DISCHARGE OF OFFICIAL
TOWNSHIP BUSINESS – Shall mean such room or rooms in a Township
building, or the Township building in its entirety, if such room or rooms,
or the entire building is being used for carrying on and facilitating the
day to day operations and functions of the Township government.
("official administration of the Township government"). This term shall
not be deemed to include those portions of public facilities used for
recreation and other activities not part of the official administration of
the Township government, nor such portions of public facilities when
made available to any group for nongovernmental use, as a meeting
facility.
e. TOWNSHIP OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE AND APPOINTEE – Shall mean any
person holding elective municipal office or holding an appointed
position in the Township government, or in any agency, commission,
board or office thereof, whether the position is full-time or part-time,
compensated or uncompensated; and any employee of the Township
government or of any Township agency, commission, board, or office
thereof, whether the position is full time or part time.
f. SOLICIT – Shall mean to ask for, by oral or written communication, a
contribution as that term is defined herein.
g. PUBLIC PERSONAL PROPERTY – Shall mean all personal property
owned, leased, or controlled by the Township government, including
but not limited to vehicles, phones, fax machines, computers, stationery
including municipal letterhead, postage, and other office equipment.
a. Prohibition Against Soliciting or Accepting Political Contribution in
Rooms or Buildings Occupied in the Discharge of Public Duties. No
Township official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit to pay, or
receive payment of or a commitment to pay any political contribution
for any candidate, elected official or political organization while in any
room or building occupied in the discharge of official Township
business. This section shall include solicitation or acceptance of
political contributions made over a private cell phone or by use of a
private computer, if the person soliciting or accepting the political
contribution, or using the cell phone or computer for purposes of
soliciting or accepting the political contribution, is in any room or
building occupied in the discharge of official Township business.
§ 2-78.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-78.4
1:105
§ 2-78.5. Penalties for Violation. [Ord. No. 2000-32 § I; Ord. No.
2006-07 § II]
Violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable by the penalties
stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 2-79. RESTRICTION ON AWARD OF CONTRACTS.
§ 2-79.1. Purpose.11 [Ord. No. 2013-03]
Throughout the State of New Jersey, in many counties and municipalities,
there exists an endless variety of "pay-to-play" ordinances regulating the
amount of political contributions which can be made by those seeking to
contract with the local entity. Subsequent to the enactment of the majority
of these ordinances, the State enacted a Statute governing the amount of
political contributions which can be made to local entities. The enactment
of the State Statute created a double layer of regulation. There exists much
confusion by those seeking to contract with local entities because of the
lack of uniformity in local ordinances and because of the overriding State
Statute governing the same subject matter. The confusion has resulted
in multiple inquiries being made of Township officials to determine what
unique peculiarities may be present in the Township's "Pay-to-Play"
Ordinance. The Governor has called for uniform Statewide pay-to-play
reform to create an understandable, level playing field. Therefore, it is the
purpose of this section to conform to the Township's "pay-to-play" regulation
to the State Statute.
§ 2-79.2. Contributions Made Prior to the Effective Date. [Ord. No.
2003-16 § II]
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a professional business entity to any municipal
candidate for Township Committee, or to any municipal or County party
committee, shall be deemed a violation of this section, if that contribution
b. Prohibition Against Use of Public Property for Political Fundraising. No
Township official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit to pay or
receive payment of or a commitment to pay any political contribution
for any candidate, elected official or political organization, when
utilizing public personal property.
c. Exception. In the event public facilities are made available to any group
for nongovernmental use, as a meeting facility, this prohibition shall not
be deemed to prevent fundraising of any sort among members of such
groups during the time such groups have reserved exclusive use of the
meeting facility.
11.Editor's Note: Former subsection 2-79.1, Prohibition on Awarding Public Contracts to
Certain Contributors, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance
Nos. 2003-16 and 2005-04, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2013-03.
§ 2-78.4 HOLMDEL § 2-79.2
1:106
was made by the professional business entity prior to the effective date of
this section.12
§ 2-79.3. Pay-to-Play. [Ord. No. 2003-16; Ord. No. 2013-03]
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, any business entities
exempt from the provisions of the Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq.) contracting with the Township of Holmdel shall be subject
to the provisions of the Statewide pay-to-play law (N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.4 et
seq.).
§ 2-79.4. Return of Excess Contributions. [Ord. No. 2003-16 § IV;
Ord. No. 2013-03]
A business entity or Township candidate or officeholder or municipal or
County party committee may cure a violation of subsection 2-79.3 of this
section, if, within 30 days after the general election, the business entity
notifies the Township Committee, in writing, and seeks and receives
reimbursement of a contribution from the Township candidate or municipal
or County political party.
§ 2-79.5. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2003-16 § V]
§ 2-79A. DEVELOPER DISCLOSURE.
§ 2-79A.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2007-07 § I]
As used in this section:
a. All Township of Holmdel professional service agreements shall provide
that it shall be a breach of the terms of the government contract for a
professional entity as defined in subsection 2-79.1c to violate
subsection 2-79.1d.
b. Any professional business entity as defined in subsection 2-79.1c who
knowingly fails to reveal a contribution made in violation of subsection
2-79.1d of this section, or directs that a contribution made through
another individual to circumvent this section, shall be disqualified from
eligibility for future Township contracts for a period of four calendar
years from the date of the violation.
a. CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION – Shall mean "Holmdel campaign
contribution," "Holmdel political committee contribution," "County
campaign contribution," "Holmdel major developer contribution," and/
or "Pass-through campaign contribution" as defined herein, but shall
not include other political contributions.
b. CONTRIBUTION – Shall mean any contribution, whether in the form of
money, free service or pledge, including without limitation any in-kind
12.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2003-16, codified herein, was adopted July 28, 2003.
§ 2-79.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-79A.1
1:107
contributions, purchases of tickets, advertisements or the like, directly
or indirectly. The term "directly or indirectly" as used herein shall
further mean and include any campaign contributions made through
intermediary or third-parties.
c. COUNTY CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION – Shall mean any contribution,
as defined herein, to any individual candidate for County office, any
County political organization, club, affiliate or County campaign
committee or fund within the County of Monmouth.
d. MAJOR DEVELOPER – Shall mean:
1. Any individual or entity who makes any application to the
Township's Planning Board for:
(a) Approval of any major subdivision as defined in Chapter 30,
Development Regulations; or
(b) Major site plan approval as defined in Chapter 30,
Development Regulations; or
(c) Any application to the Township's Zoning Board of Adjustment
for any use variance approval.
2. The term "major developer" shall also include anyone:
(a) Who owns or is the contract purchaser of any property that is
the subject of any such application; or
(b) Who engages directly or indirectly in negotiations with the
Township relating to a request for a change in zoning for a
particular property; or
(c) Who owns or is the contract purchaser of, any property that is
the subject of, or would directly be affected by a proposed
change in zoning, or of the Master Plan; and
3. In the case of a major developer who is an individual, the term
"major developer" shall also include:
(a) His or her spouse; and
(b) Any child living at home; and
(c) Any entities of which any of them are principals holding a 10%
or greater interest;
4. In the case of a major developer that is an entity, the term "major
developer" shall also include:
(a) Each and every principal of the said entity who has an
ownership interest in excess of 10% in the entity, or in any
parent or subsidiary of the entity; and
(b) Their spouses, if any; and
§ 2-79A.1 HOLMDEL § 2-79A.1
1:108
§ 2-79A.2. Requirement that Major Developers Disclose Certain
Campaign Contributions. [Ord. No. 2007-07 § I]
(c) Any child living at home.
e. ENTITY – Shall mean any corporation, professional corporation, joint
venture, general or limited partnership, trust or limited liability
company, or subsidiary or parent of any of the foregoing.
f. HOLMDEL MAJOR DEVELOPER CONTRIBUTION – Shall mean any
Holmdel Township campaign contribution or Holmdel Township
political committee contribution made by a major developer during the
preceding three years, and any other contribution made during the
three years proceeding the land use application filing date by the major
developer to any other election fund, political organization or
committee or political action committee listed on the Political
Contribution Disclosure Statement form prepared in accordance with
subsection 2-79A.2c.
g. HOLMDEL CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION – Shall mean any contribution,
as defined herein, to any campaign committee or election fund of any
candidate for, or holder of the office of Holmdel Township Committee.
h. HOLMDEL TOWNSHIP POLITICAL COMMITTEE CONTRIBUTION –
Shall mean any contribution, as defined herein, to any Holmdel
Township political club or political committee.
i. MUNICIPAL LAND USE AGENCY – Shall mean the Township of
Holmdel Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment.
j. POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION DISCLOSURE STATEMENT – Shall mean
a list on a form provided by the Holmdel Township Clerk specifying the
amount, date, and the recipient of any and all Holmdel Township major
developer political contributions as defined herein.
k. PASS-THROUGH CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS – Shall mean any
contribution, as defined herein, made to any campaign committee or
election fund of any candidate for, or holder of the office of, Holmdel
Township Committee, or to any Holmdel political club or political
committee that is received from the election fund or other campaign
account, of any elected official or candidate of any officer other than
Holmdel Township Committee or from any local, County or State party
committee or organization, or any political action committee or fund of
any kind, whether within or without Holmdel Township or Monmouth
County.
l. TOWNSHIP – Shall refer to the Township of Holmdel.
a. Each major developer shall prepare, execute and file with the Township
Clerk at least 10 days prior to a public hearing before a municipal land
use agency on a development matter relating to a major developer, a
Political Contribution Disclosure Statement, for all major developers
§ 2-79A.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-79A.2
1:109
§ 2-79A.3. Penalties for Violations. [Ord. No. 2007-07 § I]
Any person or entity, who, being subject to the provisions of this section,
fails to file or amend a Political Contribution Disclosure Statement, or
who files a false or materially inaccurate Political Contribution Disclosure
Statement, shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 for a first offense and
a fine of not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,000 for each subsequent
offense within two years of conviction of the first offense. Each day of having
neglected to file or amend an existing filing or having failed to correct a
false or materially inaccurate filing shall be deemed a separate offense for
which additional citations may be issued.
§ 2-79B. PROHIBITION ON HOLDING DUAL OFFICES/POSITIONS.
[Ord. No. 2007-19 § I]
involved in the development matter that is pending before the
municipal land use agency.
b. Any major developer required to comply with this section shall amend
its Political Contribution Disclosure Statement as necessary to reflect
political contributions made after the initial filing date of the statement,
up to the effective date of approval or denial of the Land Use
Application, so that the information contained therein is at all times
accurate and current.
c. The Political Contribution Disclosure Statement form prepared by the
Township Clerk in accordance with this section shall require the listing
of all campaign contributions of major developers during the three-year
period preceding the filing date of the application.
a. It shall be prohibited for any person holding the office of Township
Committee member in the Township to hold any other elected office in
the County, State or Federal Government simultaneously with their
holding Township office.
b. It shall be prohibited for any person employed by the Township to
simultaneously hold the elective office of Township Committee member
while so employed by the Township in another position.
c. The provisions set forth above shall be prospective only such that the
prohibitions set forth herein shall not apply to any currently elected
Township Committee member for the remainder of his/her current term
of office.
§ 2-79A.2 HOLMDEL § 2-79B
1:110
ARTICLE XIII
Liability and Property Insurance13
§ 2-80. (RESERVED)
13.Editor's Note: The Township of Holmdel joined the Mercer County Municipal Joint
Insurance Fund by Resolution and is obligated by the terms of the Bylaws.
§ 2-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-80
1:111

ARTICLE XIV
Policies and Procedures
§ 2-81. PAYMENT OF PROPERTY TAXES REQUIRED PRIOR TO
ISSUANCE OF A LICENSE OR PERMIT.
§ 2-81.1. Payment of Delinquent Taxes Required. [1976 Code § 70-1;
Ord. No. 90-28; Ord. No. 90-42]
Any applicant for the issuance or renewal of any license or permit issued by
the Township, or requiring the approval of the Township, shall be required,
if he, she or it is the owner thereof, to pay any delinquent property taxes
or assessments on the property where the business or activity for which
the license or permit is sought or where the business or activity is to be
conducted. Payment of any delinquent property taxes or assessments shall
be made only by certified check, cash, or bank check.
§ 2-81.2. Notice to Owner; Revocation. [1976 Code § 70-2; Ord. No.
90-28; Ord. No. 90-42]
The Township shall, upon notice in writing to the licensee who is an owner
of the property upon which the licensed business or activity is conducted,
revoke or suspend the license or permit, when the licensee has failed to
pay the taxes due on the property for at least three consecutive quarters.
Notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his, her or its last known address
as shown on the application for the license or permit sought to be revoked
or suspended. Notice shall be considered effective upon mailing by certified
mail, return receipt requested. Upon payment of the delinquent taxes or
assessments, the license or permit shall be restored.
§ 2-81.3. Responsibility of Owner. [1976 Code § 70-3; Ord. No.
90-28]
Prior to the issuance of licenses and permits by the various departments
or agencies of the Township, the owner-applicant shall ascertain from the
office of the Tax Collector that taxes and assessments have been paid to a
current basis for the property on which the activity or business in question
is to take place. In the event that property taxes or assessments are unpaid
to a current basis, no permits or licenses shall be issued until all such
payments have been made by the property owner.
§ 2-81.4. Applicability. [1976 Code § 70-4; Ord. No. 90-28]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to or include any alcoholic
beverage license or permit issued pursuant to the "Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act", N.J.S. 33:1-1 et seq. The provisions of this section shall apply
to all other permits and licenses issued by, or requiring approval of, the
Township, including but not limited to:
a. Permits required pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code;
§ 2-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-81.4
1:113
§ 2-81.5. Penalty. [1976 Code § 70-8; Ord. No. 90-28; New]
Any person found guilty in the Municipal Court of a violation of the terms of
this section shall upon conviction be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter
1, Section 1-5.
§ 2-82. PAYMENT OF TAXES REQUIRED PRIOR TO PAYMENT OF
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS.
§ 2-82.1. Findings. [1976 Code § 17-1; Ord. No. 86-20]
Whereas, N.J.S. 17:36-8 et seq. permits a municipality to adopt a regulation
providing that no insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance
policies in New Jersey shall pay any claims in excess of $2,500 unless
and until the insured person submits an Official Certificate of Search for
Municipal Liens pursuant to N.J.S. 54:5-12 certifying that all taxes,
assessments or other municipal liens or charges levied and assessed and
due and payable against the property have been paid or the municipality
submits a certified copy of a resolution indicating that it has entered into an
agreement with the owner of any fire damaged property allowing any lien
to be paid in installments if the Township Committee is satisfied that the
claim for fire damage is to be used to restore or improve the fire damaged
property; and the Township Committee deems it in the best interest of the
citizens of the Township to implement this regulation.
§ 2-82.2. Title. [1976 Code § 17-2; Ord. No. 86-20]
This section shall be known by its short form title as the Holmdel Township
Fire Insurance Regulation.
b. Certificates of Occupancy;
c. Soil removal or excavation permits;
d. Food establishment licenses;
e. Water and sewer connection permits;
f. Demolition permits;
g. Business sale licenses;
h. Auction sale licenses;
i. Taxi owner licenses;
j. Limousine and livery licenses;
k. Game of chance licenses.
§ 2-81.4 HOLMDEL § 2-82.3
1:114
§ 2-82.3. Purpose. [1976 Code § 17-3; Ord. No. 86-20]
The purpose of this section is to insure the payment of taxes, assessments
or other municipal liens due and payable on real property in the Township
when the property is covered by fire insurance in excess of $2,500 and is
damaged or destroyed by fire.
§ 2-82.4. Official Certificate of Search Required. [1976 Code § 17-4;
Ord. No. 86-20; New]
§ 2-82.5. Charges Appearing on Certificate Must Be Paid. [1976
Code § 17-5; Ord. No. 86-20; New]
In the event that there are taxes or assessments, demolition charges or
other municipal liens or charges due and payable appearing on the official
certificate of search referred to above, no payment shall be made to a
claimant by any insurance company of any claim in excess of $2,500 for fire
damages on any real property located within the Township pursuant to any
fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the adoption of this section
and after the filing of same with the State Commissioner of Insurance until
such time as all of the taxes and assessments and municipal liens or charges
due and payable appearing on the official certificate of search shall have
been paid either by the owner of such real property or by the insurance
company or the municipality submits to the insurance company a copy of a
resolution authorizing payment in installments as set forth hereinafter.
§ 2-82.6. Resolution From Township. [1976 Code § 17-6; Ord. No.
86-20]
Unless a resolution is received by an insurance company writing fire
insurance policies in the Township authorizing payment in installments,
such insurance company is hereby authorized and required prior to the
payment of any claims for fire damage in excess of $2,500 to pay to the
Township of Holmdel the amount of the liens appearing on the official
certificate, or in any alteration thereof pursuant to subsection 2-31.4,
paragraph b, and such other recorded liens or related charges as may
be certified to the insurance company in accordance with N.J.S. 17:36-10;
a. No insurer issuing fire insurance policies in the State of New Jersey
shall pay any claims for fire damage in the Township unless or until the
insured person submits an Official Certificate of Search for Municipal
Liens pursuant to N.J.S. 54:5-12 certifying that all taxes, assessments,
demolition charges or other municipal liens or charges levied and
assessed and due and payable against the property have been paid or
the Township submits a certified copy of a resolution agreeing to
installment payments as set forth hereinafter.
b. The official certificate of search may be altered by the bonded official
responsible for preparing such certificates, in order to correct any
errors or omissions or to add any Township liens or related charges due
and payable subsequent to the preparation of the official certificate.
§ 2-82.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-82.6
1:115
provided however, that if an appeal is taken on the amount of the lien or
charge, other than an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property
pursuant to R.S. N.J.S. 54:3.21. The insurance company shall withhold
75% of the full amount of the lien or charge being contested, pending
termination of all proceedings, at which time such moneys and all interest
occurring thereon at a rate paid on interest bearing accounts in banking
institutions or savings and loan associations in the State, shall be disbursed
in accordance with the final order or judgment of the Court.
§ 2-82.7. Agreement Between Township and Owner. [1976 Code
§ 17-7; Ord. No. 86-20]
The Township Committee may enter into an agreement with the owner of
any fire damaged property within the Township to pay in full all delinquent
taxes, assessments or other municipal liens by installments pursuant to
N.J.S. 54:5-19 provided that the Township Committee is satisfied that the
claim for fire damages is to be used to restore or improve the fire damaged
property. The agreement shall be authorized by resolution and any
insurance company receiving a certified copy of such a Resolution of
Agreement from the Township Committee is authorized to make full
payment to the insured person.
§ 2-82.8. When Insurance Company Not Obligated. [1976 Code
§ 17-8; Ord. No. 86-20]
Except as provided in the case of appeals under subsection 2-82.6, nothing
in this section shall be construed to obligate the insurance company for any
liens not appearing on the official certificate or in any certified changes
therein submitted to the insurance company by the bonded official.
§ 2-82.9. Priority of Township Claim. [1976 Code § 17-9; Ord. No.
86-20]
The Township's claim made in accordance with the provisions of this section
shall be paramount to any other claims on the process of the fire insurance
policy, except the claim of a holder of a mortgage on the fire damaged
property, where the fire insurance policy at the time of the loss listed the
mortgagee as a named insured, in which event the claim of the mortgagee
to the proceeds shall be paramount to the municipal lien only to the extent
of the amount due and payable to the mortgagee under the mortgage
contract.
§ 2-82.10. Copy to State Commissioner. [1976 Code § 17-10; Ord.
No. 86-20]
A certified copy of this section shall be forwarded by the Township Clerk
to the State Commissioner of insurance who shall notify each carrier of
insurance within the State of New Jersey of the adoption of this section.
§ 2-82.6 HOLMDEL § 2-82.11
1:116
§ 2-82.11. Penalty. [1976 Code § 17-14; Ord. No. 86-20]
Any person found guilty in the Municipal Court of the Township of Holmdel
of a violation of the terms of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty
stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 2-83. PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
§ 2-83.1. Submission of Detailed Certified Statement. [1976 Code
§ 35A-1]
Any person claiming payment from the Township shall first submit a
detailed statement of the items or demand necessitating such claim to the
Purchasing Agent, specifying particularly how the bill or demand is made
up, and a certification of the party claiming payment that it is correct. No
bill, claim or demand shall be considered for payment unless the voucher
has attached to it or includes a certification of a department head, or
other municipal official responsible for certain functions, or of his/her duly
designated representative, having personal knowledge of the facts that the
goods have been received by or the services rendered to the Township, and
that those services or goods are consistent with any existing contract or
purchase order. The Chief Financial Officer shall have the duty to audit,
warrant and make recommendations on all claims and bills.
§ 2-83.2. Duties of Township Administrator and Chief Financial
Officer. [1976 Code § 35A-2; New]
The list of bills or claims duly certified shall be presented to the Township
Administrator and Chief Financial Officer for inclusion in the agenda of the
next immediate formal meeting of the Governing Body, and it shall be the
duty of the Clerk to examine all bills or claims submitted for payment in
order to ascertain if proper administrative procedures have been followed.
All claims or bills to be considered by the Governing Body shall be listed
systematically without preference, and the list shall be made available to
every member of the Governing Body at least three full days prior to formal
action by that Body.
§ 2-83.3. Consideration by Governing Body; Approval or Rejection.
[1976 Code § 35A-3; New]
Claims shall be considered by the Governing Body which shall approve the
same, except that the Governing Body may reject any claim presented to
it, stating the reason for such rejection. Any disapproved claim shall be
referred back to the Chief Financial Officer with such instructions as the
Governing Body may give at the time of disapproval.
§ 2-83.4. Record of Claims; Availability for Public Inspection. [1976
Code § 35A-4; New]
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk to record all claims in the
official minutes or through an appropriate claims register indicating that
§ 2-82.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-83.4
1:117
the Governing Body has by formal action approved the same with
appropriate record as to any claims disapproved or rejected. All records
pertaining to approved and disapproved bills or claims shall be available for
public inspection.
§ 2-83.5. Payment Procedure. [1976 Code § 35A-5; New]
After the Clerk has certified that the claims have been approved, he/she
shall turn the same over to the Chief Financial Officer, who shall forthwith
prepare the necessary checks for the payment thereof. The annual
resolution shall be adopted designating signatories. After preparing checks
for the payment of claims, the Chief Financial Officer shall record them in
proper books of account and thereafter mail the checks to the claimants.
§ 2-84. PURCHASING.
§ 2-84.1. Purchasing Agent. [Ord. No. 2003-06; Ord. No. 2008-10
§ I]
a. Creation. There is hereby created the office of Purchasing Agent of the
Township pursuant to the authority granted by N.J.S.A. 40A:11-9.
b. Appointment. The Purchasing Agent shall be appointed annually by the
Township Committee.
c. Qualifications. The Purchasing Agent shall have the qualifications of a
Qualified Purchasing Agent pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:34-5.1 or, unless
otherwise mandated by State statute, shall be undertaking such action
as is reasonable to acquire such qualifications expeditiously.
d. Duties and Powers. The powers and duties of the Purchasing Agent
shall be consistent with those set by the New Jersey Department of
Personnel and the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
To the extent not inconsistent with the foregoing, the Purchasing Agent
shall have the authority to prepare public advertising for bids and to
receive bids for the purchase of materials and supplies on behalf of the
Township in accordance with the provisions of the governing statutes
and sound purchasing practices and make awards of contracts in the
name of the Township for the various agencies, boards, departments
and other offices of the Township. Prior approval of the Township
Committee shall be obtained for individual purchases exceeding
$3,500. Purchases in excess of the existing Local Public Contract Law
bid threshold N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4 shall be made according to the statutes
and shall require approval of the Township Committee. For purchases
under the bid threshold, but in excess of the amount specified in N.J.S.A.
40A:11-6.1a, at least two quotations as to the cost or price, whenever
practicable, shall be solicited from manufacturers, firms or dealers. The
contract shall be made with and awarded to the lowest responsible
bidder or quoter when the kind and quality of the items are equal.
§ 2-83.4 HOLMDEL § 2-84.2
1:118
§ 2-84.2. Emergency Purchasing. [Ord. No. 2003-06]
The Municipal Administrator or Mayor is hereby authorized to make
emergency purchases of goods and/or services in the event an emergency
affecting public health, safety and welfare exists and requires immediate
delivery of the goods or performance of the services. Any emergency
purchase is subject to the following:
§ 2-85. through §2-99. (RESERVED)
a. Written requisition must be filed with the Municipal Administrator or
Mayor by the department head wherein the emergency has occurred,
together with a certified statement as to the nature of the emergency
and the factors which compel immediate action.
b. The Municipal Administrator or Mayor shall review the requisition and
certification and determine if a sufficient emergency exists to invoke
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6 and that the matter cannot await the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Governing Body. If so satisfied,
the Municipal Administrator or Mayor is authorized to contract on
behalf of the Township for the emergency purchase, provided sufficient
budgetary appropriation is available after consultation with the
Township's Chief Financial Officer or Treasurer, who shall orally certify
as to the availability of funds.
c. The Township's Chief Financial Officer or Treasurer, as soon as
practicable after giving the oral certification to the Municipal
Administrator or Mayor, shall file a written certification of availability of
funds with the office of the Municipal Administrator.
d. If time allows, before undertaking the emergency purchase hereunder,
the Municipal Administrator or Mayor shall consult with the Governing
Body, by any means available, to apprise it of the proposed course of
action. Immediately after contracting for the emergency purchase, the
Township Administrator shall provide a written memorandum to each
member of the Governing Body, explaining the circumstances and
action taken.
e. Notwithstanding the procedure set forth above, in all cases where the
emergency purchase would require the expenditure in excess of
$100,000, the Municipal Administrator or Mayor shall not commit the
municipality to contract until the members of the Governing Body have
been individually polled by any means available and at least three
members thereof shall indicate agreement that the emergency
purchase is necessary.
§ 2-84.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-85
1:119

ARTICLE XV
Maps and Documents
§ 2-100. TOPOGRAPHIC MAPS.
§ 2-100.1. Purpose. [1976 Code § 52-1; Ord. No. 4-79]
The Township Committee makes the following findings and determinations:
§ 2-100.2. Custody. [1976 Code § 52-2; Ord. No. 4-79]
The Township Engineer is hereby charged with the custody, safekeeping,
care, control and use of the hereinabove-specified maps.
§ 2-100.3. Storage and Use Regulations. [1976 Code § 52-3; Ord.
No. 4-79]
The following regulations are established to govern the storage and use of
the maps and shall be enforced by the Township Engineer:
a. The topographic maps of the Township prepared by Midlantic Aerial
Surveyors, Inc., constitute valuable and irreplaceable property of the
Township.
b. These maps constitute a valuable and irreplaceable record of the
physical condition of the surface of the land in the Township at the time
of the flight photograph.
c. Careful supervision of the use and custody of the foregoing is necessary
to prevent the loss of or damage to the foregoing maps which have been
prepared in reproducible form on Mylar.
d. The use of these maps to make copies by tracing on tracing paper and
the unsupervised handling of these maps will accelerate the physical
deterioration of the same and will expose the same to an unreasonable
risk of damage, deterioration and destruction.
e. The Township has, in the office of the Township Engineer, facilities to
make prompt accurate copies, prints and sepias of these maps by
reproduction methods which, if done by supervised personnel, will not
expose these maps at any unreasonable risk of loss, damage,
deterioration or destruction.
f. The cost of the preparation of the topographical maps has been paid out
of general taxation, and the cost of supervision of the care and custody
of the same and the cost of making prints and reproducible copies such
as sepias thereof will be paid out of general taxation. Accordingly it is
right and proper that fees for such prints and copies shall be
established to recover these past and future costs, in advance, with the
value of the information and data that such copies have been based on
an acreage basis.
§ 2-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-100.3
1:121
a. The maps shall be kept in locked fireproof files.
b. No one shall take any map out of the office of the Township Engineer.
c. No one shall make any tracing or other hand copy by tracing methods of
any such map.
d. During normal office hours, on request, the Township Engineer or his/
her designee may expose to view in the office of the Township Engineer
any single sheet of the aforesaid maps without releasing or
surrendering physical possession of the same without charge or other
fee.
e. During normal business hours, on written request and on receipt of
proof that the proper fees, herein established, have been paid to the
Chief Financial Officer, the Township Engineer or his/her designee shall
reproduce and deliver the requested copies (which may be either prints
or reproducible copies such as sepias) of any of the foregoing maps and
demand and receive a receipt therefor which shall contain over the
recipient's signature the following statement: "The undersigned, for
and in consideration of the above-specified reproducible copies of
topographic maps, at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, property of the
Township of Holmdel, in the County of Monmouth, agrees that he/she
will not produce, sell, assign or transfer copies thereof, that he/she will
not sell, transfer or assign the above-specified reproducible copy and
that he/she will not permit, suffer or allow the sale, assignment or
transfer of the above-specified reproducible copy nor the sale,
assignment or transfer of copies thereof during the next 10 years,
except that he/she may transfer or assign to a subsequent purchaser a
copy of any portion of a map which he has purchased or legally
received, which depicts property he/she owns and has contracted to sell
to such person(s)."
1. In addition the Township Engineer shall require that each print or
sepia delivered as aforesaid shall bear the recipient's signature
under the following statement: "The undersigned, for and in
consideration of the receipt of this copy of a topographic map of a
part of the Township of Holmdel agrees that the undersigned will
not sell, assign or transfer this copy, will not sell, assign or transfer
a reproduction of this copy and will not suffer, allow or permit the
sale, assignment or transfer thereof of any copy or reproduction
thereof, except that he/she may transfer or assign to a subsequent
purchaser a copy of any portion of a map which he/she has
purchased or legally received, which depicts property he/she owns
and has contracted to sell to such person(s)."
2. In addition, each print or sepia delivered as aforesaid shall bear or
be clearly stamped with the following: "The sale, assignment or
transfer of this map or of any portion of this map and the sale,
assignment or transfer of any copy or reproduction of any portions
of this map is prohibited; and any such action will, upon conviction
§ 2-100.3 HOLMDEL § 2-100.3
1:122
§ 2-100.4. Sale, Assignment or Transfer Prohibited. [1976 Code
§ 52-4; Ord. No. 4-79]
No person who obtains a print or sepia or other form of reproducible copy
of any sheet or portion of a sheet of the aforesaid topographic map, to a
scale of one inch equals 100 feet, shall sell, assign or transfer or permit,
suffer or allow the sale, assignment or transfer of such reproduction or copy
thereof or the sale, assignment or transfer of any portion thereof or the sale,
assignment or transfer of any reproduction or copy of a portion thereof.
§ 2-100.5. Application Forms. [1976 Code § 52-5; Ord. No. 4-79]
All applications for copies of the aforesaid maps shall be made to the
Township Engineer, on application forms to be prepared by the Township
Engineer, agreeable to the terms of this section.
§ 2-100.6. Fees. [1976 Code § 52-6; Ord. No. 4-79]
in the Holmdel Township Municipal Court, subject the individual to
the penalties established by law, except that he/she may transfer
or assign to a subsequent purchaser a copy of any portion of a
map which he/she has purchased or legally received, which depicts
property he/she owns and has contracted to sell to such person(s)."
a. All fees herein established shall, after computation by the Township
Engineer or his/her designee, be paid to the office of the Chief Financial
Officer and the office of the Chief Financial Officer is authorized to
accept and deposit the same and to issue receipts therefor on such
forms as shall be acceptable for presentation to the Township Engineer
prior to the delivery of the requested prints or copies of such maps or of
any portion thereof.
b. The following fees are established for prints, sepias or other similar
reproducible copies of the aforesaid topographic maps; and such fees,
computed by the Township Engineer or his/her designee in accordance
with the schedule of rates below, shall be charged, paid and collected
before delivery of any such copy. When the fee schedule bases the rate
on the acreage, the acreage shall be determined by the Township
Engineer or his/her designee and noted on the application form and on
the print or sepia. The acreage shall be rounded to the nearest whole
acre. When the determination of the fee involves the application of
more than one rate per acre, the rates per acre shall be applied in the
order hereinbelow set forth. When successive applications are made by
the same applicant, each application shall be treated as a new
application for the purpose of computing the fee. All fees shall be
computed in accordance with the following schedule of rates:
c. Schedule of Rates. Topographic maps to a scale of one inch equals 100
feet with a contour interval of 2.0 feet meeting National Map
Standards.
§ 2-100.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-100.6
1:123
§ 2-100.7. Loan of Maps. [1976 Code § 52-7; Ord. No. 4-79]
It is in the public interest and permissible to lend, without charge, copies
of the maps to agencies of the Federal, State or County governments
whenever there will be a direct benefit to the Township of Holmdel. The
following procedures shall govern the free loan of the maps to other public
agencies:
§ 2-100.8. Disclaimer. [1976 Code § 52-6; Ord. No. 4-79]
§ 2-100.9. Violations and Penalties. [1976 Code § 52-9]
Any person who knowingly violates any part of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
1. Rate per acre.
(a) $7 per acre for the first 50 acres [$350].
(b) $6 per acre for the second 50 acres [$300].
(c) $5 per acre for each additional acre.
2. There shall be a minimum charge of $100 for each map or portion
thereof and a charge of $720 per sheet.
a. A written application shall be made on a form to be prepared by the
Township Engineer. The application shall be filed with the Township
Engineer, who shall forward the same to the Township Committee,
together with his/her recommendations with respect thereto.
b. The Township Committee shall review each application and the
recommendation of the Township Engineer and will, by resolution,
authorize the Township Engineer to issue the requested maps.
a. The Township does not certify the accuracy of the topographical
mapping prepared from the aerial photographs taken and does not
ensure the accuracy of same nor the acceptance of same by the
Township or any of its authorities or agencies.
b. In addition to a duly executed application form, the Township Engineer
shall require each applicant to execute a statement indicating his/her
acknowledgement of the necessity of a field check to determine the
accuracy of the mapping.
c. In addition, each print or sepia delivered as aforesaid shall bear or be
clearly stamped with the following: "accuracy of this map subject to
field check by recipient."
§ 2-100.6 HOLMDEL § 2-100.9
1:124
ARTICLE XVI
Contracts and Agreements
§ 2-101. MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT.
§ 2-101.1. Adoption of Mutual Aid Agreement. [1976 Code § 16B-1;
Ord. No. 92-16]
This section is created pursuant to the authority of N.J.S. 40:48-1(6) and
N.J.S. 40A:14-156.1 and is adopted as a reciprocal agreement with all
municipalities participating in the County-Wide Mutual Aid Compact.
Pursuant to this agreement, the Township shall render assistance to any
participating municipality by providing members of the Holmdel Police
Department, upon request, to help preserve the public peace and order.
§ 2-101.2. Injuries; Responsibility for Costs. [1976 Code § 16B-2;
Ord. No. 92-16]
In the event that a member of the Holmdel Police Department is injured
while rendering assistance to a participating municipality, the municipality
providing assistance shall be primarily responsible for any costs resulting
from the injury. Nothing in this section however, shall prevent or bar the
municipality providing assistance from seeking indemnification from the
municipality receiving assistance.
§ 2-102. INTERLOCAL SERVICES AGREEMENT.
§ 2-102.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 94-39]
The Township of Holmdel is a member of the Bayshore Task Force consisting
of the following municipalities: Township of Aberdeen, Borough of Atlantic
Highlands, Township of Hazlet, Borough of Highlands, Township of
Holmdel, Borough of Keansburg, Borough of Keyport, Borough of Matawan,
Township of Middletown and Borough of Union Beach.
The Bayshore Task Force has requested that each of the member
municipalities enter into an Interlocal Services Agreement to comply with
the provisions of N.J.S. 40:48-1(6) and N.J.S. 40A:156.1; and the Chief of
Police of the Township of Holmdel has recommended that it is in the best
interest of the Township to enter such an agreement; and a copy of the
proposed agreement is attached hereto and made a part hereof.
§ 2-102.2. Approval of Agreement. [Ord. No. 94-39]
The Interlocal Service Agreement between the Township of Holmdel and the
Bayshore Task Force which is attached hereto and made a part hereof is
approved.
§ 2-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-102.3
1:125
§ 2-102.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 94-39]
The Chief of Police of the Township of Holmdel is authorized and directed
to execute the aforesaid Interlocal Services Agreement with the Bayshore
Task Force on behalf of the Township of Holmdel.
§ 2-103. POLICE MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT.
§ 2-103.1. Preamble. [Ord. No. 99-28 § I; Ord. No. 2015-02]
The Monmouth County Prosecutor's Office and the Monmouth County
Chiefs of Police Association have created the Monmouth County Mutual
Aid Agreement ("Agreement") to provide a mechanism to participation in
a program designed to provide supplemental police protection for all
municipalities joining in such Agreement; and N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1
provides for reciprocal ordinances to enter into the Agreement.
The provisions and procedures for providing mutual police assistance are
set forth in the Agreement.
The Governing Body finds that participation in the Agreement will benefit
the citizens of the municipality.
§ 2-103.2. Execution of Agreement. [Ord. No. 99-28 § I; Ord. No.
2015-02]
The Mayor and Township Clerk are hereby authorized to execute the Mutual
Aid Agreement as proposed by the Monmouth County Chiefs of Police
Association.
§ 2-103.3. Implementation. [Ord. No. 99-28 § I; Ord. No. 2015-02]
It hereby authorizes the Police Chief to be the Township's representative for
carrying out the terms of the Agreement.
§ 2-103.4. Acceptance of Guidelines. [Ord. No. 99-28 § I; Ord. No.
2015-02]
It hereby accepts the guidelines set forth in the Agreement.
§ 2-103.5. Duration of Agreement. [Ord. No. 99-28 § I; Ord. No.
2015-02]
The Agreement authorized hereby is separate and distinct from any other
Mutual Aid Agreements previously entered into and shall remain in effect
until the Agreement is dissolved or until an Ordinance is adopted by the
Township Committee withdrawing from the Agreement.
§ 2-104. ADOPT A ROAD LITTER/MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.
§ 2-102.3 HOLMDEL § 2-104.1
1:126
§ 2-104.1. Establishment of Program. [Ord. No. 2007-21 § I]
The Township is establishing an anti-litter program known as the "Adopt a
Road Program" in which individuals, community groups, and/or businesses
adopt a Township road, or portion thereof, near their community, in order
to help clean up their environment and enlist community involvement. The
function of the Program is to clean the Township's road of litter and to
improve the general environment.
§ 2-104.2. Execution of Individual Agreements. [Ord. No. 2007-21
§ I]
Applicants who wish to participate in the Adopt a Road Program will be
required to enter into an Agreement with the Township in which the
applicant adopts a section of road or portion thereof, as set forth in the
Agreement, for a minimum period of two years, subject to the Township's
right of termination of the Agreement.
§ 2-104.3. Implementation. [Ord. No. 2007-21 § I]
The Township Committee authorizes the Mayor and Township Clerk to
execute various Adopt A Road Litter/Maintenance Agreements with
applicants who so desire to participate in the Program.
§ 2-104.4. Acceptance of Guidelines. [Ord. No. 2007-21 § I]
In entering into individual Adopt A Road Agreements with the Township,
applicants will be subject to various conditions, as set forth in the
Agreements, concerning safety guidelines and responsibilities pertaining to
the work to be performed.
§ 2-104.5. Termination of Agreement. [Ord. No. 2007-21 § I]
The Township will have the right, in its sole discretion and its convenience,
to terminate any of the Adopt A Road Agreements at any time by providing
written notice to the particular applicant. After the initial two-year period of
an Agreement, the applicant will have the right to terminate the Agreement
upon written notice to the Township.
§ 2-104.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-104.5
1:127

ARTICLE XVII
Public Records
§ 2-105. PUBLIC RECORDS.
§ 2-105.1. Inspection of Public Records. [Ord. No. 2002-13 § I]
Inspection of public records shall be as prescribed by the Open Public
Records Act, N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., as amended and as implemented by
State regulation.
§ 2-105.2. Extraordinary Copying Charge. [Ord. No. 2002-13 § I]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5c, whenever the nature, format, manner of
collation, or volume of a public record embodied in the form of printed
matter to be inspected, examined, or copied pursuant to the above
referenced statute is such that the record cannot be reproduced by ordinary
document copying equipment in ordinary business size or involves an
extraordinary expenditure of time and effort to accommodate the request, in
addition to the actual cost of duplicating the record, a special service charge
of $20 per hour for the time that a municipal employee is required to devote
to the request shall be charged. An estimated total charge shall be given to
the requestor prior to preparing the copies so that the requestor shall have
the opportunity to review and object to the charge. If during the copying
effort, it appears that the estimate given to the requestor will be exceeded
by more than 25%, a revised estimate shall be given and opportunity to
review and object provided before the copying effort is continued.
§ 2-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-105.2
1:129
Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
§ 3-1. NOISE.14
§ 3-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 97-31 § I]
The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this section have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean any site preparation, assembly, erection,
repair, alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or
structures.
DEMOLITION — Shall mean any dismantling, destruction or removal of
buildings, structures, or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Shall mean any work or action necessary to deliver
essential public services including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas,
electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities,
removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way, dredging navigational
waterways, or abating life-threatening conditions.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Shall mean either a single pressure peak or a single
burst (multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean any vehicle that is propelled other than by
human or animal power on land.
MUFFLER — Shall mean a properly functioning sound dissipative device or
system for abating the sound of escaping gasses on equipment where such
a device is part of the normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTI-DWELLING UNIT BUILDING — Shall mean any building-comprising
two or more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Shall mean any distinct parcel of land that is
used for more than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not
limited to:
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
1.
14.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1976 Code §§ 54-1 — 54-4.
§ 2-105.2 HOLMDEL § 3-1.1
1:130
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — Shall mean an employee of: (1) a local,
County or regional health agency which is certified pursuant to the County
Environmental Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise
enforcement activities; or (2) a municipality with a Department approved
noise control ordinance and the employee has received noise enforcement
training and is currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must
be acting within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized
to issue a summons in order to be considered a noise control officer.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Shall mean any sound that can be detected by a
person using his or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the
sound source under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound
amplification or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass
component of the music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The
noise control officer need not determine the title, specific words, or the
artist performing the song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road,
highway, sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by
a non-governmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road,
highway, sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by
a governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Shall mean any real property or structures thereon that
are owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Shall mean either (a) the imaginary line including
its vertical extension that separates one parcel of real property from
another; (b) the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that
is part of a multi-dwelling unit building; or (c) on a multi-use property,
the interface between the two portions of the property on which different
categories of activity are being performed (e.g., if the multi-use property is
a building which is residential upstairs and commercial downstairs, then the
real property line would be the interface between the residential area and
the commercial area).
WEEKDAY — Shall mean any day that is not a Federal holiday, and
beginning on Monday at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at
6:00 p.m.
WEEKENDS — Shall mean beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on
the following Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 3-1.2. Applicability. [Ord. No. 97-31 § I]
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
A building which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property located above, behind, below or adjacent.
2.
§ 3-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1.2
1:131
§ 3-1.3. Declaration of Findings and Policy. [Ord. No. 97-31 § I]
Whereas excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare,
safety, and the quality of life; and, whereas a substantial body of science and
technology exists by which excessive sound may be substantially abated;
and, whereas the people have a right to, and should be ensured of, an
environment free from excessive sound,
Now therefore, it is the policy of the Township to prevent excessive sound
that may jeopardize the health, welfare, or safety of the citizens or degrade
the quality of life.
This section shall apply to the control of sound originating from sources
within the Township.
a. This model noise ordinance applies to sound from the following
property categories:
1. Industrial facilities;
2. Commercial facilities;
3. Public service facilities;
4. Community service facilities;
5. Residential properties;
6. Multi-use properties;
7. Public and private rights-of-way;
8. Public spaces; and
9. Multi-dwelling unit buildings.
b. This model noise ordinance applies to sound received at the following
property categories:
1. Commercial facilities;
2. Public service facilities;
3. Community service facilities;
4. Residential properties;
5. Multi-use properties; and
6. Multi-dwelling unit buildings.
c. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.3, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
§ 3-1.2 HOLMDEL § 3-1.4
1:132
§ 3-1.4. Noise Control Officers. [Ord. No. 97-31 § I]
§ 3-1.5. Maximum Permissible Sound Levels.15 [Ord. No. 97-31 § 1]
a. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by noise control officers.
A person shall be qualified to be a noise control officer if the person
meets the criteria set forth in the definition above and completes, at a
frequency specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.11, a noise
certification and recertification course which are offered by the
Department of Environmental Sciences of Cook College, Rutgers, the
State University of New Jersey or any other noise certification or recertification
course which is offered by an accredited university and
approved by the Department.
b. Sound measurements made by a noise control officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in
subsection 3-1.5b and c of this regulation and with the definition of
"real property line" as contained herein.
c. Noise control officers shall have the power to:
1. Coordinate the noise control activities of all departments in the
Township and cooperate with all other public bodies and agencies
to the extent practicable;
2. Review the actions of the Township and advise of the effect, if any,
of such actions on noise control;
3. Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or
approval by other departments or boards, for compliance with this
section; and
4. Investigate and pursue possible violations of this section for sound
levels which equal or exceed the sound levels set forth in Tables I
and II, when measured at a receiving property located within the
designated jurisdiction of the noise control officer, in accordance
with subsection 3-1.7 below.
5. Cooperate with noise control officers of adjacent municipalities in
enforcing one another's municipal noise ordinances.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property listed in subsection 3-1.2a
above in such a manner as to create a sound level that equals or
exceeds the sound level limits set forth in Tables I and II when
measured at or within the real property line of any of the receiving
properties listed in Tables I and II, except as specified in paragraph b
below.
15.Editor's Note: The tables referred to herein may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 3-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1.5
1:133
§ 3-1.6. Restricted Use and Activities.16 [Ord. No. 97-31 § I; Ord. No.
98-9 § I; Ord. No. 99-33 § I]
b. When measuring total sound or residual sound within a multi-use
property, or within a residential unit when the property line between it
and the source property is a common wall, all exterior doors and
windows shall be closed and the measurements shall be taken in the
center of the room most affected by the noise. Residual sound shall be
measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2. When measuring
total sound or residual sound, all sound sources within the dwelling unit
must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo). Measurements shall not be
taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways, closets
and bathrooms.
c. Indoor measurements shall only be taken if the sound source is on or
within the same property as the receiving property, as in the case of a
multi-use property (e.g., sound generated within a commercial unit of a
multi-use property building and received within a residential unit of the
same building) or multi-dwelling unit building. In addition, indoor
measurements shall be taken if the property line between the receiving
property and the source property is a common wall, such as in a multidwelling
unit building. The allowable sound level standards for indoors
are as shown in Tables I and II.
d. Impulsive Sound. Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., impulsive sound which occurs less than four times in any hour
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Impulsive sound which repeats
four or more times in any hour shall be measured as impulsive sound
and shall meet the requirements as shown in Table I.
a. 1. Except as provided in paragraph b below, the provisions of this
ordinance shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C.
7:29-1.4.
2. Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound
level limits set forth in Tables I and II, except as provided for in
paragraph b below.
b. Notwithstanding the provisions of Tables I and II, the following
standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth
below:
1. Noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping and
yard maintenance equipment shall not be operated between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet
the applicable limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
16.Editor's Note: The tables referred to herein may be found as an attachment to this chapter
§ 3-1.5 HOLMDEL § 3-1.6
1:134
to noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping
and yard maintenance equipment;
2. Commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment, excluding emergency work, shall not be
operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a
residential property line when operated on commercial or
industrial property, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends or federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the
limits set forth in Tables I and II. In addition, commercial or
industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance
equipment, excluding emergency work, utilized on commercial or
industrial property shall meet the limits set forth in Tables I and II
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
to commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment;
3. Construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work,
shall not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
on weekends and federal holidays, unless such activities can meet
the limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized equipment used
in construction and demolition activity shall be operated with a
muffler. At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do
not apply to construction and demolition activities;
4. Motorized snowblowers, snow throwers, and lawn equipment with
attached snow plows shall be operated at all times with a muffler.
At all times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply;
5. An exterior burglar alarm of a building or motor vehicle must be
activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates its
operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for impulsive sound after it has been activated. At all
times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply;
6. Personal or commercial music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that it is plainly
audible at a residential property line between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m.;
7. Personal vehicular music amplification equipment shall not be
operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of
50 feet in any direction from the operator between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;
8. Self-contained, portable, hand-held music or sound amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated on a public space or
public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
§ 3-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1.6
1:135
§ 3-1.7. Engine Braking. [Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-1717]
§ 3-1.8. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 97-31 § I; Ord. No. 99-33 § I]
distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m., sound from such equipment shall not be plainly
audible by any person other than the operator;
9. Sound levels exceeding the limits set forth in Table I shall be
prohibited between residential units within the same multidwelling
unit building. Measurements shall be taken indoors as per
subsection 3-1.5b and c.
a. "Engine braking," as used herein, shall mean any mechanical exhaust
device designed to aid in the braking, decompression, or deceleration of
any motor vehicle that results in loud or unusual noise from such
vehicle and shall include engine compression brakes.
b. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to use or operate
or cause to be used or operated, at any time and on any county or
municipal roadway within the Township of Holmdel, any mechanical
exhaust or decompression device defined as "engine braking."
c. Exceptions. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the
practice of engine braking:
1. Where conventional vehicle brakes have failed resulting in an
emergency making necessary the use of engine braking; or
2. By emergency equipment being used for emergency purposes.
d. Posting of Signs. The Township is hereby authorized to post signs at
reasonable locations within the Township indicating the prohibition of
engine braking.
e. Jurisdiction. Authority to enforce this subsection is granted to any law
enforcement officer employed by the Township Police Department, the
Township Code Enforcement Officer, or the Township Noise Control
Officer.
f. Violations and Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 3, Subsection 3-1.8, Enforcement.
a. Violation of any provision of this section shall be cause for an
enforcement document to be issued to the violator by the noise control
officer according to procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.6. The
recipient of an enforcement document shall be entitled to a hearing in
Municipal Court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 3-1.7, Enforcement, as § 3-1.8.
§ 3-1.6 HOLMDEL § 3-1.8
1:136
§ 3-2. ABANDONED OR INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
§ 3-2.1. Definitions. [1976 Code § 75-1]
As used in this section:
PROPERTY — Shall mean any real property within the Township which is
not a "street" or "highway."
STREET OR HIGHWAY — Shall mean the entire width between the
boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — Shall mean a machine propelled by power other than human
power, designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads,
runners or slides and transport "persons" or property or pull machinery,
and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, truck, trailer, motorcycle,
tractor, buggy and wagon.
§ 3-2.2. Abandonment or Appearance of Abandonment Prohibited.
[1976 Code § 75-2]
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the Township and no person
shall leave any vehicle at any place within the Township for such time and
under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle to reasonably appear to
have been abandoned.
§ 3-2.3. Leaving of Junked or Inoperable Vehicles on Streets. [1976
Code § 75-3]
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or
junked vehicle on any street or highway within the Township.
§ 3-2.4. Keeping of Junked or Inoperable Vehicles Restricted. [1976
Code § 75-4]
No person in charge or control of any property within the Township,
whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any
partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle
to remain on such property longer than 72 hours; and no person shall
leave any such vehicle on any property within the Township for a longer
time than 72 hours; except that this section shall not apply to a vehicle in
b. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to
a civil penalty for each offense of not more than $3,000. If the violation
is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall
constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
c. No provision of this section shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, right of private enforcement, or legal
remedy therefrom, of any person for injury or damage arising from any
violation of this section or from other law.
§ 3-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2.4
1:137
an enclosed building; a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise
operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of
such business enterprise; or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or
depository maintained in a lawful manner by the Township.
§ 3-2.5. Impounding of Vehicles; Redemption or Disposal; Costs and
Penalties. [1976 Code § 75-5]
The Chief of Police or any designated member of the Police Department
is hereby authorized to take possession of, remove or have removed any
vehicle left at any place within the Township which reasonably appears
to be in violation of this section or is lost, stolen or unclaimed. Upon
taking possession or impounding of any vehicle, the Police Department
shall immediately notify the owner or owners of the vehicle of the place at
which such vehicle was taken and is being held. The owner shall arrange to
reclaim the vehicle and shall be responsible to pay all reasonable costs of
removal and storage of the vehicle and any fine or penalty and court costs
assessed against him/her for the violation which gave rise to the seizure
or taking possession of such vehicle. In the event the Police Department
shall be unable to locate the owner or owners of the vehicle or in the event
the vehicle is not reclaimed by the owner or owners, the Police Department
is hereby authorized to dispose of the vehicle in accordance with N.J.S.
39:10A-1 et seq. or other applicable laws.
§ 3-2.6. Violations and Penalties. [New]
Penalties for a violation of this section shall be in accordance with N.J.S.
39:4-56.5.
§ 3-3. SNOWMOBILES, TRAIL BIKES AND MOTOR-DRIVEN OFFROAD
VEHICLES.
§ 3-3.1. Legislative Findings. [1976 Code § 76-1; Ord. No. 88-43]
The Township Committee enacts this section pursuant to its police powers
under N.J.S. 40:48-2 and applicable provisions of N.J.S. 39:1-1 et seq. in
order to improve standards of safety as well as to minimize the impact of
the operation of certain motorized vehicles on residents of the Township,
the public at large and the environment since:
§ 3-3.2. Certain Vehicles Restricted. [1976 Code § 76-2; § 76-5; Ord.
No. 88-43; New]
a. Such operation has been in a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary
or unusual noise so as to disturb or interfere with the peace, quiet and
tranquility of others.
b. Such operation has been in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so
as to endanger or be likely to endanger the safety of others or the
property of others.
§ 3-2.4 HOLMDEL § 3-3.2
1:138
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized vehicle
including motorcycles, snowmobiles, minibikes, trail bikes, motor
scooters, go-carts, motorized skateboards, all-terrain vehicles (ATV's)
and dune buggies or any other vehicle in the class known as
recreational vehicles when same are used primarily for transportation
of the driver on any property or under any circumstances described in
paragraph b.
b. It shall be unlawful to operate any off-road vehicle anywhere within the
Township under the following circumstances:
1. On the private property of another person or party without the
express written permission to do so by the owner or occupant of the
property; the written permission shall be exhibited to Police
Officers on request.
2. On any private property that does not comply with the following
requirements:
(a) Consists of a minimum size of three acres;
(b) Has at least one off-street parking space for each motor driven
vehicle to be used on the property;
(c) Provides a minimum 100-foot buffer area measured from the
property line of the property to be used, which buffer shall
consist of landscaping, hedges, evergreen trees and other
sound-absorbing vegetation. No operation of off-road vehicle
described in subsection 3-3.2 shall be allowed in this area.
3. On any public street, sidewalk, bicycle path, conservation
easement, open spaces, park or any other public lands within the
Township; provided, however, that vehicles registered under N.J.S.
39:3C-19 et seq. shall be regulated by that Statute as to operation
on the aforesaid areas.
4. Without any muffler device or, in the case of vehicles with two-cycle
engines, without any spark arrester.
5. In a manner creating loud or unusual noise so as to disturb or
interfere with the peace, quiet or health of other persons.
6. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger, or be
likely to endanger, the safety or the property of any person or
wildlife.
7. Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any weekday or
9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any Saturday, Sunday or holiday.
8. Without the use by the operator, while the vehicle is in operation, of
helmet and goggles.
§ 3-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3.2
1:139
§ 3-3.3. Exceptions. [1976 Code § 76-3; Ord. No. 88-43]
This section shall not be applicable to police or other emergency vehicles,
including but not limited to ambulances, motorcycles, fire control vehicles
and the like, or to motorized lawnmowers, tractors or farm vehicles or
construction equipment. The use of all-terrain vehicles on construction
sites by employees of the owner or contractor or the owner or contractor
engaged in construction work on the site shall be permitted during normal
business working hours; however, such use shall be subject to the operation
regulations set forth in subsection 3-3.2, paragraphs b4 through b10.
§ 3-3.4. Confiscation and Impoundment of Vehicles. [1976 Code
§ 76-4; Ord. No. 88-43]
The Police Department is hereby authorized to confiscate and impound
any motorized vehicle which is allegedly operated in violation of the terms
of this section. All towing charges as well as storage fees as prescribed
in Section 4-7 of the Code of the Township of Holmdel shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the motor-driven vehicle confiscated.
§ 3-3.5. Violations and Penalties. [1976 Code § 76-9; Ord. No. 88-43;
Ord. No. 2006-07 § III]
9. In a manner creating disturbances to ground area that interferes
with the health, safety or general welfare of any person or any
wildlife.
10. An off-road vehicle may not be operated unless it has working head
lights, tail lights and brakes in accordance with N.J.S. 39:3C-19.
c. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized vehicle as described
in paragraph a to permit any person to operate that vehicle on any
property or under any circumstances described in this section.
a. For persons 18 years of age or over, violation of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be subject to one or more of the
following in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court:
impounding of the motorized vehicle for six months at the violator's
expense, or imprisonment in the County Jail or in any place provided by
the Township for the detention of prisoners for any term not exceeding
90 days, or by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by a period of community
service not to exceed 90 days.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation
of any provision of this section exists, shall constitute a separate
violation. In addition, any violation of this section shall be considered a
separate offense upon each and every day in which a violation exists.
b. In the event the provisions of this section are violated by an operator or
a registered owner of the vehicle who is at the time of such violation
under the age of 18, such violation will result in the following:
§ 3-3.2 HOLMDEL § 3-3.5
1:140
§ 3-4. PROHIBITED PHOTOGRAPHY OF INVESTIGATION SITES.
§ 3-4.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2013-25]
As used in this section:
DISCLOSE — Shall mean to sell, manufacture, give, provide, lend, trade,
mail, deliver, transfer, publish, post, distribute, circulate, disseminate,
present, exhibit, advertise or offer.
FIRST RESPONDER — Shall mean a law enforcement officer, other
Township employee, paid or volunteer firefighter, paid or volunteer member
of a duly incorporated first aid, emergency, ambulance or rescue squad
association, or any other individual who, in the course of his employment, is
at the scene of a motor vehicle accident or other police involved situation.
SCENE OF MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT OR OTHER EMERGENCY
SITUATION — Shall mean within the perimeter of the area established by
the police to which the civilian public is prohibited.
§ 3-4.2. Prohibited Activity. [Ord. No. 2013-25]
§ 3-4.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2013-25]
Each person convicted of a violation of this section shall be:
§ 3-5. (RESERVED)
impoundment of the motorized vehicle for six months at the expense
of the violators, parents or guardian and institution of juvenile
delinquency proceedings against such minor operator or owner.
a. A first responder who is dispatched to or is otherwise present at the
scene of a motor vehicle accident or other emergency situation
(hereafter "scene"), for the purpose of providing medical care or other
assistance, shall not photograph, film, videotape, record or otherwise
reproduce in any manner, except for the exclusive use for in-house
training purposes, any portion of the scene.
b. A first responder shall not disclose any photograph, film, videotape,
record or other reproduction of any portion of the scene unless that
disclosure was for a legitimate law enforcement, public safety, health
care or insurance purpose or pursuant to a Court order.
a. Subject to punishment as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General
Penalty, subsection 1-5.1.
b. Shall forfeit benefits under Sections 2-32 (Volunteer Incentives) and
2-33 (LOSAP) from the date that the violation took place until
December 31 of the first full calendar year following the date of
violation.
§ 3-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-6
1:141
§ 3-6. POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE
PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES.
§ 3-6.1. Prohibitions. [1976 Code § 26-9; Ord. No. 10-82]
§ 3-6.2. Standards for Permit Issuance. [1976 Code § 26-10; Ord.
No. 10-82]
The grant or denial of any permit requested pursuant to subsection 3-6.1
shall be based upon the following standards:
§ 3-6.3. Definitions. [1976 Code § 26-11; Ord. No. 10-82]
As used in this section:
PUBLIC AREAS OR STRUCTURES — Shall mean and include, but are not
limited to, all areas referred to in subsection 3-6.1a, together with all
Township-owned or controlled properties and structures.
SEMIPUBLIC AREAS OR STRUCTURES — Shall mean and include, but
are not limited to, all buildings, structures, facilities or complexes used
a. Public Places. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, serve, sell,
dispense, drink or consume any alcoholic beverage on a public street,
alley, road, sidewalk, public parking lot or any other public property or
public area within the Township unless a permit shall have been first
obtained from the Township Police Department. The application for the
permit shall be made on forms to be obtained from the Police
Department.
b. Semipublic Places. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, serve,
sell, dispense, drink or consume any alcoholic beverage in any portion
of the exterior premises or yard area of any semipublic property,
structure or building within the Township unless a permit shall have
been first obtained from the Township Police Department. The
application for the permit shall be made on forms to be obtained from
the Police Department.
a. Age of the individual(s) who will be consuming the beverages, none of
whom shall be under the allowable drinking age. Adequacy of plans for
supervision of these individuals.
b. Number of individuals making such request and the number of
individuals who will be at the event or invited to it.
c. Number and type of activities scheduled in the surrounding area of
requested location on that date.
d. The safety of the public and the safety of persons directly or indirectly
involved or near the location at which the permit is intended to cover.
e. Concerns for peace and good order in the immediate neighborhood and
the surrounding area.
§ 3-6 HOLMDEL § 3-6.3
1:142
by the general public or to which the general public is invited, including
but not limited to theaters, concert halls, auditoriums, museums, schools,
libraries, recreation facilities, public transportation terminals and stations,
factories, office buildings, businesses, shopping centers, hotels or motels
and public eating places, all whether privately or publicly owned, and the
roads, streets, driveways, parking areas, parkways, exits, entrances, and all
other roadways within the confines of parking areas adjacent to or used in
connection with such structure or building.
§ 3-6.4. Exemptions. [1976 Code § 26-12; Ord. No. 10-82]
These provisions shall not apply to prohibit:
§ 3-7. BICYCLES.
§ 3-7.1. Definitions. [1976 Code § 30-1]
As used in this section:
BICYCLE — Shall mean a device having wheels with tires 16 inches or more
in diameter, connected by a frame of metal or wood, and so arranged as
to be propelled by human power. The term "bicycle" as used in this section
shall not include children's tricycles.
DIVISION — Shall mean the Division of Motor Vehicles of the Department
of Law and Public Safety, State of New Jersey.
§ 3-7.2. Regulations. [1976 Code § 30-2; New]
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle in the
Township unless such person rides or operates such bicycle in accordance
with the following rules and regulations:
a. Drinking or consuming alcoholic beverages on licensed premises, or in
restaurants, whether licensed or unlicensed, excluding fast food service
establishments.
b. Drinking or consuming alcoholic beverages on Board of Education
property where written authority to do so has been obtained from the
Board of Education and is not in violation of any other law or regulation.
c. Drinking or consuming alcoholic beverages in a municipal park owned
or operated by the Township where a permit has been obtained
pursuant to Chapter 6 or subsection 13-1.4.
d. Transporting, carrying or possessing alcoholic beverages in connection
with the transportation of such beverages to and from locations where
consumption is allowed pursuant to this section provided that the
alcoholic beverage is in a closed container and transported in a bag or
other similar container.
a. Lights on Bicycles. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible
§ 3-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7.2
1:143
from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front, and with a lamp on
the rear which shall emit a red light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the rear. In addition to the red lamp, a red reflector may
be mounted on the rear, of a type approved by the Division, which
shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear
when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor
vehicle.
b. Audible Signal Device Required. No person shall operate a bicycle
unless it is equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a
signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet, except that a bicycle
shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any
siren or whistle.
c. Brakes. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable
the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean
pavement.
d. Position of Hands and Feet; Carrying Another Person. A person
propelling or riding on a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor shall be ride
with his feet removed from the pedals or with both hands removed from
the handlebars, nor shall be practice any trick or fancy riding in a
street. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than
the number for which it is designed and equipped.
e. Hitching on Vehicles Prohibited. No person riding upon any bicycles,
coaster, skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to
any streetcar or vehicle upon a street, and no operator of any streetcar
or vehicle shall knowingly allow any person riding upon any bicycle,
coaster, skates, sled or toy vehicle to attach the same or himself to the
street vehicle.
f. Rights and Duties of Persons on Bicycles.
1. Every person riding a bicycle upon a street shall be granted all the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the
driver of a vehicle by Chapter 4 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes
and all supplements thereto, except as to those provisions thereof
which by their nature can have no application.
2. Regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is
operated upon any street or upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
g. Operating Regulations. Every person operating a bicycle upon a street
shall ride as near to the right side of the street as practicable,
exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding
in the same direction.
h. Riding on Sidewalks.
§ 3-7.2 HOLMDEL § 3-7.2
1:144
§ 3-7.3. Bicycle Safety Program. [1976 Code § 30-3]
The Chief of Police or his/her duly authorized representative is hereby
authorized and directed to provide within the Township bicycle safety
programs in conjunction with the Board of Education of the Township of
Holmdel (pursuant to N.J.S. 18A:62) and in conjunction with the Division
of Motor Vehicles, the County of Monmouth or any volunteer or service
organizations. Such bicycle safety programs may include lectures, courses
in traffic safety, voluntary inspections of bicycles and publication of printed
material to parents and children in the Township.
§ 3-7.4. Violations and Penalties. [1976 Code § 30-4]
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall
be liable upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $50 or by imprisonment
for not more than 15 days or by impounding of such person's bicycle for a
period not to exceed 30 days, or by any combination thereof.
§ 3-8. CURFEW FOR MINORS.
§ 3-8.1. Curfew and Hours Established. [1976 Code § 36-1; amended
9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
1. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
2. The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk
prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, and when
such signs are in place no person shall disobey the same.
3. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such
person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give
audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
i. Carrying Articles. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at
least one hand upon the handlebars.
j. Parking. No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon
the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support
the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to
afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
k. Pursuant to N.J.S. 39:4-10.1 to 10.4, the operator and/or passenger
under the age of 14 years shall be required to wear an approved safety
helmet when riding a bicycle.
a. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter,
idle, wander, stroll, play or remain in or upon the public streets,
highways, roads, playgrounds, public buildings, places of amusement,
entertainment or places of business conducted for profit to which the
public is invited, and all public or quasi-public places, either on foot or
§ 3-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-8.1
1:145
§ 3-8.2. Responsibility of Parent or Guardian. [1976 Code § 36-2]
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person having
custody, care or control of such minor under the age of 18 years to
knowingly permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play or remain
in or upon public streets, or other public or quasi-public places within the
Township as described in subsection 3-8.1.
§ 3-8.3. Notification Procedure. [1976 Code § 36-3]
If any minor under the age of 18 years shall be found to be in violation of
the provisions of this section, any Police Officer, upon becoming aware of
the violation, shall advise such minor under the age of 18 years that he/
she is in violation of this section and shall further advise such minor to
immediately remove himself/herself from the premises wherein he/she was
so found and to proceed to his/her residence. If the minor under the age of
18 years refuses to obey the order of the Police Officer, or if such minor has,
on a prior date, been advised of the terms of this section and is again in
violation of this section, the Police Officer shall thereupon apprehend such
minor and shall notify the parents, guardian or other person having custody,
care or control of such minor of such arrest and apprehension and make
such further inquiry or take such further action with respect to such minor
as the Police Officer deems necessary.
in any vehicle, within the Township between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
on all days from Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. of the
following day, and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on all Fridays and
Saturdays and 6:00 a.m. on the following day, between September 15
and June 15 of each year, and from June 15 to September 15 between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. on all days from Sunday to Thursday, inclusive,
and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, and between the hours of 12:00
midnight on all Fridays and Saturdays and 6:00 a.m. of the following
day, all of these times being prevailing time.
b. The foregoing provisions shall also be applicable between dusk and
6:00 a.m. on any day in which the Township has ordered a temporary
emergency curfew be implemented, which shall be effectuated through
a duly adopted resolution of the Township Committee or a directive of
the Chief of Police, either of which shall be prominently noticed on the
Township's website and communicated through routine means to
Township residents prior to the date(s) of applicability of the temporary
emergency curfew.
c. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any such person under
the age of 18 years when such person is accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian or other adult person having custody, care or control
of such minor, or as otherwise set forth herein.
§ 3-8.1 HOLMDEL § 3-8.4
1:146
§ 3-8.4. Exceptions to Provisions. [1976 Code § 36-4]
The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any minor under the
age of 18 years during the time necessarily required for such minor to travel
to his/her residence from the following places:
§ 3-8.5. Procedures During Emergency Situations. [1976 Code
§ 36-5]
Should an emergency arise necessitating a minor under the age of 18 years
to be dispatched upon an errand requiring his or her presence in or upon
a street or automobile, or in any public or quasi-public place, as aforesaid,
during the curfew hours herein established, he or she shall have in his or
her possession a note signed by a parent, guardian or other person having
custody, care or control of such minor under the age of 18 years, stating
the nature of the errand, the necessity therefor, and place to which such
minor is to go, the time such note was issued, and the time required for such
errand.
§ 3-8.6. Presumptive Knowledge; Parent or Guardian. [1976 Code
§ 36-6]
If it shall be established that any minor under the age of 18 years remained
idle, loitered, wandered, strolled or remained in or upon any of the public
or quasi-public places within the Township, as above mentioned, in violation
of the provisions of this section, then it shall be presumed, in the absence of
proof to the contrary, that the parent, guardian or other person having the
custody, care or control of such minor, knowingly permitted such minor so
to do.
§ 3-8.7. Responsibility of Merchants. [1976 Code § 36-7]
It shall be unlawful for any merchant, businessman or the proprietor of any
commercial establishment, or their agents, servants or employees, to permit
any minor under the age of 18 years to remain on the premises under their
control if that person, in good faith, knows or has reason to know that the
minor is under the age of 18 years and in violation of this section.
a. A place of employment at which such minor is gainfully employed; or
b. A school or place of instruction at which such minor may be in bona fide
attendance; or
c. A place at which a function may be held that shall be, or has been,
sponsored by a religious, school, fraternal or other civic group, which
function will, or has been, supervised by persons 21 years of age or
over; or
d. A place at which a bona fide, supervised social meeting, gathering or
assemblage had taken place.
§ 3-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-8.8
1:147
§ 3-8.8. Posting of Regulation. [1976 Code § 36-9]
Notice of the existence of this section and of the curfew regulations
established by it shall be posted on or at such public or quasi-public places
as may be determined by the Chief of Police in order that the public may be
constantly informed of the existence of this section and its regulations.
§ 3-9. DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES.
§ 3-9.1. Drug-Free School Zone Map Adopted. [1976 Code § 39-1;
Ord. No. 89-24; Ord. No. 99-26 § I]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S. 2C:35-7, the
drug-free school zone map18 prepared May 11, 1998, revised August 1,
1999 by Edward G. Broberg, Township Engineer, is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within
the municipality of property which is used for school purposes and which is
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or School Board,
and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 3-9.2. Location and Boundaries of School Property. [1976 Code
§ 39-2; Ord. No. 89-24]
The drug-free school zone map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-9.1 shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to an elementary or secondary school or School Board
which is used for school purposes until such time if any that this section
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location and boundaries of school property and drug-free school zones.
§ 3-9.3. Changes in Location and Boundaries. [1976 Code § 39-3;
Ord. No. 89-24]
The School Board, or the Chief Administrative Officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligations to promptly notify the Township Engineer and the Township
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned or leased to any elementary or secondary
school or School Board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 3-9.4. Copies of Map on File. [1976 Code § 39-4; Ord. No. 89-24]
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to subsection 3-9.1, and
to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy to any person, agency or court
which may request such a copy, along with a certification that such copy
is a true copy of the map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It
is hereby further directed that a true copy of such map and of this section
18.Editor's Note: The map is on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 3-8.8 HOLMDEL § 3-9.4
1:148
shall be provided without cost to the County Clerk and to the office of the
Monmouth County Prosecutor.
§ 3-9.5. Map to Be Used as Evidence. [1976 Code § 39-5; Ord. No.
89-24]
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
§ 3-10. LITTERING.
a. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-9.1 was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this State, and that
pursuant to State Law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence
of the following:
1. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
Township;
2. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a School Board;
3. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
4. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
b. All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
school property was owned by (or leased to) a school or School Board
and was being used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being
the effective date of N.J.S. 2C:35-7.
c. Pursuant to the provisions of L. 1988. c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including uses of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to subsection 3-9.1. The failure of the map approved
herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property which is, in
fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or School Board, whether the absence
of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the result of
any changes in the location and boundaries of such property which have
not yet been incorporated into a revised approved map, shall not be
deemed to be an official finding and record that such property is not
owned by or leased to a school or School Board, or that such property is
not used for school purposes.
d. All of the requirements set forth in L. 1988, c. 44 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a drug-free school zone map have
been complied with.
§ 3-9.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-10.1
1:149
§ 3-10.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2007-23 § I]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED LITTER — Shall mean any litter which is not in an authorized
location and/or is deposited contrary to the provisions of this section.
LITTER — Shall mean any used or unconsumed substance or waste material
which has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic,
rubber, paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof, including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap
or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing. For purposes of this section, the term "litter"
shall be interchangeable with the term "solid waste."
§ 3-10.2. Compliance with New Jersey Clean Communities Model
Program. [1976 Code § 51B-1; Ord. No. 90-24; Ord. No. 2007-23 § I]
§ 3-10.3. Discarding and Dumping of Litter. [1976 Code § 51B-2;
Ord. No. 90-24; Ord. No. 2007-23 § I]
No person shall sweep, throw, deposit or dump litter in or on any property,
whether occupied, open or vacant and whether owned by that person, or
in a public place or pond, lake or stream or other body of water within the
Township, except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles
for collection.
§ 3-10.4. Placement in Receptacles. [1976 Code § 51B-3; Ord. No.
90-24; Ord. No. 2007-23 § I]
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in a manner which prevents the litter from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon a public place or upon private
property. No person shall throw, deposit or dump litter in any private
receptacle unless he/she is so authorized by the owner or lessee of such
receptacle.
a. Responsibility; Coordinator. The Clean Communities Coordinator shall
be responsible for grant implementation for the application to be filed
by the Township of Holmdel for the Clean Communities Model Program
in the Office of Recycling, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection. The Recycling Coordinator shall serve as coordinator of the
program.
§ 3-10.1 HOLMDEL § 3-10.5
1:150
§ 3-10.5. Responsibility for Servicing Receptacles. [1976 Code
§ 51B-4; Ord. No. 90-24; Ord. No. 2007-23 § I]
The proprietors of any location set forth in subsection 3-10.2 above, or the
sponsor of any event listed therein, shall be responsible for the providing
and servicing of the receptacles in such number as would reasonably be
required for the amount of litter to be generated by the person(s) expected
to use or be on the site or at the event in question.
§ 3-10.6. Open or Overflowing Waste Bins. [1976 Code § 51B-5; Ord.
No. 90-24; Ord. No. 2007-23 § I]
Open or overflowing commercial, industrial or residential waste disposal
bins are prohibited.
§ 3-10.7. Covering of Vehicles. [1976 Code § 51B-6; Ord. No. 90-24;
Ord. No. 2007-23 § I]
The covering of vehicles to prevent loads from dropping, sifting, leaking or
otherwise escaping is required.
§ 3-10.8. Parking of Vehicles Regulated. [1976 Code § 51B-7; Ord.
No. 90-24; Ord. No. 2007-23 § I]
No vehicle shall be parked in or on any "front yard," as that term is defined
in Chapter 30, Development Regulations, Section 30-3, unless the parking
space is located on an improved driveway consisting of stone or pavement.
§ 3-10.9. Accumulation of Debris at Construction Sites Prohibited.
[1976 Code § 51B-8; Ord. No. 90-24; Ord. No. 2007-23 § I]
The accumulation of debris on or around construction sites, or its storage in
such a manner that it is likely to be removed by natural forces onto adjacent
property is prohibited.
§ 3-10.10. Rebuttable Presumption of Ownership. [Ord. No. 2007-23
§ I]
Any evidence or information contained in or which is a part of abandoned
litter which identifies or otherwise establishes the source of such litter, i.e.,
envelopes and/or other items with the name and/or address of such person,
will create a rebuttable presumption that such person is the owner of such
litter. Such establishing of ownership shall likewise create a rebuttable
presumption that such person did throw, deposit and/or dump such litter at
the place where found. It is further presumed that all right or expectation
of privacy is relinquished in abandoned litter.
§ 3-10.11. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2007-23 § I]
A summons alleging a violation of this section may be issued by the Holmdel
Township Code Enforcement Officer or by the Holmdel Township Police
§ 3-10.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-10.11
1:151
Department. Alternatively, any individual may file a complaint with the
Holmdel Township Municipal Court, which shall issue a summons in
accordance with the New Jersey Rules of Court.
§ 3-10.12. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2007-23 § I]
For violation of any provision of this section, the penalty shall be as set forth
in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, General Penalty. Additionally, property owners
and/or any persons who violate the terms of this section, will be subject to
a penalty requiring such persons to clean up all areas where litter has been
illegally swept, thrown, deposited or dumped.
§ 3-11. PUBLIC PROPERTY DRUG-FREE ZONE MAP.
§ 3-11.1. Adoption of Public Property Drug-Free Zone Map. [Ord.
No. 98-27 § I; Ord. No. 2014-13; Ord. No. 2016-12]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1997, c. 327,
the public property drug-free zone map "Revised July 5, 2016," produced
by Edward G. Broberg, P.E., Township Engineer, is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within the
municipality of property which is used for public purposes as specifically
defined and regulated by the above referenced statute, and of the areas on
or within 500 feet of such public property. (The map may be found on file in
the Township Clerk's Office.)
§ 3-11.2. Location and Boundaries of Public Property. [Ord. No.
98-27 § I]
The public property drug-free zone map approved and adopted pursuant
to subsection 3-11.1 of this section shall continue to constitute an official
finding and record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within
500 feet of public property to which the statute cited in subsection 3-11.1
applies until such time, if any, that this section shall be amended to reflect
any additions or deletions with respect to the location and boundaries of
public property and drug-free zones.
§ 3-11.3. Copy of Map on File. [Ord. No. 98-27 § I]
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to subsection 3-11.1 of
this section, and to provide, at a reasonable cost, a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may, from time to time, request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is further directed that a true copy
of such map and of this section shall be provided without cost to the County
Clerk and to the Office of the Monmouth County Prosecutor.
§ 3-10.11 HOLMDEL § 3-11.4
1:152
§ 3-11.4. Additional Matters. [Ord. No. 98-27 § I]
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
§ 3-11.5. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 98-27 § I]
This section shall take effect upon final passage and publication according
to law.
§ 3-12. DRUNK DRIVING FREE SCHOOL ZONES.
§ 3-12.1. Adoption of Map. [Ord. No. 2000-10 § 1]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S. 2C:35-7, the
drunk driving free school zones map19 produced on or about November 30,
1987 by Edward G. Broberg, Township Engineer, is hereby approved and
a. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-11.1 of this section was prepared and is intended to be
used as evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this
State, and that pursuant to State law, such map shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the following:
1. The location and boundaries of public housing facilities, public
parks and/or public buildings as defined in P.L. 1997, c. 327, within
the municipality.
2. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 500
feet of such public property.
b. All of the property depicted on the map and approved and adopted
herein as public property qualifies as public property as defined in P.L.
1997, c. 327.
c. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1997, c. 327, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to subsection 3-11.1 of this section. The failure of the
map approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any
property which, in fact, qualifies as the type of public property defined
in P.L. 1997, c. 327, whether the absence of such depiction is the result
of inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in the location and
boundaries of such property which have not yet been incorporated into
a revised approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding
and record that such property is not public property as defined in that
statute.
d. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1997, c. 327, concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a public property drug-free zone
map have been complied with.
§ 3-11.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-12.1
1:153
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within
the municipality of property which is used for school purposes and which is
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or School Board,
and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 3-12.2. Location and Boundaries of School Property. [Ord. No.
2000-10 § 2]
The drunk driving free school zones map approved and adopted pursuant
to subsection 3-12.1 shall continue to constitute an official finding and
record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of
property owned by or leased to an elementary or secondary school or School
Board which is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this
section shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect
to the location and boundaries of school property and drunk driving free
school zones.
§ 3-12.3. Map to Constitute Official Findings. [Ord. No. 2000-10 § 3]
The drunk driving free school zones map approved and adopted pursuant
to subsection 3-12.1 of this section shall continue to constitute an official
finding and record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within
1,000 feet of property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary
school or School Board which is used for school purposes until such time, if
any, that this section shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions
with respect to the location and boundaries of school property and drunk
driving free school zones.
§ 3-12.4. Changes in Locations or Boundaries. [Ord. No. 2000-10
§ 4]
The School Board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the office of the Township Engineer and the
Township Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location
and boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or School Board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 3-12.5. Original Map to be on File: Copies. [Ord. No. 2000-10 § 5]
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to subsection 3-12.1 of
this section and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a
true copy of such map and of this section shall be provided without cost
19.Editor's Note: The map referred to herein may be found as an attachment to this chapter
§ 3-12.1 HOLMDEL § 3-12.5
1:154
to the Monmouth County Clerk and to the office of the Monmouth County
Prosecutor.
§ 3-12.6. Map as Evidence. [Ord. No. 2000-10 § 1]
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to this section
was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in prosecutions arising
under the criminal and traffic laws of this State and that, pursuant to State
law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of the following:
§ 3-13. POSSESSION; CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
BY PERSON UNDER LEGAL AGE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; PENALTY.
§ 3-13.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2000-25 § I]
The purpose of this section is to provide for the enforcement of P.L. 2000 c.
33.
§ 3-13.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2000-25 § I]
As used in this section:
GUARDIAN — Shall mean a person who has qualified as a guardian of the
underage person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — Shall mean the underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle,
sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 3-13.3. Possession; Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages by
Person Under Legal Age on Private Property; Penalty. [Ord. No.
2000-25 § I]
Any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who
knowingly possesses without legal authority or who knowingly consumes
any alcoholic beverage on private property shall be punished by a fine of
$250 for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense. The Court may,
in addition to the fine authorized for this offense, suspend or postpone for
six months the driving privilege of the defendant.
a. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
b. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to such
schools or a School Board.
c. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
d. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000 feet
of such school property.
§ 3-12.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-13.3
1:155
Upon the conviction of any person and the suspension or postponement
of that person's driver's license, the Court shall forward a report to the
Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of the suspension
or postponement period imposed by the Court pursuant to this section.
If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is less than 17
years of age, the period of license postponement, including a suspension
or postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall
commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of
six months after the person reaches the age of 17 years.
If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid driver's
license issued by this State, the Court shall immediately collect the license
and forward it to the Division along with the report. If for any reason
the license cannot be collected, the Court shall include in the report the
complete name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of the person, as
well as the first and last date of the license suspension period imposed by
the Court.
The Court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to acknowledge receipt
of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive a written notice or failure
to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a written notice shall not be a
defense to a subsequent charge of a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
The Court shall, of any person convicted under this section who is not a
New Jersey resident, suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and submit
to the Division the required report. The Court shall not collect the license
of a nonresident convicted under this section. Upon receipt of a report by
the Court, the Division shall notify the appropriate officials in the licensing
jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
This section does not prohibit an underage person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious observance,
ceremony, or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the
presence of and with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative who
has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
This section does not prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages by any
such person while actually engaged in the performance of employment by
a person who is licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, or while
actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary
arts or hotel management program at a county vocation school or post
secondary educational institution; however, no ordinance enacted pursuant
to this section shall be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty
under this section, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section of law against a
person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at
premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 3-13.3 HOLMDEL § 3-14
1:156
§ 3-14. DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
§ 3-14.1. Discharge of Guns, Weapons and Firearms Prohibited in
Certain Areas. [1976 Code § 42-1; Ord. No. 85-2; Ord. No. 2018-10]
No person shall discharge a gun, weapon or any firearm within the
Township except as set forth hereinafter. For purposes of this section,
weapon shall be defined to include, but not be limited to, bow and arrow,
cross bows, air driven weapons, sling shots, and similar devices.
§ 3-14.2. Nonapplicability of Provisions. [1976 Code § 42-2]
Subsection 3-14.1 shall not be applicable to:
§ 3-14.3. Statutory Provisions. [1976 Code § 42-3; Ord. No. 85-2]
The prohibited areas affected by this section are intended to be
supplemental to those areas described in N.J.S. 23:4-16, as amended, which
reads as follows:
"N.J.S. 23:4-16: No person either in an automobile or vehicle of any kind
whatsoever, or by the aid or use of a light carried on or attached to a vehicle
of any kind, shall hunt for, pursue, shoot at, kill, capture, injure or destroy
a bird or animal in this State, and no person shall use any portable light
or lights for the purpose of hunting for any game bird or animal excepting
raccoon, and no person shall, for the purpose of hunting, taking or killing
any bird or animal, cast an arrow or discharge any firearm upon or across
any State, county, or municipal road or highway, and no person, except the
owner or lessee of the property and persons specifically authorized by him
in writing, shall, for the purpose of hunting, taking or killing any bird or
animal, have in his possession a loaded gun while within 450 feet of any
occupied dwelling in this State or of a school playground, under a penalty
of $50 for each offense."
a. The discharge of any gun, weapon or firearm upon a pistol, rifle or
firearm range which is under the supervision of the Township Police
Department.
b. Members of the Township Police Department, any law enforcement
officer of any municipal, county, State or Federal government or any
representative of the Division of Fish, Game and Shellfisheries,
Department of Environmental Protection, State of New Jersey, while in
the performance of their official duties.
c. The owner, tenant or lessee of a tract of land in excess of five acres
while in and upon that tract.
d. The owner, tenant or lessee, or a person with their express written,
dated permission, when controlling woodchuck or other pests, as
legally defined, authorized and allowed by the Hunting Regulations
promulgated annually by the Division of Fish, Game and Shellfisheries,
Department of Environmental Protection, State of New Jersey.
§ 3-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-14.4
1:157
§ 3-14.4. Posting of Signs; Distribution of Regulations. [1976 Code
§ 42-4]
On or before September 1 of each year, the Township Administrator shall
arrange for the posting of appropriate signs on all major roads which
provide access to this Township advising the general public that there
are zones within the Township of Holmdel where firearms shall not be
discharged. The signs shall also indicate that it shall be necessary for any
persons desiring to discharge firearms or to hunt in this Township to obtain
a copy of this section at the Holmdel Police Headquarters. In addition, the
Township Administrator shall prepare and arrange for distribution of copies
of this section in any other appropriate manner so that any person desiring
to discharge firearms or hunt in this Township shall be made aware of this
section and the State Statute which it supplements. Copies of this section
shall be made available free of charge.
§ 3-14.5. Violations and Penalties. [1976 Code § 42-5; Ord. No. 85-2]
Each and every person violating any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, should any person violate a provision of this
section which incorporates or refers to the provisions of N.J.S. 23:4-1 et
seq., then, upon conviction, he shall be subject to the fine(s) stated therein.
§ 3-15. SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY PROHIBITION.
§ 3-15.1. Sex Offender Residency Prohibition; 1,000 Feet. [Ord. No.
2005-23 § I]
It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the registration requirements
set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq. (hereafter "sex offender"), to reside
within 1,000 feet of any public or private primary and/or secondary school
or educational facility, park, playground or childcare facility (hereafter
"prohibited area") within the Township as delineated on the then approved
Township of Holmdel's Drug Free Park Zone/Drug Free School Zone Map,
pursuant to subsection 3-9.1.
§ 3-15.2. Time Limit for Compliance with Section. [Ord. No.
2005-23 § I]
A sex offender who resides within any prohibited area established pursuant
to the provisions of this section shall have 60 days from the effective date of
this section20, or upon the termination of any residential lease entered into
prior to the effective date of this section and the term of which is not longer
than one year, whichever is later, to relocate outside the prohibited area.
Failure to move to a location which is in compliance with this section within
the prescribed time period shall constitute a violation of this section.
20.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2005-23, codified herein, was adopted July 25, 2005.
§ 3-14.4 HOLMDEL § 3-15.3
1:158
§ 3-15.3. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2005-23 § I]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any sex offender who has
purchased property to be used as his/her primary residence which is located
within the prohibited area prior to the effective date of this section.21
§ 3-15.4. Violation and Penalty. [Ord. No. 2005-23 § I; Ord. No.
2006-07 § IV]
Any violation of this section shall be punishable by the penalties stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-16. through §3-18. (RESERVED)
§ 3-19. (RESERVED)22
§ 3-20. JOGGING REGULATIONS.
§ 3-20.1. Regulations. [1976 Code § 49-1; Ord. No. 27-81]
It shall be unlawful for any person to jog on any public street, driveway,
alley or shoulder in the Township except in accordance with the following
regulations:
§ 3-20.2. Definitions. [1976 Code § 49-2; Ord. No. 27-81]
As used in this section:
HOURS OF DARKNESS — Shall mean any time from 1/2 hour after sunset
to 1/2 hour before sunrise and at any other time when there is not sufficient
light to render clearly discernible persons on the highway at a distance of
500 feet ahead.
JOG OR JOGGING — Shall mean running of any kind and at all speeds.
a. All joggers shall run in the direction facing traffic.
b. All joggers shall run on sidewalks where they are provided.
c. All joggers running during hours of darkness must wear reflective
material between the waist and shoulders on their front and back which
gives an indication of the jogger's presence through reflected light from
the headlamp beams of motor vehicles at a distance of at least 500 feet.
d. All joggers shall run in single file and not side by side or abreast of each
other.
21.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2005-23, codified herein, was adopted July 25, 2005.
22.Editor's Note: Former Section 3-19, Games of Chance on Sunday, previously codified
herein was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2013-15. See Section 4-9 for Games of
Chance.
§ 3-15.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-20.3
1:159
§ 3-20.3. Construal of Provisions. [1976 Code § 49-3; Ord. No.
27-81]
This section shall not be construed to permit jogging where prohibited by
any law of the State of New Jersey.
§ 3-21. PEACE AND GOOD ORDER.
§ 3-21.1. Nudity; Indecent Exposure; Lewd Behavior. [1976 Code
§ 56-1]
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, appear on any street,
park or other public place in a state of nudity or make any indecent
exposure of his or her person or commit or do any lewd or indecent act or
behave in a lewd or indecent manner.
§ 3-21.2. Swimming in a State of Nudity. [1976 Code § 56-2]
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, bathe, swim or be found
in a state of nudity in the waters of any pond, stream or lake located therein.
§ 3-21.3. Disrobing in Automobiles Parked in Public Places. [1976
Code § 56-3]
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, disrobe in any
automobile, truck or vehicle while the same is upon any parking place,
street, park or other public place.
§ 3-21.4. Sale of Indecent Literature; Immoral Performance or
Exhibition. [1976 Code § 56-4]
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, sell or offer to sell any
indecent or lewd picture, book or thing, or exhibit or perform any indecent,
immoral or lewd play or other representation.
§ 3-21.5. Disorderly Houses and Houses of III Fame. [1976 Code
§ 56-5]
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, keep or maintain a
disorderly house or a house of ill fame, or allow or permit any house, shop,
store or other building or structure owned or occupied by him or her to be
used as a disorderly house or house of ill fame.
§ 3-21.6. Use of Houses for Riotous or Disorderly Persons,
Prostitutes, Gamblers, Vagrants. [1976 Code § 56-6]
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, permit any house, shop,
store or other building or structure owned or occupied by him or her to
be frequented or resorted to by noisy, riotous or disorderly persons or by
prostitutes, gamblers or vagrants.
§ 3-20.3 HOLMDEL § 3-21.7
1:160
§ 3-21.7. Gathering Alms.23 [1976 Code § 56-11; Ord. No. 2005-05
§ I]
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, go about from door to
door or place himself or herself in any street or streets or other public place
or places to beg or gather alms, except upon obtaining a written permit
from the Police Department.
§ 3-21.8. Property Damage and Interrupted Passage. [1976 Code
§ 56-13; Ord. No. 2005-05 § I; amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-14]
No person shall in any way injure, destroy, break, mutilate, deface, damage
or tamper with any traffic control device, utility fixture, streetlight, pole, fire
hydrant, guard rail, bridge, bridge support, fence, barrier, mailbox, property
or any part thereof in any street, sidewalk, easement, path, park or other
public place within the limits of the Township. Any act resulting in the
interrupted passage of pedestrians or any means of conveyance shall also
be prohibited.
§ 3-21.9. Gambling.24 [1976 Code § 56-14; Ord. No. 2005-05 § I)
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, deal, play or engage
in faro, roulette or other games of chance, either as banker, player, dealer
or otherwise, for the purpose of gaming or gambling for money or other
valuable thing.
§ 3-21.10. Dangerous or Offensive Weapons. [1976 Code § 56-15;
Ord. No. 2005-05 § I]
No person shall, within the limits of the Township and without lawful
authority, have concealed upon his or her person any offensive or dangerous
weapon.
§ 3-21.11. Destruction of Schools; Annoyance of Children and
Teachers. [1976 Code § 56-16; Ord. No. 2005-05 § I]
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, enter the building
or go upon the lands of any public school and break, injure or deface
such building or any part thereof or the fences, structures or outhouses
belonging to or connected with such building or lands, and no person shall
disturb the exercises of any public school or molest or give annoyance to
the children attending such school, or annoy any teacher therein.
23.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2005-05 deleted former subsections 3-21.7, Loitering, Land
and Offensive Language; Obstructing Passage; 3-21.9, False Alarms; 3-21.14, Disturbing
the Quiet of Public Library Reading Rooms; 3-21.18, Assaulting, Brawling, Disturbances,
Rioting; 3-21.19, Fireworks and Firearms and 3-21.27, Riotous Conduct, Breaches of the
Peace, Vagrancy, Prostitution Prohibited and renumbered the remaining subsections
accordingly.
24.Editor's Note: See Section 3-19, Games of Chance on Sunday.
§ 3-21.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-21.12
1:161
§ 3-21.12. Obstruction of Township Officer in Performance of
Duties. [1976 Code § 56-19; Ord. No. 2005-05 § I]
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, hinder or obstruct any
Township Officer in the performance of his duties; nor shall any person
knowingly resist or oppose any officer or person authorized by law in
serving or attempting to serve any writ, bill, order or process or when
making any arrest, either with or without a warrant.
§ 3-21.13. Destruction of or Interference with Fire or Police
Apparatus. [1976 Code § 56-20; Ord. No. 2005-05 § I]
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, intentionally, willfully
or maliciously destroy or injure any of the wires, posts, machines, bells,
sirens, boxes, locks or other apparatus of any fire or police alarm system;
nor shall any person intentionally, willfully or maliciously interfere with the
same or any part thereof with intent to create a false alarm or obstruct the
efficient operation of the same or any part thereof, or hinder or impede any
of the operations intended to be accomplished thereby; nor shall any person
intentionally, willfully or maliciously cause a false alarm of fire to be given
in any manner.
§ 3-21.14. Deterring Firemen and Police Officers in Performance of
Duties at Fires. [1976 Code § 56-21; Ord. No. 2005-05 § I]
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, during an alarm of
fire, hinder, prevent or deter by any device whatsoever any fireman, police
officer or other person from rendering lawful assistance in abating or
quelling such fire, or hinder or interfere with any fireman or police officer
from going to or returning from the place where any building or other
property is on fire or from which an alarm proceeds; nor shall any person
hinder or obstruct the passage of any fire engine, hook or ladder truck, hose
cart or any fire apparatus in going to or from the place from which an alarm
of fire proceeds or where any building or other property may be burning.
§ 3-21.15. (Reserved)25
§ 3-21.16. Placards or Advertising Material on Private Property.
[1976 Code § 56-25; Ord. No. 2005-05 § I]
No person shall paste, write, clip, paint, print, nail, clamp or otherwise
fasten, inscribe or affix any notice, placard or advertisement against or
upon any way, gate, house, store, shop, shed, fence, rock, stump, tree,
shrub, bush, building or structure without the written consent of the owner
or occupant of the same, except when done by a Public Officer in the
performance of his/her duties.
25.Editor's Note: Former § 3-21.15, Destruction of Poles and Streetlights, 1976 Code § 56-24;
Ord. No. 2005-05 § I, was repealed 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-14.
§ 3-21.12 HOLMDEL § 3-21.17
1:162
§ 3-21.17. Placards or Advertising Material on Public Property.
[1976 Code § 56-26; Ord. No. 2005-05 § I]
No person shall paste, clip, paint, nail, clamp or otherwise fasten, inscribe
or affix any notice, placard or advertisement upon any public building,
sidewalk, fence, curbstone, wall, bulletin board, park or other public
property or place within the limits of the Township except with the
permission of the Police Department.
§ 3-21.18. Destruction of Fire Hydrants. [1976 Code § 56-27; Ord.
No. 2005-05 § I]
No person shall open, injure, destroy, deface, mutilate, break or tamper with
any fire hydrant in any public street or public place within the limits of
the Township, except members of the Township Fire Department actually
engaged in the performance of their duties.
§ 3-21.19. Riding in Taxicabs with Intent to Avoid Payment. [1976
Code § 56-28; Ord. No. 2005-05 § I)
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, travel on any autobus or
taxicab without having paid his or her fare, with intent to avoid payment
thereof.
§ 3-21.20. Placing Abandoned Vehicles or Other Junk on Private
Property. [1976 Code § 56-29; Ord. No. 90-9; Ord. No. 2005-05 § I]
No person shall dump on or tow to open fields or private property any
abandoned automobile or vehicle, or part thereof, or other junk or refuse or
waste matter.
§ 3-21.21. Seeking Food or Lodgings with Intent to Defraud Owners.
[1976 Code § 56-30; Ord. No. 2005-05 § I]
No person shall obtain food, lodging or other accommodations or service at
any hotel, inn, boarding or eating house or restaurant with intent to defraud
the owner or keeper thereof.
§ 3-21.22. Fines Imposed and Collected Paid into Treasury. [1976
Code § 56-33; Ord. No. 2005-05 § I]
All fines imposed and collected under and by virtue of this section shall be
paid into the Treasury of the Township.
§ 3-21.23. Obstructing Passage, Disorderly Assemblage. [Ord. No.
2005-17 § I]
No person shall, within the limits of the Township, obstruct or interfere
with any person lawfully conducting themselves. No person shall participate
in any disorderly assemblage, nor shall any person in any way breach or
disturb the peace.
§ 3-21.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-21.24
1:163
§ 3-21.24. Public Urination/Defecation. [Ord. No. 2007-22 § I]
Public urination and/or defecation in or in view of a public place is
prohibited. For purpose of this subsection only, a "public place" is defined
as a location where the prohibited conduct may reasonably be expected to
be viewed or could be viewed by others.
§ 3-21.25. Interference with Retail or Wholesale Business Practices.
[Ord. No. 2012-07]
No person shall purposely interfere with, hinder, disturb, or obstruct any
retail or wholesale business operation, function or activity, nor shall any
person purposely interfere with, hinder, disturb, or obstruct any retail or
wholesale business owner, employee, agent, or personnel acting in the
furtherance of the interests of that business with the intent to prevent,
undermine or otherwise obstruct the lawful retail or wholesale practices
of that business. This section does not apply to conduct considered lawful
competitive economic practices.
§ 3-22. SKATEBOARD, ROLLER SKATE AND ROLLER BLADE
REGULATIONS.
§ 3-22.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2000-06 § I; Ord. No. 2002-06 § I]
The purpose of this section is to implement the authority given to local
governing bodies by N.J.S.A. 39:4-10.10a. It is the finding of the Township
Committee that in order to protect the safety of the public, it is necessary
to prohibit the use of skateboards, roller skates and roller blades in the
locations identified in subsection 3-22.4. This section is not intended to
affect the rights of any other entity or person, private or public, to control
and regulate the use of skateboards, roller skates and roller blades on his/
her/its property. The use of motorized skateboards is regulated by Section
3-3.
§ 3-22.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2000-06 § 1]
The following terms used in this section shall have the following meanings:
MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDS — Shall mean a device as described in the
definition "Skateboards" below, but with the addition of a motor to propel or
assist in propelling the user.
ROLLER SKATES — Shall mean a pair of devices worn on the feet with a set
of wheels attached, regardless of the number or placement of those wheels,
and used to glide or propel the user over the ground. Devices commonly
known as "roller blades" are intended to be included within this definition.
SKATEBOARDS — Shall mean a device made of rigid material designed
primarily to be stood upon, with a set of wheels attached, regardless of the
number or placement of those wheels and used to glide or propel the user
over the ground.
§ 3-21.24 HOLMDEL § 3-22.3
1:164
§ 3-22.3. Prohibition on Use of Motorized Skateboards. [Ord. No.
2000-06 § I; Ord. No. 2002-06 § I]
No person shall engage in any activity utilizing motorized skateboards
on any public street, sidewalk, bicycle path, conservation easement, open
spaces, park or any other public lands within the Township. Operation of
motorized skateboards on private property is regulated by Section 3-3.
§ 3-22.4. Prohibition on Use of Skateboards, Roller Skates and
Roller Blades. [Ord. No. 2000-06 § I]
On the following properties, no person shall engage in any activity utilizing
skateboards, roller skates or roller blades:
Bayshore Community Hospital.
Bayshore Health Care Center.
Holmdel Plaza.
Holmdel Towne Center.
§ 3-22.5. Helmet Required. [Ord. No. 2000-06 § I; Ord. No. 2002-06
§ I]
No person under the age of 14 years shall operate or ride upon a
skateboard, roller skates or roller blades unless that person is wearing on
his/her head a properly fitted and fastened bicycle helmet which meets the
standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI Z90.4 bicycle
helmet standard) or the Snell Memorial Foundation's 1990 Standard for
Protective Headgear for Use in Bicycling.
§ 3-22.6. (Reserved)26
§ 3-22.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2000-06 § I]
Every person convicted of any provision of this section shall be liable upon
conviction to a fine of not more than $100 or for a sentence of community
service of not more than 30 days.
§ 3-23. POLITICAL SIGNS. [Ord. No. 2003-12 § I]
The following regulations shall apply to political signs as hereinafter
defined.
§ 3-23.1. Definition. [Ord. No. 2003-12 § I]
The words "political signs" shall mean any sign (as defined in Section 30-3)
pertaining to (1) the election or re-election of Federal, State, County or
26.Editor's Note: Former subsection 3-22.6, Notification of Parent, Guardian, Adult,
previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2000-06, was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-06.
§ 3-22.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-23.1
1:165
local candidates for elective office or (2) the passage of a public question or
proposition to be voted upon by the legal voters in an upcoming election.
§ 3-23.2. Political Signs Prohibited Under Certain Circumstances.
[Ord. No. 2003-12 § I]
a. No political sign(s) shall be erected, placed, located or maintained on
any of the following Township owned property:
Location Block Lot
1. Municipal Building 27 10
2. Community Center 27 10
3. First Aid Building - Crawfords
Corner Road
26 1
4. Department of Public Works 26 2
Building 26 2.01
5. Emergency Services Building -
Centerville Road
50.30 74.35
3 9
3 10
3 15
6. Cross Farm Park
5 3
7. Phillips Park 47 1.01
8. Veterans Park 47 1
9. Allocco Park 52 36.02
52 36.03
10. Labbe Park 50.32 86.03
11. Bayonet Farm 9 15.01
10 14.03
50.19 48.01
50.27 48
50.27 49
12. DePalma Farm
50.27 51
13. Mahoras Greenway Nature Area 51 6
51 7
14. Seven Oaks Open Space (Crawfords
Corner Road)
22 20.06
b. No political sign(s) shall be erected, placed, located or maintained on
any property without the permission of the person(s) or entity/entities
§ 3-23.1 HOLMDEL § 3-23.2
1:166
§ 3-24. DETAINMENT OF INDIVIDUALS ARRESTED FOR DRIVING
WHILE INTOXICATED.
§ 3-24.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2004-04 § I]
The purpose of this section is to implement the authority given to local
governing bodies by the provisions of "John's Law" (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.22
et seq.) (the "Act") which requires the law enforcement agency to notify
persons who accompany a drunk driver from the premises that they can be
held criminally or civilly liable if they permit the drunk driver to operate
a motor vehicle, and authorizes the law enforcement agency to impound
the vehicle. The legislation authorizes a municipality to enact an ordinance
providing that a person who has been arrested for driving under the
influence pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 shall be held in protective custody
at an appropriate police or other facility. All the provisions of the Act are
hereby incorporated into and are deemed to be a part hereof.
§ 3-24.2. Detainment of Individuals. [Ord. No. 2004-04 § I]
Any person who is arrested for a violation of the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:4-50 may be held in protective custody at an appropriate police or other
facility until the person's blood alcohol concentration is less than 0.05%
and the person is no longer under the influence of any intoxicating liquor
or narcotic or hallucinogenic or habit forming drug to the extent that the
person's faculties are impaired. In no event shall the municipality's law
enforcement agency hold a person in protective custody for a period longer
than eight hours without providing an appropriate hearing.
§ 3-24.3. Release of Detained Individual. [Ord. No. 2004-04 § I]
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, provided that it is not a
detriment to the public safety, the arresting law enforcement agency may,
because of the age, health, or safety of the arrested person, release the
person pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5-50.22 et seq. or provide
an appropriate alternative to protective custody. The municipality and its
law enforcement agency shall not be subject to liability if a person is
released from custody pursuant to the provisions of this section under the
Act.
who/which own or have legal control over the property upon which the
political sign(s) is/are to be erected, placed, located or maintained.
c. No political sign(s) shall be erected, placed or maintained more than 60
days prior to the election to which it pertains, and shall be removed not
later than seven days after the election to which it pertains.
d. No political sign(s) shall be erected, placed, located or maintained on
certain traffic islands as set forth in Section 17-2.9 hereof.
§ 3-23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-24.4
1:167
§ 3-24.4. Use of State Police Facilities. [Ord. No. 2004-04 § I]
Nothing in this section shall be constructed as requiring the use of State
Police facilities by the municipality for purposes of this section.
§ 3-25. NUISANCE PROHIBITED - NOISE.
§ 3-25.1. Noise Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2012-08]
It shall be unlawful for a person to make, continue or cause to be made
or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which
does or is likely to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose,
health, peace or safety of others. Specifically exempted hereunder is noise
presumed not to be a nuisance pursuant to the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A.
4:1C-1 et seq.
§ 3-25.2. Definition of Noise. [Ord. No. 2012-08]
Without intending to limit the generality of subsection 3-25.1, the following
acts are hereby declared to be examples of loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noise in violation of this section:
a. The playing, use or operation of any radio receiving set, television,
musical instrument, musical device or other machine or device that
produces or reproduces sound in such manner as to disturb the peace,
quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants or with louder volume
than is necessary for convenient hearing for persons who are in the
room, vehicle or chamber in which the machine or device is operated
and who are voluntary listeners. The operation of such a set,
instrument, phonograph, machine or device so that it is clearly audible
at a distance of 100 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which
it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
b. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets,
particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any
time or place, which annoys or disturbs the quiet, comfort or repose of
persons in any office, dwelling, hotel, motel or other type of residence
or of any persons in the vicinity.
c. The keeping of animals or birds which, by causing frequent or longcontinued
noise, disturbs the comfort or repose of any person in the
vicinity; but nothing herein contained is intended to apply to a dog
pound or kennel licensed in accordance with Chapter 5, Animal Control,
of this revision.
d. The sounding of a horn or warning device on an automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except when required by law, or when
necessary to give timely warning of the approach of the vehicle, or as a
warning of impending danger to persons driving other vehicles or to
persons on the street. No person shall sound a horn or warning device
on an automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle which emits an
§ 3-24.4 HOLMDEL § 3-25.2
1:168
§ 3-25.3. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2012-08]
Section 1-5 hereof, General Penalty, shall apply.
§ 3-26. REGULATION OF CONDUCT IN CERTAIN PARKING AREAS.
§ 3-26.1. Definition. [Ord. No. 2014-10]
As used in this section, "major place of amusement", shall mean any place
where any facilities for entertainment, amusement or sports are provided at
which admission charges are regularly paid and which contains fixed seats
or bleacher capacity of not less than 4,000 patrons.
§ 3-26.2. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2014-10]
No person or entity shall engage in or allow or permit others to engage in
any activity in the parking area of a major place of amusement other than:
Chapter 4
GENERAL LICENSING
§ 4-1. ALARM SYSTEMS.27
§ 4-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2005-30 § I]
The purpose of this section is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of intrusion, burglar, fire and other alarm devices requiring
response thereto by the Police Department, Fire Department or other
municipal agencies of the Township of Holmdel.
unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or for an unnecessary or
unreasonable period of time.
a. The parking of motor vehicles by staff or patrons; or
b. For access to the facility.
c. Any and all other activities are prohibited, including, by way of example
only and not by way of limitation:
1. Conduct prohibited by any of the following Code subsections:
3-21.1, 3-21.3, 3-21.4, 3-21.8, 3-21.9, 3-21.10, 3-21.12, 3-21.13,
3-21.14, 3-21.16, 3-21.17, 3-21.18, 3-21.20, 3-21.23 OR 3-21.24.
2. Organizing, sponsoring, holding or engaging in any event of
entertainment, amusement or sport.
27.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes 1976 Code §§ 25-1 — 25-9 and Ordinance
Nos. 19-80, 2001-6 and 2003-09.
§ 3-25.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.2
1:169
§ 4-1.2. Scope. [Ord. No. 2005-30 § I]
The provisions of this section shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains or owns any alarm system situated in the Township having an
audible signaling device or requiring a response by the Police Department,
Fire Department or other municipal agencies of the Township.
§ 4-1.3. Definitions. [1976 Code § 25-3; Ord. No. 2001-6 § 2; Ord.
No. 2005-30 § I; amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-21]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM BUSINESS — Any person, firm or corporation in the business of
selling, providing, maintaining, monitoring, servicing, repairing, altering,
replacing, moving or installing an alarm system in an alarm site.
ALARM PERMIT — A permit issued by the Holmdel Police Department
allowing the operation of an alarm system within the Township of Holmdel.
ALARM SITE — A single fixed premises or location served by an alarm
system or systems. Each unit, if served by a separate alarm system in a
multiunit building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site.
ALARM SYSTEM — A device or series of devices, including but not limited
to hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio frequency
method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a
local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and
intended to summon law enforcement response, including but not limited to
fire alarms, domestic violence alarms, alarms designed to elicit a first aid or
medical response, and local alarms.
ALARM USER — The owner or lessee of the real property upon which
an alarm system is installed, as well as any individual or entity that is
responsible for the premises upon which an alarm system is installed,
including but not limited to property managers and agents of the owner or
lessee of the real property.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — Limited to a member of the Police
Department of the Township, who may also function as the Alarm System
Inspector.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence
of the alarm user or his/her employees or agents causing a signal that
is activated to summon law enforcement, Fire Department, first aid, or
other municipal personnel, and upon inspection by the Holmdel Police
Department, evidence does not exist of any condition warranting the
summoning of law enforcement, Fire Department, first aid, or other
municipal personnel, including but not limited to the lack of an
unauthorized entry, robbery or other such crime which would have
activated a properly functioning alarm system. This definition shall not
include a signal that is canceled by an alarm user or his/her employees
or agents prior to the arrival of law enforcement, Fire Department, first
§ 4-1.2 HOLMDEL § 4-1.3
1:170
aid, or other personnel at the location in response to the false alarm, nor
shall it include an activation of an alarm system which can reasonably be
determined to have been caused or activated by an act of God or other
extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm
user.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm system which, when activated, produces a
signal such as store burglar alarm actuating bell devices or providing
warning of intrusion. The term "local alarm" shall not include any alarm
equipment designed to signal solely within the building (or series of
buildings, if owned by the same person) on which it is located and which
is not designed to emit signals, visible or audible, to persons outside each
building (or series of buildings).
NUISANCE ALARM — A false alarm that is attributable to the alarm
system's mechanical failure, improper installation, or lack of proper
maintenance, any alarm system that rings or puts forth any other sound for
a period in excess of 15 minutes, or any alarm system that causes a signal
to be produced using an automatic dial protection device that reports, or
causes to be reported, any recorded message to the Holmdel Township
Police Department.
PERMIT YEAR — The calendar year in which an alarm permit is issued.
PERMITTEE — Any person owning or operating an alarm system within the
scope of this section, who has been issued a permit to operate the system.
§ 4-1.4. Registration and Permits. [Ord. No. 2005-30 § I; amended
9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-21]
a. Permit Required. No person shall use an alarm system without first
obtaining an alarm permit for such alarm system from the Holmdel
Police Department. The alarm permit shall be issued for a permit year,
which shall be comprised of one calendar year or any portion of the
then-current calendar year up until December 31. Each permit shall be
renewed annually in January. A fee is required for the initial permit and
for each annual alarm permit renewal. Each alarm system requires a
separate alarm permit. Each alarm permit shall be assigned a unique
permit number.
b. If an alarm system owner fails to obtain an alarm permit within 20 days
of the installation of an alarm system or its takeover, then such owner
shall be deemed to be in violation of the Revised General Ordinances of
the Township of Holmdel and thereby subject to the imposition of a fine
of $500 per offense. No municipal court appearance shall be required
unless the owner pleads not guilty to the alleged violation. The fine may
be waived at court and/or any summons dismissed with proof that the
permit has been obtained prior to the court date.
c. Application. An alarm permit shall be requested on an application to be
provided by the Holmdel Police Department. An alarm user has the duty
to submit the required application to the Holmdel Police Department
§ 4-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.4
1:171
for initial permits and renewals, which may require the alarm user to
provide the following information:
1. The name(s) of the alarm user(s);
2. The address of the alarm site;
3. The name, address and telephone number of the alarm business
which is responsible for monitoring, inspecting, servicing,
responding to and/or maintaining the alarm system;
4. The type of alarm system;
5. Provisions relating to false alarms and testing procedures;
6. Business, cellular and home telephone numbers of the alarm user;
7. The name, address and telephone number of a minimum of two
persons who can be reached at any time, day or night, who are
authorized to respond to an alarm signal within one hour and who
can open the alarm site; and
8. Other information as may be required by the Chief of Police or his
designee.
d. Permit Fee. The alarm user shall pay a fee for an initial alarm permit
and each annual alarm permit renewal thereafter as set forth below. No
refund of any permit fees calculated pursuant to the terms of this
subsection shall be made. The initial permit fee and application must be
submitted to the Holmdel Police Department no later than 20 days after
the alarm system installation or system takeover.
1. Commercial Property:
(a) Initial fee: $50.
(b) Annual permit renewal fee: $50.
2. Residential Property:
(a) Initial fee: $20.
(b) Annual permit renewal fee: $20.
e. No alarm installer shall undertake any work toward the installation of
an alarm system in or on any property in the Township unless the alarm
installer has filed the above-referenced application with the Chief of
Police or has been presented with and made and retained a copy of
written evidence that the alarm user has filed the application with the
Chief of Police for an alarm system to be installed. It shall be the
responsibility of the alarm installer to advise its customers of the
requirements of this section. Any person or entity installing an alarm
system without evidence of an application for a permit in accordance
with this section shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000 per offense,
§ 4-1.4 HOLMDEL § 4-1.4
1:172
§ 4-1.5. Limitation of Township Obligations. [Ord. No. 2005-30 § I;
amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-21]
§ 4-1.6. General Regulations. [Ord. No. 2005-30 § I; amended
9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-21]
which can be reduced or suspended upon proof that a permit has been
obtained for the alarm site.
f. The Chief of Police shall issue a permit for the operation of an alarm
system if he/she or his/her designated representative is satisfied that
the registration information is complete and that the alarm system will
be operated in conformance to this section. The permit may be granted
subject to any special conditions stated thereon, if necessary.
g. Permittees shall be required to reregister whenever there is a change in
the alarm user or alarm business responsible for maintaining, servicing
and/or monitoring the alarm system.
h. Registrations shall not be transferable from one alarm site to another or
from one permittee to another.
i. Reporting Updated Information. Whenever the information provided on
an alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall provide
corrected information to the Holmdel Police Department within 20 days
of the change and/or as part of any alarm permit renewals completed
pursuant to this section. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be
deemed a failure to register an alarm system.
a. The Township shall be under no duty nor obligation to any permittee
concerning alarm systems registered in accordance with this section.
b. The requirements contained in this section shall not create any
contract, duty, or obligation, either express or implied, between the
alarm user and the Township of Holmdel or any of its subdivisions,
including the Holmdel Township Police Department, or any of the
entities that are subject to its regulation under applicable law, including
but not limited to nonprofit entities providing first aid and fire
responses. The Township hereby retains any and all governmental
immunities afforded to it under applicable law, including but not limited
to the New Jersey Tort Claims Act, N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq. By applying for
an alarm permit, the alarm user acknowledges that the Township of
Holmdel or any of its subdivisions, including the Holmdel Township
Police Department, or any of the entities that are subject to its
regulation under applicable law, including but not limited to nonprofit
entities providing first aid and fire responses, may have any potential
responses to alarm signals influenced by factors such as availability of
police or fire units, priority calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions,
emergency conditions, staffing and prior response history.
§ 4-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.6
1:173
§ 4-1.7. False and Nuisance Alarms; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2005-30
§ I; amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-21]
a. Any person or entity testing an alarm system shall notify the Police
Department immediately prior to and after the testing is completed.
Failure to do so shall subject such person to the penalties provided for
false alarms.
b. The sensory mechanism of alarm systems shall be adjusted so as to
suppress false indications and not to be actuated by impulses due to
short flashes of light, wind, noises, rattling or vibration at doors or
windows or other forces unrelated to alarm systems.
c. It shall be unlawful to install, maintain or use an audible alarm system,
except a fire alarm system, which can sound continually for more than
15 minutes.
d. Ringing in excess of 15 minutes is deemed to be a public nuisance. In
the event that an alarm system emitting an audible, visual or other
similar response shall fail to be deactivated within the time limitation
specified herein, the Police Chief or his designated representative shall
have the right to take such action as may be necessary in order to
disconnect such alarm, at the expense of the permittee.
e. It shall be unlawful to install, maintain or use an automatic dial
protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded
message to the Holmdel Township Police Department.
f. For violation of any provision of this subsection, except Subsection d
above, the penalty shall be as set forth in § 1-5, General Penalty.
a. In the case of any false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof
shall immediately notify the Police Department in a manner to be
prescribed by rules and regulations in accordance with Subsection
4-1.8. In addition, the Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be
made and shall keep a record of the alarms on file. For false alarms, the
following penalties shall be assessed against the alarm user:
1. For the first and second false alarm in any twelve-month period, a
warning shall be issued.
2. For the third false alarm in any twelve-month period, a fine of up to
$500 shall be paid to the Township.
3. For the fourth or any subsequent false alarms in a twelve-month
period, a fine of up to $750 shall be paid to the Township.
b. In the case of any nuisance alarm, any person having knowledge thereof
shall immediately notify the Police Department in a manner to be
prescribed by rules and regulations in accordance with Subsection
4-1.8. In addition, the Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be
§ 4-1.6 HOLMDEL § 4-1.7
1:174
§ 4-1.8. Chief of Police to Promulgate Rules and Regulations. [Ord.
No. 2005-30 § I; amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-21]
The Chief of Police or his designee may promulgate additional written
rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the Township Committee,
supplementing this section in order to provide for recordkeeping and
efficient operation and management of the system.
§ 4-2. PEDDLERS, HAWKERS, VENDORS, CANVASSERS AND
SOLICITORS.
§ 4-2.1. License Required. [1976 Code § 57-1; Ord. No. 91-7]
made and shall keep a record of the alarms on file. For nuisance alarms,
the following penalties shall be assessed against the alarm user:
1. For the first and second nuisance alarm in any twelve-month
period, a warning shall be issued.
2. For the third nuisance alarm in a twelve-month period, a fine of
$500 shall be paid to the Township.
3. For the fourth and fifth nuisance alarms in a twelve-month period, a
fine of $750 shall be paid to the Township.
4. For the sixth and additional nuisance alarms in a twelve-month
period, a fine of $1,000 shall be paid to the Township.
c. In the event the Municipal Court determines that the false or nuisance
alarm(s) occurred as a direct result of an interruption of electrical
power, a telephone system malfunction, or other causes beyond the
control of the alarm user, or that the alarm user has submitted proof
that the alarm system has been satisfactorily repaired to prevent the
recurrence of a false alarm or nuisance alarm that is the subject of a
violation, the Municipal Court may waive or reduce imposition of the
applicable penalties under this section.
d. False alarms created by an act of nature shall not be subject to penalty
under this section.
a. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to sell, buy or dispose of, display or
offer for sale any food, beverage, confections, goods, wares,
merchandise, service or commodities of any nature or description to be
delivered or performed presently or in the future or to take orders for
any such item or service to be delivered or performed presently or in
the future, within the Township, without first obtaining a license
therefor.
b. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to cause the delivery to any building,
unless the same has been previously ordered, or to cause the placing
upon any automobile, tree, pole, sign, billboard, fence or building,
except where located on the premises of the vendor, any printed or
§ 4-1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2.1
1:175
§ 4-2.2. Definitions. [1976 Code § 57-2; Ord. No. 91-7]
As used in this section:
MERCHANDISE — Shall mean all goods, wares, food, fruit, vegetables, ice
cream, candy, farm products, magazines, periodicals, clothing and all kinds
of articles of personal property for domestic use, and orders or contracts for
services including, but not limited to, home improvements or alterations.
PUBLIC STREET OR SIDEWALK — Shall mean all areas legally open to
public use as public streets, sidewalks, roadways, highways, parkways,
parking lots or spaces, alleys and any other public way.
STAND — Shall mean any news stand, table, bench, booth, rack, hand cart,
pushcart or any other fixture or device which is not required to be licensed
and registered by the Department of Motor Vehicles, used for the display,
storage or transportation of articles offered for sale by a vendor.
VENDOR — Shall mean any person, including an employee or agent of
another, who sells or offers to sell or barter food, beverage, goods,
confections, wares, merchandise, services or commodities of any nature
or description on any public street or sidewalk, on or from any public or
private property, from a stand, cart or motor vehicle or from his or her
person, or one who travels, by foot, wagon, motor vehicle, pushcart or any
other method of transportation from house to house or street to street
selling or offering to sell or barter food, beverages, goods, confections,
wares, merchandise, services or commodities of any nature or description.
The term "vendor" shall also include "canvasser", "solicitor", "transient
merchant", "itinerant merchant", "peddler", "hawker", "distributor" or any
other term which describes an activity which is similar to those activities
conducted by a "vendor".
§ 4-2.3. Exemptions from License Requirements. [1976 Code § 57-3;
Ord. No. 91-7]
Requirements of this section shall not apply as follows:
advertising matter, unless the vendor shall first obtain a license
therefor. Every vendor distributing printed or advertising matter shall
do so in such a way as to avoid the littering and scattering of the printed
or advertising matter, and such vendor shall comply with all applicable
ordinances, rules and regulations established by the Township
Committee.
a. Exemption from Fee Requirement.
1. Any charitable or religious body or group that shall conduct sales of
personal property when the proceeds thereof shall be applied to
the payment of the expenses thereof and to the charitable or
religious objects for which the body exists.
2. Any person honorably discharged from the military service who has
a license under N.J.S. 45:24-9 et seq.
§ 4-2.1 HOLMDEL § 4-2.3
1:176
§ 4-2.4. Application for License. [1976 Code § 57-4; Ord. No. 91-7]
3. Any person who is an exempt fireman of a volunteer fire
department as defined by N.J.S. 45:24-9, possessing a license
conforming with said law.
b. Exemption from Other Requirements. The following persons or entities
shall be exempt from all requirements of this section except the
provisions set forth in subsections 4-2.8 and 4-2.9 thereof:
1. Any public utility or its employees, which utility is subject to
regulation by the State Board of Public Utility Commissioners;
provided, however, that such employee shall display the
identification badge or card issued by his/her employer.
2. Any person not otherwise subject hereto, engaged in the delivery of
goods, wares or merchandise or other articles or things in the
regular course of business to the premises or persons who had
ordered the same or entitled to receive the same by reason of a
prior agreement.
3. Any person going from house to house for the purpose of obtaining
the views of any person on any economic, political, religious or
social question or project or for the purpose of distributing
literature, pamphlets, circulars, samples and the like for the
purpose of information and advertising for a governmental or
noncommercial agency.
4. Any person or group engaged in a Township sponsored or
cosponsored event.
5. Any person selling fruits, vegetables or farm products grown by
himself/herself, with or without the help of others.
6. Persons engaged in the sale or delivery of any newspaper which
has been approved by the State of New Jersey or any political
subdivision thereof as qualified for the publishing of legal notices.
7. Any member of the Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts or a similarly
constituted youth organization that shall conduct sales of personal
property when the proceeds thereof shall be applied to the
payment of the expenses thereof and to the objectives for which the
group exists.
a. General Information. Every applicant for a license under this section
shall file with the Supervisor of Mercantile Licenses a sworn written
application in a form to be furnished by said supervisor, which may
contain all information relevant and necessary to determine whether a
particular license may be issued, including but not limited to:
1. The name of the applicant; if a corporation, the names and home
addresses (P.O. Box address not acceptable) and home telephone
§ 4-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2.4
1:177
numbers of the president and secretary shall be set forth; if a
partnership, the names and addresses of all partners shall be set
forth.
2. The name under which the business is to be conducted.
3. Business address of applicant (P.O. Box address not acceptable);
permanent home address and full local address of the applicant
(P.O. Box address not acceptable).
4. A brief description of the nature of the business and a description
of the merchandise or service to be sold.
5. If employed by another, the name and business address of the
person, firm, association, organization, company or corporation
(P.O. Box address not acceptable).
6. If a motor vehicle is to be used in the vending business, a
description of the vehicle together with the motor vehicle
registration number and the license number.
7. A description of the proposed location(s) of the vending business
and the length of time during which it is proposed that the business
shall be conducted.
8. Three photographs of the applicant taken within 60 days
immediately prior to the date of the application, which photograph
shall clearly show the head and shoulders of the applicant and shall
measure two inches by two inches, which may be waived in a
renewal application.
9. Whether or not the applicant has ever had a license to conduct a
business in the Township which has been denied or revoked. If such
license has been denied or revoked, the applicant shall set forth in
detail the facts leading to such action.
10. The details of any conviction for crimes of the first, second, third or
fourth degree, the date of the conviction and the place where the
conviction was obtained.
11. The business telephone number of the applicant.
12. If a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent
thereof (P.O. Box address not acceptable).
b. Moral Character. No license or renewal thereof, shall be issued to any
person not of good moral character. If applicant is not an individual,
these provisions shall apply to the officers and managers.
c. Prior to the issuance of a license, the supervisor of licenses and permits
may cause a routine police check to be made of the applicant to verify
the validity of the information above-described. The Police Department
shall report in writing affirmatively or negatively within 14 days after
§ 4-2.4 HOLMDEL § 4-2.4
1:178
§ 4-2.5. Fees. [1976 Code § 57-5; Ord. No. 91-7]
An applicant for a license under this section shall pay an annual license fee
of $50 per vendor. This fee shall cover the vendor. For each additional agent
or employee the fee shall be $25 per employee.
§ 4-2.6. Insurance. [1976 Code § 57-6; Ord. No. 91-71]
No license shall be issued to an applicant unless the applicant furnishes
proof to the Township of a public liability bond or insurance policy in an
amount not less than $100,000 for property damage and injuries, including
injury resulting in death, caused by the operation of the vending business.
The Township shall be listed as an additional insured under such policy.
Multiple applicants from one company may be covered under a blanket
policy so long as the minimum coverage required herein applies to each
occurrence each employee may be liable for.
§ 4-2.7. Licenses and Identification Badges. [1976 Code § 57-7; Ord.
No. 91-7]
the request is made, indicating recommendations for approval or
disapproval of the granting of the license and the reasons therefor.
d. After submission of the application and the required fees to the
supervisor, he/she shall make any investigation necessary, including but
not limited to reports from the Police Department, Health Department
and Zoning Officer, and indicate his/her written approval or disapproval
of the license application within 30 days after the application is filed. If
approved, the initial license shall be issued in the name of the applicant.
If disapproved, the supervisor shall notify the applicant in writing of
disapproval and the reasons therefor and the applicant shall have 10
days from the receipt of notice to appeal the decision of the supervisor
to the Township Committee which, after due hearing, may affirm or
reverse the decision of the supervisor.
a. The license issued to a vendor shall be carried with the vendor while he
or she is engaged in the business of vending.
b. In addition to the license, the Township shall issue an identification
badge to every vendor. Vendors shall wear their badges in such a way
that the badges may be easily read while doing business. If a badge
becomes damaged or obscured, the vendor shall return it to the
Township and receive another badge at a fee of $25.
c. Licenses and identification badges shall be used only by the person to
whom they were issued and may not be transferred to any other person.
d. The license holder shall produce such license at the request of any
official of the Township or of any resident of the Township with whom he
or she wishes to conduct his or her business activity.
§ 4-2.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2.8
1:179
§ 4-2.8. Prohibited Practices. [1976 Code § 57-8; Ord. No. 91-7; Ord.
No. 2010-03]
No vendor shall:
a. Conduct or attempt to conduct his or her business at any residence or
on any property on which is posted a sign expressly prohibiting such
activity.
b. Station, place, set-up maintain his or her stand or allow it to remain on
any public street if to do so would place him or her closer than 30 feet to
any other vendor who is selling thereon.
c. Station, place, set-up or maintain his or her stand on the sidewalk or
allow it to remain there except at the curbline for the purpose of selling
food, beverages, goods, confections, wares, merchandise or
commodities of any nature or description therefrom.
d. Station, place, set-up or maintain his or her stand or allow it to remain
on any public street in such a way as would: (1) substantially restrict,
obstruct, interfere with or impede the pedestrian's right-of-way; (2)
substantially restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede the driver of a
vehicle's right-of-way; (3) substantially restrict, obstruct, interfere or
impede the ingress or egress from the abutting property; (4) create or
become a nuisance; (5) increase traffic congestion, cause or increase
traffic delays or hazards; (6) cause or create or constitute danger to life,
health or property; (7) locate within 25 feet of a fire hydrant, fire
escape, bus stop, loading zone, driveway; or (8) sell food, drinks, ice
cream or confections of any kind for immediate consumption unless he
or she has available for public use his or her own covered litter
receptacle which shall be clearly marked and maintained for his or her
patronage use (with separate recyclable compartments) nor shall any
vendor leave any location without first picking up, removing and
disposing of any trash or refuse remaining from sales made by him or
her.
e. Use a cart the dimensions of which exceed two feet in width, four feet in
length and four feet in height including wheel height.
f. Use any cart which, fully loaded with merchandise cannot be easily
moved and maintained under control by the licensee, his/her employee
or attendants.
g. Use, set-up, attach, place or permit the use of any table, crate, carton,
rack, device or structure of any kind to increase the selling or display
capacity of his or her stand.
h. Leave any stand unattended at any time or store, place or leave the
same overnight on any public street or sidewalk.
i. Engage in the business of vending between dusk and 7:00 a.m.
§ 4-2.8 HOLMDEL § 4-2.8
1:180
§ 4-2.9. Do Not Solicit List. [Ord. No. 2010-03]
j. Station, place, set-up or maintain his or her stand, or allow it to remain
on any part of the street for sale or display or be sold if to do so would
place the vendor or his or her food, beverages, confections, goods,
wares, merchandise or commodities of any nature or description closer
than 10 feet from intersecting streets or sidewalks.
k. Station, place, set-up or maintain his or her stand or allow it to remain
on any public street if to do so would reduce the unobstructed
pedestrian or vehicular right-of-way to less than four feet on any
sidewalk or 15 feet on each lane of any public street. The Township
Engineer and Traffic Safety Officer may from time to time, recommend
to the Township Committee, an increase or decrease in the width of
pedestrian and vehicular right-of-way space required, as circumstances
dictate in a particular area or on a particular street.
l. Engage in the business of vending within 10 feet of any location where
the curb has been depressed to facilitate pedestrian or vehicle
movement.
m. Station, place, set-up or maintain his or her stand against display
windows of fixed location businesses, nor shall they be within 20 feet
from an entrance-way to any building, store, theater, library, school,
museum, movie house, or other place of public assembly.
n. Station, place, set-up or maintain his or her stand or vehicle on any
portion of a public street or public parking lot in spaces designated for
the parking of motor vehicles while conducting business therefrom.
o. Place a vehicle or stand or conduct a general vending business at a
location in the street where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited,
or during a time period when stopping, standing or parking is
restricted.
p. Violate any traffic parking law, ordinance or regulation, or operate in
such a manner as to restrict the continued maintenance of a clear
passageway for vehicles.
q. No person shall have exclusive right to any location in or upon the
public streets, nor shall any vested rights arise from the use of any
location.
r. Station, place, set-up or maintain his or her stand or allow it to remain
on any public street where the posted speed limit is in excess of 35
miles per hour.
a. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other subsection of this section,
any person or entity who owns or rents property within the Township
may register such property on a Do Not Solicit List.
b. Registration for the Do Not Solicit List shall be made as follows:
§ 4-2.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2.9
1:181
§ 4-2.10. Compliance with Health Requirements. [1976 Code § 57-9;
Ord. No. 91-7; Ord. No. 2010-03]
Any prospective vendor of any food or beverage, in addition to the license
required herein, shall apply to the Health Department for a license to
operate and must operate in accordance with Chapter 12, of the New Jersey
State Sanitary Code-Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments, N.J.A.C.
8:24-1 et seq.
§ 4-2.11. Enforcement. [1976 Code § 57-10; Ord. No. 91-7; Ord. No.
2010-03]
It shall be the duty of any Police Officer, Health Officer, Code Enforcement
Officer, Zoning Officer, or other appropriate Township employee or official
to enforce the provisions of this section.
§ 4-2.12. Records. [1976 Code § 57-11; Ord. No. 91-7; Ord. No.
2010-03]
The Supervisor of Mercantile Licenses shall maintain a record of all licenses
issued under the provisions of this section and shall record therein all
convictions for violations of this section and other pertinent circumstances
and incidents reported to him or her by the enforcement officers/officials.
§ 4-2.13. Suspension or Revocation of License. [1976 Code § 57-12;
Ord. No. 91-7; Ord. No. 2010-03]
1. The Do Not Solicit List shall be maintained by the Township Clerk.
2. The Do Not Solicit List shall consist solely of property addresses
and shall include no further identifying information concerning the
ownership of each property.
3. The Tax Assessor shall notify the Township Clerk of any change in
ownership of property within the Township. The Township Clerk
shall remove from the Do Not Solicit List any property which has
changed ownership.
c. The Township Clerk's office shall provide a copy of the Do Not Solicit
List to every applicant to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this
section. The Township Clerk's office shall also provide a copy of the Do
Not Solicit List to any individual or entity otherwise exempt from the
provisions of this chapter under Section 4-2 which intends to engage in
door-to-door canvassing, solicitation, political campaigning, advocacy,
education or proselytizing as those individuals and entities shall be
subject to this subsection.
d. Solicitation at any address identified on the Do Not Solicit List shall
constitute a violation of this section. Each and every solicitation at an
address identified on the Do Not Solicit List shall constitute a separate
violation of this section.
§ 4-2.9 HOLMDEL § 4-2.13
1:182
§ 4-2.14. Expiration and Renewal of License. [1976 Code § 57-13;
Ord. No. 91-7; Ord. No. 2010-03]
All licenses issued under the provisions of this section shall expire
December 31 of the calendar year in which they are issued. Any such
license may be renewed upon payment of a license renewal fee of $10 and
upon submission by the licensee of a new application in conformity with
the requirements of subsection 4-2.4 or, in lieu thereof, a sworn statement
in writing, setting forth all changes in the information contained in the
application for the expired license which are necessary to bring the
application completely up to date, together with proof of insurance and
bonding renewals.
§ 4-3. LICENSING AND REGULATION OF SALES AND
CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS.
a. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked by
the Township Committee after notice and hearing for any of the
following reasons:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements in the application for
the license;
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements in the course of
conducting the business of vending;
3. Conducting the business of vending contrary to the conditions of
the license;
4. Violation of this section or of any ordinance of the Township;
5. Conviction of the licensee of any crime or offense involving moral
turpitude;
6. Conducting the vending licensed through applicant himself/herself,
or any of his/her agents, servants or employees, in an unlawful
manner, or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace
or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public or
in such manner as to constitute a public nuisance.
b. Notice of hearing on the suspension or revocation of a license shall be
given in writing by the supervisor, setting forth specifically the grounds
of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be
mailed, by certified mail, to the licensee, at the address indicated on the
license application at least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing.
In addition to the provisions for suspension or revocation, the
supervisor, any Police Officer or Township employee or official, or any
taxpayer or resident of the Township may make complaint in the
Municipal Court for violation of this section.
§ 4-2.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3.1
1:183
§ 4-3.1. Prohibition. [1976 Code § 33-1; Ord. No. 92-10; Ord. No.
94-13]
As of the effective date of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person,
corporation or other legal entity to park or maintain a sales or construction
trailer on any public or private property within the Township without a
permit duly issued by the Township in accordance with the terms of this
section.
§ 4-3.2. Initial Application Process. [1976 Code § 33-2; Ord. No.
92-10; Ord. No. 93-21]
a. Permits for temporary sales or construction trailers may be obtained
upon submission of a written application to the Code Enforcement
Officer by persons desiring the permits. The application shall set forth
the name and address of the owner of the trailer; the ownership and
location of the site where the trailer is to be parked or maintained and
the name and address of the general contractor, if other than the owner
of the trailer.
b. After submission of the application and required application fees, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct an examination of the site,
consult with the Township Engineer and Public Safety Officer and
submit a recommendation for approval or disapproval noting therein
any special conditions or circumstances. If the applicant is processing a
development application before the Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment, the recommendation of the Code Enforcement Officer shall
be forwarded to such Board to approve or disapprove the permit
application consistent with the standards of this section. In all other
circumstances the recommendation of the Code Enforcement Officer
shall be made to the Township Committee for action hereunder.
c. Applicants shall notify adjoining property owners located within 200
feet of the perimeter of the proposed trailer site of the pending
application by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the trailer
permit application is one to be processed before the Planning Board or
the Board: of Adjustment as a result of a development application
requiring notice to property owners within 200 feet, then the applicant
shall include notifications of the trailer permit application when
complying with the provisions of N.J.S. 40:55D-11 and 12. Thereafter,
the reviewing Board shall grant or deny the application for the permit
when taking action on the development application. In all other cases,
the notification to property owners required by this section shall set
forth:
1. Name and address of applicant.
2. An identification of the property where the proposed trailer will be
located by street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block
numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the municipal tax
assessor's office.
§ 4-3.1 HOLMDEL § 4-3.2
1:184
§ 4-3.3. Site Location Standards. [1976 Code § 33-3; Ord. No. 92-10]
All applications submitted pursuant to the provisions of this section shall
be accompanied by a site plan, subdivision plat or survey showing the
proposed location of the trailer. No trailer may be located within 125 feet
of an occupied dwelling unit. Trailers shall not be mounted on permanent
foundations and the required plot plan shall specify landscaping, buffering,
and the method of solid waste disposal proposed by the applicant.
§ 4-3.4. Use of Trailers. [1976 Code § 33-4; Ord. No. 92-10]
Trailers may only be used as temporary sales offices, construction offices
and for the storage of construction materials and supplies during the
construction of a project on lots in approved subdivision or approved site
plan lots. Trailer sites may not be used as staging areas for construction
projects.
No advertising signs or devices may be erected or installed on trailers or
trailer sites except for one temporary sign as permitted by Section 78-63 of
the "Holmdel Development Regulations Ordinance".
Movement of equipment or supplies to and from the trailer shall not
commence before 7:00 a.m. and shall cease at 7:00 p.m. Monday through
3. A rendering of the property showing the proposed location of the
trailer.
4. A notification that the recipient of the notice has 10 days from the
date that the notice was mailed to register with the Code
Enforcement Officer an objection to the granting of the permit.
5. The location and times at which all maps and documents relating to
the application for which approval is sought are available for
inspection by members of the public.
d. If the trailer permit application is one which will be acted upon in
conjunction with a development application and if the Code
Enforcement Officer receives no objection to the granting of the permit,
such officer may grant the permit if all requirements of this section
have been met. If any objection is received, the matter shall be listed for
action at a public meeting by the body before which the application is
pending. The Code Enforcement Officer shall advise the applicant and
the objecting party of the date, time and place at which the application
will be considered and of their right to attend and be heard.
e. No permit for a sale or construction trailer shall be issued pursuant to
the provisions of this section unless and until all municipal taxes and
assessments against the property upon which the proposed trailer is to
be placed are current. A certification from the Tax Collector shall
accompany all applications submitted pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
§ 4-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3.4
1:185
Saturday and no equipment or supplies may be removed to or from the site
on Sundays.
§ 4-3.5. Application Fee. [1976 Code § 33-5; Ord. No. 92-10]
Each application submitted pursuant to the terms of this section shall be
accompanied by a fee as follows:
§ 4-3.6. Trailer Permit Duration; Renewal Process. [1976 Code
§ 33-6; Ord. No. 92-10]
§ 4-3.7. Suspension or Revocation of Permit. [1976 Code § 33-7;
Ord. No. 92-10]
Any permit issued pursuant to the terms of this section may be suspended
or revoked by the Township Committee for good cause shown upon notice
and hearing. Good cause shall include but not be limited to the following
factors:
a. Initial application $200 per trailer.
b. Renewal application $100 per trailer.
a. Any permit issued pursuant to the terms of this section shall be valid for
an initial period of 12 months.
b. Permits may be renewed upon request to the Code Enforcement Officer
for additional six month periods. If the location and circumstances for
use of the trailer have not changed since the initial application was
granted, the Code Enforcement Officer may grant or deny requests for
extension or renewal of permits based upon a review of the status of the
ongoing construction project; the reason or reasons for delay in the
completion of the construction project during the initial permit period
or any other relevant factors provided to the Code Enforcement Officer
by the applicant or interested parties. If the location and/or
circumstances for use of the trailer have changed since the initial
application was granted, the application shall proceed pursuant to
subsection 4-3.2.
c. Permits shall expire regardless of the expiration date specified therein
upon the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the last unit in a
development.
a. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the application for the
permit;
b. Use of the sales/construction trailer for any purpose other than
purposes set forth in this section;
c. Violation of any of the terms or provisions of this section;
d. Use of the trailer and/or construction site by the applicant, his/her
agents or employees in an unlawful manner, or in such manner as to
§ 4-3.4 HOLMDEL § 4-3.7
1:186
§ 4-3.8. Penalty. [1976 Code § 33-10; Ord. No. 92-10]
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of the
Township of Holmdel of violating the terms and provisions of this section
shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 4-4. TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
§ 4-4.1. Definitions. [1976 Code § 28-1; Ord. No. 92-12]
As used in this section:
PERSON — Shall mean and include any individual, copartnership,
association, corporation or joint-stock company, their lessees, trustees or
receivers appointed by any Court whatever.
STREET — Shall mean and include any street, park, parkway or public place
used for public travel.
TAXICAB OR TAXI — Shall mean a motor vehicle used to transport
passengers for hire which does not operate over a fixed route and is not
hired by the day or hour.
§ 4-4.2. License Required. [1976 Code § 28-2; Ord. No. 92-12]
No person shall operate a taxicab within the Township for the
transportation of passengers for hire without first having obtained the
license or licenses required by this section.
§ 4-4.3. License Required for Vehicles Operating Wholly or Partly
Within Municipality. [1976 Code § 28-3; Ord. No. 92-12]
It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicles over the streets of the
Township for the transportation of passengers for hire, whether such motor
vehicle is operated over routes wholly or partly within the territorial limits
of such municipality, without first having obtained a license therefor as
hereinafter provided; provided that it shall not be unlawful to transport
passengers for hire in any motor vehicle used for funeral purposes.
constitute a danger to the health, safety and general welfare of the
public at large or in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance;
e. Failure to maintain the trailer and its site in a clean, litter-free and safe
condition.
Notice of the proposed hearing on the suspension or revocation of the permit
shall be given in writing by the Municipal Clerk, setting forth specifically the
grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Notice shall
be mailed by certified mail return receipt requested to the permittee at the
applicant's address indicated on the application at least 10 days prior to the
date set for the hearing.
§ 4-3.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.4
1:187
§ 4-4.4. License Applies Only to Vehicle Described in Application.
[1976 Code § 28-4; Ord. No. 92-12]
Licenses issued pursuant to the terms of this section shall only apply to the
motor vehicle which is mentioned and described in the original application
for a license as provided herein. No other motor vehicle shall be operated
under the license, and the licensed motor vehicle shall be owned by the
person or legal entity named in the license.
§ 4-4.5. Applications for Taxicab Owner's License and Taxicab
Driver's License. [1976 Code § 28-5; Ord. No. 92-12]
a. Taxicab Owner's License. Applicants for a taxicab owner's license shall
meet the following requirements:
1. Every applicant for a taxicab owner's license shall submit the
insurance policy or policies required by N.J.S. 48:16-3 or N.J.S.
48:16-4 covering the specific motor vehicle or vehicles to be
licensed. The applicant shall also execute and deliver the Power of
Attorney required by N.J.S. 48:16-5.
2. Applicants for owner's licenses shall submit a written statement
specifying the owner's name, address, the vehicle identification
number of each vehicle to be licensed, the type, color, age and
make of each vehicle to be licensed, and the number of persons
each vehicle is capable of transporting.
3. Applicants for owner's licenses shall submit at least two character
witnesses and/or business references.
b. Taxicab Driver's License. Applicants for a taxicab driver's license shall
meet the following requirements:
1. The applicant shall be in good health and shall not suffer from any
chronic illness or disease which would impair the applicant's ability
to safely operate a motor vehicle on the highways of the State of
New Jersey.
2. The applicant shall not be addicted to or use controlled and
dangerous substances and shall not be an alcoholic or suffer from
alcoholism.
3. The applicant shall be able to read and write the English language.
4. The applicant shall be of good and moral character.
5. The applicant shall not have been convicted of an indictable offense
or of a reckless driving offense within two years next preceding the
filing date of the application.
6. The applicant shall possess a valid New Jersey driver's license and
shall have a general knowledge of New Jersey Department of Motor
§ 4-4.4 HOLMDEL § 4-4.5
1:188
§ 4-4.6. Insurance Required; Power of Attorney. [1976 Code § 28-6;
Ord. No. 92-12]
Vehicles rules and laws governing the use of motor vehicles within
the State of New Jersey.
7. The applicant shall have a general knowledge of the geography and
streets of the Township.
8. The applicant shall furnish with the application for a taxicab
driver's license a recent photograph of himself of a size not less
than 4 1/2 inches in height and 3 1/2 inches in width.
9. The applicant shall be fingerprinted by the Township Police and
shall consent to a review of the applicant's motor vehicle driving
record and criminal record, if any.
10. The applicant shall be at least 21 years of age.
a. No taxicab shall be licensed until the owner thereof shall have filed with
the Township Clerk an insurance policy of a company duly licensed to
transact business under the insurance laws of the State of New Jersey
(the policy to be approved by the Township Committee of the Township
of Holmdel), in the sum of $5,000, against loss from the liability
imposed by the law upon the owner or driver for damages on account of
bodily injuries or death suffered by any person or persons as a result of
an accident occurring by reason of the ownership, maintenance or use
of such vehicle upon the streets of the Township of Holmdel; such
insurance policy shall provide for payment of any final judgment
recovered by any person on account of the ownership, maintenance and
use of such taxicab or any fault in respect thereto, and shall be for the
benefit of every person suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
b. Concurrently with the filing of the policy herein referred to, the person
to whom a license shall be granted shall execute a power of attorney
and deliver the same to the Township Clerk, whereby such person shall
name, constitute and appoint the Clerk his true and lawful attorney for
the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of a court of
competent jurisdiction, to be served against the insured by virtue of the
indemnity granted under the insurance filed, and also for the purpose of
acknowledging service on behalf of the insurance company upon the
bond. The policy to be furnished shall also insure by the owner of the
taxicab the performance of all the conditions of this section and the
amendments thereof and supplements thereto and the agreements set
forth in the application filed by the owner on securing the license.
c. The license herein provided for shall continue effectively only so long as
such insurance to the full and collectible amount of $5,000 shall remain
in force.
§ 4-4.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.7
1:189
§ 4-4.7. Issuance of License. [1976 Code § 28-8; Ord. No. 92-12]
Upon receipt, of an application submitted pursuant to the terms of this
section, the application shall be submitted to the Township Chief of Police
for review and recommendation. After receipt of the recommendation by
the Chief of Police, the Township Clerk shall submit the application for
consideration to the Township Committee.
§ 4-4.8. Factors Considered. [1976 Code § 28-8; Ord. No. 92-12]
In determining whether to grant or deny any license required by the
provisions of this section, the Township Committee shall take into
consideration the following factors:
§ 4-4.9. Expiration Date of Licenses. [1976 Code § 28-14; Ord. No.
92-12]
All licenses issued pursuant to the terms of this section shall expire on
December 31st following the date when issued, and the fees herein fixed
shall be the license fee whether it be for all or part of such license year.
§ 4-4.10. License Fees. [1976 Code § 28-15; Ord. No. 92-12]
The following fees shall be imposed for the purposes of administering the
terms and provisions of this section and for fee generation as provided by
law:
a. The character, business or financial responsibility, experience of the
applicant and the probability that if granted a license, the applicant will
operate the licensed motor vehicle in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
b. Any other factors directly related to the granting or denial of a license
which would substantially affect the public safety or convenience.
c. The Township Committee shall, by resolution, grant or deny licenses
requested pursuant to the terms of this section within 30 days of their
receipt of a completed application form and report from the Chief of
Police or his/her designee. If the application is approved, the Clerk shall
issue the license upon forms established by the Township Committee by
resolution.
a. For each taxi - $50.
b. For each taxicab driver's license - $50.
In addition to the above specified changes, applicants shall be responsible for
fingerprinting, abstracts and processing fees imposed by the Township Police
Department.
§ 4-4.7 HOLMDEL § 4-4.11
1:190
§ 4-4.11. Rates. [1976 Code § 28-17; Ord. No. 92-12]
The Township Committee may, by ordinance, establish the fees charged to
any and all passengers occupying or using the motor vehicles regulated by
the provisions of this section.
§ 4-4.12. Identification of Taxicabs. [1976 Code § 28-18; Ord. No.
92-12]
No taxicabs shall be operated in the Township unless and until there is
prominently displayed on the motor vehicle the words "Taxicab" or "Taxi".
Each taxicab shall also display the rates charged to passengers of the
vehicle.
§ 4-4.13. Owners and Operators of Motor Vehicles: Compliance with
Statutes Relating to Ownership, Registration, Operation. [1976
Code § 28-19; Ord. No. 92-12]
Nothing herein contained shall exempt any person owning or operating
any motor vehicle from complying with existing statutes relating to the
ownership, registration and operation of automobiles in this State.
§ 4-4.14. Inspection: Power to Revoke License. [1976 Code § 28-20;
Ord. No. 92-12]
The Township Committee or its duly authorized representatives shall have
the right to inspect all motor vehicles licensed pursuant to the terms of this
section at any and all times and should there be a violation of any of the
provisions of this section, any license issued may be revoked.
§ 4-4.15. Authorization to Revoke. [1976 Code § 28-21; Ord. No.
92-12]
The Township Committee is hereby authorized to revoke any license issued
pursuant to the terms of this section for a violation of any term or provision
of this section.
The Municipal Court may enforce the terms and provisions of this section
and may revoke any license issued pursuant to the terms of this section
upon conviction of a license holder for violation of the terms of this section.
Should any person holding a license issued pursuant to the terms of this
section be convicted of reckless driving or driving under the influence of
intoxicating liquors or drugs, in addition to any other sentence provided by
the laws of the State of New Jersey, the Judge of the Municipal Court may
revoke any license issued pursuant to the terms of this section.
§ 4-5. LICENSING AND REGULATING OF PERSONS ENGAGING IN
THE PURCHASE OF PRECIOUS METALS, GEMS, JEWELRY AND
SECONDHAND GOODS.28
§ 4-4.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-5.1
1:191
§ 4-5.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — Shall mean a current valid New Jersey
driver's license or identification card, a current valid photo driver's license
issued by another U.S. state, a valid United States passport, or other
verifiable U.S. government issued identification, which will be recorded on
the receipt retained by the dealer and subsequently forwarded to the local
police department or request.
DEALER — Shall mean any person, partnership, limited-liability company,
corporation, or other entity who, either wholly or in part, engages in or
operates any of the following trades or businesses: the buying for purposes
of resale of precious metals, jewelry, or other secondhand goods as defined
herein; pawnbrokers as defined herein; itinerant businesses as defined
herein. For the purposes of this section, transient buyers, as defined herein,
are subject to the same licensing and reporting requirements as any other
dealers.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Shall mean a dealer who conducts business
intermittently within the municipality or at varying locations.
MUNICIPAL CLERK OR "TOWNSHIP CLERK" — Shall mean the statutory
officer whose duties are defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 and may refer to the
duly appointed clerk of the "Township."
PAWNBROKER — Shall mean any person, partnership, association or
corporation lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other
than choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness;
purchasing personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated
price; or doing business as furniture storage warehousemen and lending
money on goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral
security.
PRECIOUS METALS — Shall mean gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and
their alloys as defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and 51:6-1 et seq.
PUBLIC — Shall mean individuals and retail sellers, not to include
wholesale transactions or transactions between other merchants.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Shall mean every transaction conducted
between a dealer and a member of the public in which precious metals,
jewelry, or any other secondhand goods as defined herein are purchased or
pawned.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Shall mean used goods such as antiques, gold,
silver, platinum, or other precious metals, jewelry, coins, gemstones, gift
cards, any tools, telephones, typewriters, word processors, GPS devices,
computers, computer hardware and software, television sets, radios, record
or stereo sets, electronic devices, musical instruments, sporting goods,
28.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes 1976 Code § 51A-1 — 51A-8 and Ordinance
Nos. 89-2, 96-20, 2015-16.
§ 4-5.1 HOLMDEL § 4-5.1
1:192
automotive equipment, collectibles, game cartridges, DVDs, CDs, and other
electronically recorded material, firearms, cameras and camera equipment,
video equipment, furniture, clothing, and other valuable articles. For the
purposes of this section, secondhand goods shall not include goods
transacted in the following manner: i) judicial sales or sales by executors or
administrators; ii) occasional or auction sales of household goods sold from
private homes; iii) auctions of real estate; iv) the occasional sale, purchase,
or exchange of coins or stamps by a person at his permanent residence or
in any municipally owned building who is engaged in the hobby of collecting
coins or stamps and who does not solicit the sale, purchase, or exchange
of such coins or stamps to or from the general public by billboard, sign,
handbill, newspaper, magazine, radio, television, or other form of printed or
electronic advertising.
SELLER — Shall mean a member of the public who sells or pawns used
goods such as precious metal, jewelry, or other secondhand goods to a
dealer.
TRANSIENT BUYER — Shall mean a dealer, as defined herein, who has not
been in a registered retail business continuously for at least six months at
any address in the municipality where the dealer is required to register or
who intends to close out or discontinue all retail business within six months.
§ 4-5.2. License Requirement for Dealers. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
a. No person, partnership, limited-liability company, corporation, or other
entity shall engage in the business of buying, selling, or pawning of
precious metals or other secondhand goods, as defined above, within
the jurisdiction of the municipality, without having first obtained a
license therefor from the Municipal Clerk, which license shall bear a
number issued by the Municipal Clerk.
b. The application for a license to the Municipal Clerk shall set forth the
name, date of birth, and address of the dealer, whether or not he or she
is a citizen of the United States, and whether or not he or she has ever
been convicted of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or
municipal ordinance violation(s), and the date(s) thereof.
c. Advertising in any print or electronic media or by sign that any of those
articles or secondhand goods referred to in subsection 4-5.1 above are
being bought in any location within the municipality shall constitute
engaging in business as a dealer of secondhand goods for purposes of
this section. No person, partnership, limited-liability company,
corporation or other entity shall place or cause to be placed any
advertisement for purchase of such articles or goods without stating in
the advertising the license number issued to a person or entity by the
municipality. In any print advertisement, the license number shall
appear in type no smaller than eight-point in the lower-right-hand
corner of the advertisement. In any advertisement in electronic media,
the license number shall be visually or audibly stated. Failure to state or
§ 4-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-5.2
1:193
§ 4-5.3. Application Process for Dealers; Approval or Denial. [Ord.
No. 2015-20]
indicate the license number shall be a violation of this section and shall
be subject to the penalties established in subsection 4-5.8.
d. Licensees may not operate at any location other than site specified in
the license. Licensees operating at multiple locations must have each
location separately licensed. Each location must be permanent.
Itinerant businesses and transient buyers, as defined in subsection
4-5.1 above, are not eligible for licensure and are prohibited from
operating in the Township.
a. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this section, the
Municipal Clerk shall refer such application to the Chief of Police, who
shall make an investigation of the prospective licensee, pursuant to this
section for the purpose of determining the suitability of the applicant
for licensing. The investigation shall include, but shall not be limited to,
the following:
1. The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of those articles or goods referred to in subsection 4-5.1 above,
although nothing in this section shall be construed to warrant
denial of a license solely on the basis of lack of experience.
2. The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license.
3. Any criminal record of the applicant including any past convictions
for any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or municipal
ordinance violation(s) within this or any other jurisdiction. The
Chief of Police shall, as part of the initial application process and
annual renewals, require fingerprint criminal background checks
through the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Criminal Justice
Information Services Division, for the applicant and all owners and
employees, which may require payment of additional fees by the
applicant.
4. The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of precious metal or
other secondhand goods, and other factors bearing on whether the
licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent nature.
b. The Chief of Police shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
section within 30 days of the submission of the application to the
Municipal Clerk, fully completed by the applicant. If a criminal record
check has been requested within the thirty-day period and has not been
received by the Chief of Police within that period, the Chief of Police
§ 4-5.2 HOLMDEL § 4-5.3
1:194
§ 4-5.4. Identification of Seller; Recordkeeping Requirements for
Dealers. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
For every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer shall be required to do as follows:
may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a conditional
issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding criminal record.
c. The Chief of Police shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend "grant" or "denial" of the license to the Municipal Clerk,
who shall grant or deny the license. Any recommendation of the Chief of
Police shall be in writing and, in the case of a recommendation of
denial, shall state fully and specifically the reasons for said
recommendation. If the Municipal Clerk accepts the recommendation
of the Chief of Police to deny any license, the applicant shall be notified
in writing within 10 days of such denial and the Clerk shall forward to
the applicant a statement of the reason or reasons for such denial.
d. Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to a dealer in secondhand goods. A license may be denied if the
investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its principal
officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s) in
which deceit or misrepresentation is an element; or any conviction of
any crime(s), disorderly persons offense involving theft or the receiving
of stolen goods, regardless of whether the applicant was a principal,
accessory before the fact, after the fact, or a co-conspirator; or any
prior municipal ordinance violation(s) by the applicant or any of its
principal officers or employees in this or any other jurisdiction. A
license may be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate an ability to
satisfactorily comply with the electronic reporting requirements
specified in subsection 4-5.4 the retention and inspection requirements
of subsection 4-5.5, or any other portion of this section. Upon receipt of
the recommendation of the Chief of Police, the Municipal Clerk shall
issue or deny the license accordingly, contingent upon the receipt of a
bond as required by subsection 4-5.6 of this section.
e. Whenever any application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
entitled to a hearing before the Township Attorney or one of the
Assistant Township Attorneys in the Division of Law, or another official
designated by the Township Attorney, at which time the applicant shall
be permitted to introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to
such denial. Any applicant exercising the right to appeal must file a
written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving written notice of
denial of a license to act as a dealer of secondhand goods.
f. No license shall be assignable by the dealer.
§ 4-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-5.4
1:195
a. Require of each person selling or pawning precious metals or other
secondhand goods acceptable identification as defined above in
subsection 4-5.1.
b. Require each seller to execute a "declaration of ownership," which shall
contain the following certification: "My signature confirms that I am the
sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell the goods being
sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain and do not possess
the identified goods through unlawful means. I am the full age of 18
years and the identification presented is valid and correct."
c. Record and issue to each person selling or pawning such goods on a
sequentially numbered receipt:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
purchase;
2. The name, address, date of birth, and telephone number of the
seller or sellers;
3. A photographed recording of the seller in a format acceptable to
the Chief of Police, along with a physical description of the seller,
including height and weight (approximate), hair color, eye color,
facial hair, if any, etc.;
4. A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, as set forth in subsection 4-5.1, in a format
acceptable by the Chief of Police;
5. A photographed recording of all items sold in a format acceptable
by the Chief of Police. When photographing, all items must be
positioned in a manner that makes them readily and easily
identifiable. Items should not be grouped together when
photographing or imaging. Each item should have its own
photograph;
6. The receipt number;
7. A detailed, legible description of the item(s) and the manufacturer
and model of the item(s) if known; in the case of jewelry, the
descriptions must include style, length, color, design, and stones, if
any; any identifying marks, including numbers, dates, sizes,
shapes, initials, names, monograms, social security numbers
engraved thereon, serial numbers, series numbers, or any other
information, which sets apart the particular object from others of
like kind;
8. The price paid for the purchase or pawn of the item(s);
9. If precious metals, the net weight in terms of pounds Troy,
pennyweight (Troy) or kilograms/grams; fineness in terms of karats
§ 4-5.4 HOLMDEL § 4-5.4
1:196
§ 4-5.5. Retention; Revocation; Other Restrictions. [Ord. No.
2015-20]
for gold, and sterling or coin for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
51:5-1 and 51:6-1 et seq.;
10. The time and date of the transaction.
d. The information outlined in paragraph c above must additionally be
electronically documented through the use of an electronic database
system authorized by the Chief of Police. Installation and training in this
software will be made mandatory as of the effective date of this section
and licensing will be conditional upon compliance with proper use of
the system as described herein. These records shall be subject to the
inspection of any authorized police officer or any sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of his or her duty as set
forth in paragraph f below. Through the use of applicably required
computer equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the
Chief of Police, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into
the electronic database by the end of the close of business on the same
date as the purchase or receipt of property for pawn or consignment.
The information entered must contain all pertinent information outlined
in paragraph c above.
e. In the event of a database failure, or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police within 24 hours from the
date of purchase. In the event that paper forms are used, the dealer is
responsible to enter all transaction information set forth in paragraph c
above into the database as soon as possible upon the dealer's
equipment being repaired or replaced, or the database coming back
into service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain computer
equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the dealer to replace
faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer being cited for a
violation of this section and subsequently being subject to the penalties
for doing so including revocation of the dealer's license as described in
subsection 4-5.5.
f. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the Police Department to examine any database, book,
ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the reportable
transactions of precious metals or other secondhand goods, as well as
the articles purchased or received and, where necessary, relinquish
custody of those articles as provided in subsection 4-5.5.
a. All precious metals, jewelry, and other secondhand goods purchased,
received for pawn, or received for consignment as described above, are
to be made available for inspection by the Chief of Police or designee
thereof at the designated business address for a period of at least 15
calendar days from the date the transaction information is actually
§ 4-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-5.5
1:197
reported to the Chief of Police in the approved manner described
above in subsection 4-5.4. All precious metal or other secondhand
goods subject to inspection must remain in the same condition as
when purchased or received for pawn and shall not be sold, disposed
of, changed, modified, or melted by the dealer until the fifteen-day
retention period has expired. Itinerant businesses and transient buyers
will be responsible for notifying the Chief of Police of the location where
the purchased item(s) are being held.
b. Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
providing that the seller signed the mandatory statement required by
subsection 4-5.4b upon the sale of those goods, a law enforcement
officer with jurisdiction should charge the seller with theft by deception
under N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 on behalf of the dealer, who shall be considered
the "victim" of the offense for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The
officer shall seize the goods, provide the dealer with a receipt, and issue
a criminal complaint against the seller for theft by deception and any
other criminal charges for which the officer has probable cause that the
seller has committed. If convicted of theft by deception and if so found
by an order of a court of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible
for providing restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the
amount paid by the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
c. In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain, for at least five years, a paper record of all purchases of
precious metals and other secondhand goods in the form prescribed in
subsection 4-5.4c.
d. No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this section from any
person under the age of 18 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or business designee
identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to be made and
the item to be purchased.
e. Suspension. The Chief of Police or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license and
rights to operate thereunder. This penalty shall be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to subsection 4-5.8.
1. Grounds for Suspension. The following shall constitute grounds for
suspension: violation of any provisions of this section, including
failure to comply with any training or fees associated with the
electronic database software system in use by the municipality;
violation of any other statute, regulation, or local ordinance; or any
other illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
2. Procedure for Suspension. Upon determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted, the Chief of
Police or a designee thereof shall issue a written notice of
suspension of license to the offending dealer and to the Municipal
Clerk, which shall set forth the grounds for the suspension and
§ 4-5.5 HOLMDEL § 4-5.5
1:198
notify the dealer of his or her right to appeal pursuant to paragraph
g. A temporary suspension shall issue immediately, pending the
outcome of any appeal taken. Suspended dealers must immediately
cease engaging in the business of purchasing for resale, receiving
for pawn, and/or selling of precious metals and/or other
secondhand goods in the municipality until reinstatement.
3. Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only when
the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the determination of
the Township Attorney, Assistant Township Attorney, or other
official designated by the Township Attorney to review the grounds
for suspension, been cured, corrected, or appropriately rectified.
f. Revocation. A license issued under this section may be revoked by the
Municipal Clerk upon written recommendation from the Chief of Police
or the Chiefs designee that the dealer is no longer qualified, capable or
competent to comply with the requirements of this section. This penalty
shall be in addition to any fines and penalties the dealer may incur
under subsection 4-5.8.
1. Grounds for Revocation. The following shall constitute grounds for
revocation: a third violation under this section; a second violation
under this section less than one year after an earlier violation
under this section; conviction for a criminal offense within this or
any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any other regulations or
local ordinances within this or any jurisdiction.
2. Procedure for Revocation. Upon a determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted, the Chief of
Police or the Chiefs designee shall so report to the Municipal Clerk
in writing. A temporary suspension will immediately and
automatically issue, if one is not already in effect, pending the
outcome of the charge. The Township Attorney, Assistant Township
Attorney, or other official designated by the Township Attorney,
shall review the stated grounds for revocation and shall issue an
appropriate disposition of either suspension, revocation, or
reinstatement. If it is determined that revocation is the appropriate
disposition, the grounds therefor shall be set forth in writing in the
form of a notice of revocation, which shall be provided to the
dealer. The notice shall advise the dealer of the right to appeal. If
determined that suspension is the appropriate disposition, the
dealer shall be so notified in writing and shall be advised of the
right to appeal. Following revocation, the dealer must relinquish
his or her license and must immediately and indefinitely cease
operating as a dealer of precious metals or other secondhand goods
within the municipality.
g. Appeal. Any applicant wishing to appeal a suspension or revocation
shall be entitled to a hearing as provided in subsection 4-5.3e. Any
applicant exercising the right to appeal must file a written notice of
§ 4-5.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-5.5
1:199
§ 4-5.6. Bond. [Ord. No. 2015-20; Ord. No. 2016-10]
Each dealer covered under this section shall deliver a bond to the Municipal
Clerk executed by the applicant as principal and executed by a surety
company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of New
Jersey as surety. The bond shall be subject to review and approval by the
Township Attorney, and shall be in the penal sum of $10,000, conditioned
for the due and proper observance of and compliance with the provisions
and requirements of all ordinances of the municipality in force or which
may be adopted respecting the conduct of this business and conditioned
also that the bond shall be and remain for the benefit of any person or
persons who shall have received judgment against the dealer licensed under
this section, which damage shall be established by a judgment of a court
of proper jurisdiction. Said bond shall contain the following language: "The
obligation of this bond shall, in addition to the Township of Holmdel, be and
remain for the benefit of any person who shall obtain a judgment against
obligor as a result of damage sustained in operation pursuant to any license
granted under this section." Said bond shall be kept for a minimum of one
year from the date of issuance of license and must be renewed annually
along with the license.
§ 4-5.7. Fees; License Term. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
§ 4-5.8. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
Violation of any provision of this section by any dealer shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not in excess of the limitations of N.J.S.A.
40:49-5 or by a term of imprisonment or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days in addition to a suspension or revocation of operating
license as provided in subsection 4-5.5e and f above. Each and every
violation shall be considered a separate violation. Each violation shall result
in an additional suspension period. Any person who is found guilty of
appeal within 10 days of receiving written notice of revocation or
suspension of license.
h. A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he or she notifies the Municipal Clerk, in
writing, of the street address of said new location.
a. A nonrefundable fee for initial application and license for a pawnbroker
or a dealer in precious metals or other secondhand goods, as covered
under this section, is $200. The annual renewal fee for a license is $100.
These fees are separate from and in addition to any fees the dealer must
pay in relation to the mandatory electronic database system designated
by the Chief of Police, as provided by subsection 4-5.4d. Payments are
to be made in the manner directed by the Municipal Clerk.
b. Licenses issued pursuant to this section are valid for one year, from
January 1 through December 31. Initial applications and applications
for renewal must be submitted no later than October 1.
§ 4-5.5 HOLMDEL § 4-5.8
1:200
violating the provisions of this section within one year of the date of a
previous violation and who was fined for the previous violation may be
sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a repeat offender and,
in addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings as provided in
subsection 4-5.5f. The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender shall not
be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided herein, and
same shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation
of this section.
§ 4-5.9. Implementation. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
§ 4-6. PARADES AND SPECIAL EVENTS.
§ 4-6.1. Definitions. [1976 Code § 55C-1; Ord. No. 16-83; Ord. No.
2018-11]
As used in this section:
PARADE — Shall mean any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition,
pageant, procession of any kind, or any similar display in or upon any street,
park or other public place in the Township.
SPECIAL EVENT — Shall mean any parade or other event, such as a
marathon run, walkathon, leisurely walk, bikeathon, foot race, bicycle race,
jogging group, motorcycle run, block party, concert, fundraiser, photo
shoots, filming of commercials or movies, large social event generating a
parking traffic situation that could potentially interfere with the movement
of normal traffic and/or emergency vehicles, or other organized group
having a similar common purpose or goal proceeding in or upon any street,
park or other public or quasi-public place (including schools, both public
and private) in the Township.
§ 4-6.2. Permit Required; Exemptions. [1976 Code § 55C-2; Ord. No.
16-83]
No parade or special event shall be held in the Township unless a permit
has been obtained as set forth herein, except that the following shall be
exempted from complying with the requirements set forth in this section:
a. Effective Dec. 1st, 2015, no existing licensee may continue to operate
without having been licensed pursuant to this section.
b. Nothing contained in this section is intended to replace any preexisting
statutory requirements governing pawnbrokers, as in N.J.S.A. 45:22-1
et seq., the sale of precious metals as in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq., the sale
of secondhand jewelry as in N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36 et seq., or any other
statutory provision regarding any subject matter discussed herein.
a. Funeral and wedding processions.
b. A governmental agency acting within the scope of its function.
§ 4-5.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6.2
1:201
§ 4-6.3. Application Procedure, Fees and Contents. [1976 Code
§ 55C-3; Ord. No. 16-83; Ord. No. 2018-11]
c. Students participating in educational activities under the authorization
of the proper school authorities of the Township.
a. An application for a permit to conduct a parade or special event shall be
made to the Holmdel Township Police Department, in writing, by the
person or persons in charge of or responsible for such parade or event.
The application request shall be filed at least 45 days before the
scheduled date of the parade or event, except for block party requests
which shall be filed 15 days before.
b. A fee of $50 shall accompany such request and shall be used to
reimburse the Township for its administrative costs in issuing a permit.
The Township may waive the fee for permits issued to non-profit
organizations.
c. Such application for a permit shall contain the following information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting
the permit.
2. The name and address of the organization or group he/she is
representing.
3. The name, address and telephone number of the person(s) who will
act as chairperson of the parade/special event and be responsible
for the conduct thereof.
4. The number of staff and support personnel to be provided and the
identifying clothing, signs, badges or symbols to be used or worn by
the staff and support personnel.
5. The purpose of the event, the estimated number of persons to
participate and otherwise attend and the number and type of
vehicles, if any, to participate.
6. The date the event is to be conducted, which will include an
alternate rain date, if any, and the commencing and terminating
times.
7. The location of the parade/special event, and the plans for
assembly and dispersal of the participants.
8. Whether or not any music will be provided, either live or recorded.
9. The number, types and locations of all loudspeakers and amplifying
devices to be used.
10. Whether any admission fee will be charged for participating in the
parade/special event.
§ 4-6.2 HOLMDEL § 4-6.3
1:202
§ 4-6.4. Issuance of Permit. [1976 Code § 55C-4; Ord. No. 16-83]
d. Any major changes in the activity from what was specified in the
original application (date, route, time, etc.) will necessitate a
reapplication to be instituted by the applicant.
a. The Police Department shall issue a parade/special event permit upon a
finding that:
1. The conduct of the parade/special event will not substantially
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous
to its routes.
2. The conduct of the parade/special event will not require the
diversion of so great a number of Police Officers to properly police
the line of movement and the area contiguous thereto as to prevent
normal police protection for the Township.
3. The conduct of such parade/special event will not require the
diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal
ambulance service to portions of the Township other than that to be
occupied by the proposed line of march or special event area in
areas contiguous thereto.
4. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade/special event will not unduly interfere with the
proper fire and police protection of or ambulance service to areas
contiguous to such assembly areas.
5. The conduct of such parade/special event will not interfere with the
movement of fire-fighting equipment en route to a fire.
6. The parade/special event is scheduled to move from its point of
origin and to its point of termination expeditiously and without
unreasonable delays en route.
7. The parade/special event is not to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be
held purely for private profit.
8. The parade/special event will not tend to unreasonably interfere
with the public use of the streets and sidewalks and private
properties and can be conducted in a safe manner.
b. Notice of approval or disapproval of the application shall be given by
the Police Department to the applicant no later than 20 days from the
date of the filing of the application, except for block party requests
which shall be approved or denied no later than 10 days from the date
of the filing of the application. In the event of a denial of an application,
a written explanation of the reasons for same shall be provided to the
applicant.
§ 4-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6.5
1:203
§ 4-6.5. Miscellaneous Provisions. [1976 Code § 55C-5; Ord. No.
16-83; Ord. No. 2018-11]
§ 4-6.6. Indemnification; Costs for Police Protection. [1976 Code
§ 55C-6; Ord. No. 16-83; Ord. No. 2018-11]
§ 4-7. MOTOR VEHICLE TOWING AND STORAGE.29
a. The Police Department in denying any application for a parade/special
event permit shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of such
parade or special event of a duration, on the date, at a time or of a route
and with a number of participants different than that named by the
applicant. Any applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall,
within three days after notice of the action of the Police Department,
file a written notice of acceptance with the Police Chief. An alternate
parade/special event permit shall conform to the requirements of and
shall have the effect of a parade permit under this section.
b. Where there is more than one parade/special event application for the
same date, the application received first in time will be considered first.
c. For the purpose of public safety and welfare, the Chief of Police may
order the temporary closing of streets during the parade/special event
and shall direct the posting of proper warning or directional signs in
connection therewith.
d. Any permit granted under this section shall contain a guarantee from
the applicant that the areas used for the parade/special event shall be
cleaned up as soon after the conclusion of the parade/special event as is
reasonably possible. This cleanup shall include, but not be limited to,
such items as refreshments, signage, and any litter or debris generated
from the parade/special event.
a. The holder of a parade/special event permit shall agree in writing to
indemnify and hold harmless the Township, its servants, agents and
employees from any claims caused by the activity covered in such
permit. The holder of such permit shall present to the Chief of Police a
certificate of insurance in advance of the event, which will provide
indemnification in a form acceptable to the Township.
b. If the Chief of Police deems it necessary to have additional Police
Officers made available for the purpose of preserving the public safety
and welfare during the course of any parade/special event, then he/she
shall so advise the applicant at the time of issuing the permit. If
additional expenses or costs are incurred for the purpose of providing
such police protection, then the holder of the permit shall be required
to pay for same or reimburse the Township for such expenses or costs
according to the existing policy of the Township on payment of the
officers.
§ 4-6.5 HOLMDEL § 4-7.1
1:204
§ 4-7.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2012-16]
The purpose of this section is to regulate the towing and storage of private
motor vehicles which result from Police Department calls for assistance
within the Township in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49 and N.J.S.A.
40A:11-5(1)(u).
§ 4-7.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2012-16; Ord. No. 2016-11]
The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AUTOMOBILE — All motor vehicles, including motorcycles. Sometimes
referred to herein as "motor vehicle."
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile from a highway, street or other public or private road, or a
parking area, or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident
thereto but does not include recovery of an automobile from a position
beyond the right-of-way or berm, or from being impaled upon any other
object within the right-of-way or berm.
DISABLED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is unable to operate under
its own power.
IMPOUNDED VEHICLE — A vehicle which, at the direction of the Police
Department, is taken into Police custody because the operator of the vehicle
was alleged by a Police Officer to be engaged in a violation of the law,
including, but not limited to, the operator being arrested on a DWI charge,
the operator having been arrested for driving without registration or
insurance, or the operator having been arrested for stealing the motor
vehicle, or the vehicle having been involved in a serious accident.
STORAGE RATE CHARGES — Shall begin at the time of impoundment and
shall be charged each day after for every day the vehicle is impounded. A
new day starts at 12:01 a.m.
TOW LIST — A list of names of towing and storage contractors maintained
by the Police Department containing addresses of towing and storage
contractors who will be called on a rotating basis when the Police
Department determines that the assistance of such services are required
within the Township.
TOWNSHIP STORAGE FACILITY — A storage area or lot owned and
operated by the Township of Holmdel.
TOW VEHICLE — Only those vehicles equipped with a boom or booms,
winches, slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or under-reach equipment specifically
designed by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of private
passenger automobiles.
29.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1976 Code §§ 72-1- 72-16 and
Ordinance Nos. 94-7, 2000-18, 2001-05, 2006-02.
§ 4-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-7.2
1:205
UPRIGHTING — Returning of a vehicle to its proper position on all four
wheels or under carriage.[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-13]
WINCHING — The process of moving a motor vehicle by the use of chains,
nylon slings from a position that is not accessible for direct hookup for
towing a motor vehicle. Winching includes recovering a motor vehicle not
on the road and righting a motor vehicle that is on its side or upside
down, but does not include pulling a motor vehicle onto a flatbed tow
truck.[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-13]
§ 4-7.3. Enforcement of Section. [Ord. No. 2012-16]
The Chief of Police or member of the Police Department designated by him/
her is authorized to enforce the provisions set forth in this section.
§ 4-7.4. Establishment and Operation of Tow List. [Ord. No.
2012-16; Ord. No. 2016-11]
The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall establish a list of towing
and storage contractors designated to provide towing and storage services
required by the Police Department. Any towing and storage contractors
qualifying pursuant to this section shall be included on the list and those
on the list shall be called on a rotating basis to provide the required towing
and storage services. Whenever a towing and storage contractor is called
through the Police Department, whether as a result of being next on the tow
list, or for another reason, that towing and storage contractor will rotate
to the bottom of the list. In the event any towing company responds for
an impounded vehicle between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., that
company will remain at the top of the list until they are called for the
next accident. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall establish such
other written procedures for the operation of the tow list as he/she shall
deem appropriate. Nothing in this ordinance shall preclude the Chief of
Police from making any exceptions to adding companies to this list based
on need. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Chief of Police or his/
her designee from requesting additional towing services from others, if,
in the judgment of such person, the size, nature or scope of the accident
conditions or the performance of the called towing service requires that
assistance be rendered.
§ 4-7.5. Application and Fee. [Ord. No. 2012-16]
All towing and storage contractors desiring to be included on the tow list
shall annually file an application with the Police Department on a form to be
approved by the Chief of Police, together with an application fee as provided
in subsection 4-7.7e. By filing such application, the applicant shall agree
to the conditions outlined on the application, including compliance with all
provisions of this section. Said application must be filed by January 30 of
each calendar year.
§ 4-7.2 HOLMDEL § 4-7.6
1:206
§ 4-7.6. Standards and Qualifications. [Ord. No. 2012-16; Ord. No.
2016-11]
The following are the minimum standards/qualifications required to be
considered for inclusion on the tow list:
a. Motor Vehicles Requiring Towing/Wrecker Services. The towing and
storage contractors must be prepared to promptly clear the roadway of
any and all types of disabled vehicles. Where the vehicles are too large
for the tow service to remove from the scene, the Police may call for
assistance of others including heavy duty tow vehicles.
b. Response Time.
1. The towing and storage contractor must meet the following
response times within the Township of Holmdel:
(a) Twenty minutes all times, seven days a week.
(b) Thirty minutes all times, seven days a week for large vehicles
over 30,000 pounds.
2. Response time determination is to be initiated when the Police call
requesting towing is completed. Where the Police cannot reach the
next eligible contractor on the list, that contractor shall be deemed
to have forfeited its position, rotate to the bottom of the tow list and
the next succeeding contractor on the list shall be called.
c. Performance Standards. The towing and storage contractor will meet
the following response performance standards:
1. 90% of all calls referred will be answered (towing vehicle on scene)
within the response time outlined above.
2. Not more than 10% of the calls will be answered within an
additional 10 minutes.
3. No response will be later than 30 minutes.
4. The performance standard will be reviewed periodically. Where the
towing and storage contractor performance record is found to be
unsatisfactory, it will be removed from the tow list for at least six
months and until it shall have provided satisfactory evidence to the
Chief of Police that it has undertaken effective steps and
implemented such procedures as are necessary to meet the
foregoing performance standards.
d. Equipment Specification. The towing and storage contractor must have
specialized towing equipment in good repair which meets the following
specifications:
1. Tow Vehicle. The towing service must have ownership of two
professionally constructed tow vehicles, one of which being a
flatbed-type tow vehicle capable of removing certain types of
§ 4-7.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-7.6
1:207
damaged vehicles or those, which by design, cannot be removed by
conventional wreckers without sustaining additional damage. All
towing vehicles used in performance of the contract must meet the
standards specified by the State of New Jersey Motor Vehicle Codes
and this specification in all respects. Each applicant is required to
list all equipment/vehicles to be used including registered name,
type and license number of each.
2. Safety Equipment. Each vehicle shall have beacon and warning
lights, tow vehicle illumination and stop lights and portable fire
extinguishers.
3. Specialized Equipment. At least one of the available tow vehicles
must be equipped for dolly service and winching.
4. Cleanup Equipment.
(a) All tow vehicles must carry road cleanup equipment and
supplies such as brooms, rakes, trash cans and shovels.
(b) The towing service is responsible for the prompt and safe
removal of the disabled vehicle and for the prompt and
complete removal of all litter and debris resulting from the
accident.
e. Motor Vehicle Storage. The towing service must operate a suitable
motor vehicle storage area in an area zoned for such use. This storage
yard used must be located within a three mile radius of the Township of
Holmdel and appear on the towing and storage contractor's insurance
certificate. No towing service may store an impounded vehicle except at
a suitable, fenced and secure storage yard and only when storage at
such facility is directed by the Police. Upon request, authorized
personnel of the Police Department shall be able to have access to
vehicles 24 hours per day within the storage area.
f. Insurance.
1. The towing and storage contractor shall maintain the following
minimum insurance coverage in the name of the applicant:
(a) Automobile liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000
combined single limits.
(b) Workers' compensation as required by statute.
(c) Garage keeper's liability in an amount not less than $60,000
per location.
(d) Garage liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000
combined single limit.
(e) Policies in force to provide collision coverage for vehicles in
tow.
§ 4-7.6 HOLMDEL § 4-7.6
1:208
2. Certificate of Insurance. At time of application, the towing and
storage contractor shall present a certificate of insurance
evidencing the above coverage by an insurance company licensed
to do business in the State of New Jersey. Included on such
certificate shall be a statement that the insurance company or
agent will notify the Chief of Police immediately of any change,
cancellation or lapse of such coverage. Such statement shall not
include language making such notification permissive, nor
language absolving the company/agent from liability for failure to
notify.
3. By virtue of making application to be included on the tow list, the
applicant will be deemed to agree to indemnify and hold the
Township of Holmdel and its officers and employees harmless from
any liability, expense or costs of suit, including reasonable
attorney's fees, arising out of or resulting from any action of the
applicant in performing towing and/or storage services in the
Township of Holmdel.
4. The applicant agrees to notify the Chief of Police immediately of
any change, cancellation or lapse of insurance coverage.
g. Prohibition of Oral Inquiry. No towing and storage contractor included
on the tow list shall make oral inquiry regarding its position on the tow
list, violations by other towing and storage contractors or any other
matters relating to performance under this section. All other inquiries
must be made in writing addressed to the Chief of Police.
h. Customer Fees and Billing. Each applicant shall attach a copy of its
current fee schedule, which must not be in excess of that provided for in
subsection 4-7.7. In the event an applicant is included on the tow list
and will be amending its fee schedule from that previously filed with the
Chief of Police, such applicant shall notify the Chief of Police, in writing,
of such amendment, together with a complete amended fee schedule at
least 30 days prior to implementing and charging pursuant to such
amended fee schedule. The fact of filing a fee schedule with the Chief of
Police shall not in any way be construed as authority to charge any fees
in excess of those permitted by subsection 4-7.7. All customer bills must
be in an amount not exceeding the rates provided for herein.
i. Authorized Township Service Receipt Form. The towing and storage
contractor will complete and file with the Police Department a towing
service receipt form for every vehicle serviced on Township assignment.
1. A preprinted form supplied by the towing and storage contractor
will include at least the following information:
(a) Towing and service fee schedule.
(b) Authorized service business name, address and business phone
number.
§ 4-7.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-7.6
1:209
§ 4-7.7. Towing and Storage Fees. [Ord. No. 2012-16; Ord. No.
2016-11]
(c) Time, location and vehicle information.
(d) Towing representative's signature.
(e) Service charge and fees.
2. The receipt will be multicopy and issued as follows:
(a) Original. Issued immediately to owner upon completion of
service and payment of bill.
(b) Police. Issued to Police Department representative upon
completion of service.
(c) Owner's Accident Receipt. Issued at the accident site to the
owner prior to removal of the vehicle. In the event the owner is
incapacitated or disputes the assignment, the owner's receipt
may be issued to the Police Department.
(d) Copies. As deemed necessary by towing service.
j. Follow-Up Report. A monthly report must be filed with the Police
Department containing the following information.
1. Description of each vehicle towed pursuant to request by Police
Department during month for which report is given.
2. Name and address of title owner of vehicle.
3. Date vehicle was towed.
4. Amount charged for tow.
5. Amount charged for storage to date of report.
6. Date vehicle was released.
7. List of all vehicles towed pursuant to Police Department request
which are unclaimed for over 30 days.
k. Storage Provision During Emergency Condition. During emergency
situations (snow storms, etc.) the towing and storage contractor must
provide additional vehicle storage spaces as needed. Said storage space
does not have to be located at the primary facility. Said spaces will only
be used during the period of the aforesaid emergency.
a. No towing and storage contractor shall charge fees in excess of those
set forth in this subsection. Allowable fees shall be as provided in
paragraph e below.
b. Towing operators may charge additional rates for cleanup and labor
rates as those set forth in this subsection, if additional labor other than
§ 4-7.6 HOLMDEL § 4-7.7
1:210
basic towing services are provided. [Amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-13]
c. Rates specified herein will be reviewed by the Finance Committee of
the Township Committee on a yearly basis. Operators are permitted to
petition the Township Committee, in writing, as to prevailing rates.
d. Special Towing Services.
1. If special towing services are required, the towing and storage
contractor shall quote the vehicle owner or his authorized agent
directly. In the event that the owner is incapacitated, a written copy
of the price quote should be filed with the Police Department.
2. No release fees may be charged for the release of vehicles after
normal business hours.
e. Fee Schedule. [Amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-13]
1. Application fee: $150.
2. Basic Tow.
(a) Motor vehicles up to 4,000 lbs. (referred to as Class 1): $150.
(b) Motor vehicles between 4,001 lbs. and 10,000 lbs. (referred to
as Class 2): $175.
(c) Motor vehicles between 10,001 lbs. and 30,000 lbs. (referred
to as Class 3): $200.
(d) Motor vehicles 30,001 lbs. + (referred to as Class 4): $250.
(e) Motorcycles, motorized scooters: $200.
3. Storage Fees.
(a) Motor vehicles up to 4,000 lbs. (referred to as Class 1): $40 per
day; fee starts immediately.
(b) Motor vehicles between 4,001 lbs. and 10,000 lbs. (referred to
as Class 2): $50 per day; fee starts immediately.
(c) Motor vehicles between 10,001 lbs. and 30,000 lbs. (referred
to as Class 3): $60 per day; fee starts immediately.
(d) Motor vehicles 30,001 lbs. + (referred to as Class 4): $75 per
day; fee starts immediately.
(e) Motorcycles:
(1) Outside: $40 per day; fee starts immediately.
(2) Inside (if available): $50 per day; fee starts immediately.
4. Labor Rates.
§ 4-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-7.7
1:211
§ 4-7.8. Arrangements by Person Responsible for Automobile. [Ord.
No. 2012-16]
Nothing contained in this section shall prevent a person responsible for
a disabled vehicle disabled upon the public streets or highways within
Holmdel Township to arrange for the prompt removal of the vehicle from the
scene of an accident or disablement by wrecking or towing services of his/
her own selection. The person responsible will be advised of the ability to
select such towing service at the required time of removal, providing such
person is present, fully conscious and capable of taking prompt action.
§ 4-7.9. Removal from Tow List. [Ord. No. 2012-16]
In the event that a person or entity shall fail to perform satisfactorily, or
performs in violation of this section, such person or entity may immediately
be removed from the tow list by the Chief of Police. As soon as practical
after such removal, the Chief of Police shall cause written notice of such
removal to be given to the person or entity removed. The notice shall set
forth the reason(s) for such removal. The person or entity removed shall
have the right to submit in writing such rebuttal as deemed appropriate and
(a) Cleanup fee: $30 flat rate plus $15 for each bag of absorbent
material used.
(b) Waiting time: $35 per 1/2 hour. Waiting time begins 1/2 hour
after arrival.
(c) Tow to a location not on Township tow list: $50 flat rate within
the Township. Tows to a location outside of the Township shall
be negotiated pursuant to a separate agreement between the
tow company and the driver prior to the tow.
(d) Tow during emergency to move vehicle for plowing, etc.: $60
flat rate to move vehicle.
(e) Winching time: $50 per 1/4 hour, within 20 feet of the roadway;
for winching operations greater than 20 feet, an additional $3
per foot of cable or chain.
(f) Uprighting: $50 per 1/4 hour.
(g) No key/use of dollies: $75.
(h) Service Requests. Service calls for tire changes, vehicle
lockouts, jump starts, fuel delivery and roadside repairs shall
be $60 plus cost of fuel/parts.
(i) Sealing/wrapping/covering vehicle, to include use of materials
in order to prevent damage from inclement weather: $25.
5. Administration Fee.
(a) Administrative charge: $25 per vehicle.
§ 4-7.7 HOLMDEL § 4-7.9
1:212
an explanation of the steps being taken and procedures being implemented
to correct any deficiencies. After review of such response, the Chief of
Police or his/her designee may continue the removal from the list, return
the person or entity to the list either immediately, or after a specified period
of time.
§ 4-7.10. Availability of Towing and Storage Fees. [Ord. No.
2012-16]
The Police Department and the office of the Township Clerk shall maintain
copies of this section as well as copies of all fee schedules of towing and
storage contractors submitted to the Township pursuant to Section 4-7
which section and fee schedule shall be available for inspection by the
public during regular business hours of the municipality.
§ 4-7.11. Storage of Impounded Vehicles. [Ord. No. 2012-16;
amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-13]
All impounded vehicles shall be removed to the Township storage facility
unless otherwise directed by the Township Police. The towing contractor
shall submit its bill for tow services to the Township which shall process
and make payment for same. The towing contractor shall clearly indicate
the year, make, model, color, type, VIN/serial number, mileage, weight class
per Subsection 4-7.7, and any visible damages on the bill for services. The
towing contractor shall also be responsible for the sealing, wrapping or
otherwise covering openings in motor vehicles and covering of motorcycles
for protection from inclement weather. To secure release of the vehicle,
after the Police impound has been lifted, the vehicle owner must pay to the
Township the daily storage fee provided in Subsection 4-7.7e, any vehicle
release fee charged by the Township, plus the fee for tow services charged
to the Township by the towing contractor.
§ 4-7.12. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2012-16]
Any person or entity who shall be found to have violated any subsection of
this section, or to have submitted a false or misleading application shall, in
addition to removal from the tow list, be subject to the penalties set forth
in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, General Penalty, of the Code of the Township of
Holmdel.
§ 4-8. PHOTOGRAPHIC IDENTIFICATION CHARGE. [Ord. No. 99-11
§ I]
In the event any license to be issued by the Township requires a
photographic identification, the applicant shall have the photographic
identification prepared by the Holmdel Township Police Department. The
charge for such service shall be $10 per photographic identification.
§ 4-9. GAMES OF CHANCE.
§ 4-7.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-9.1
1:213
§ 4-9.1. Authorization to Conduct Games. [Ord. No. 2013-15 § 2]
The Township of Holmdel, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-50
et seq., hereby finds and determines that it shall be lawful on any day
of the week for certain organizations, hereinafter specified, to conduct
raffles or games of chance within the Township of Holmdel when the entire
net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted to educational,
charitable, patriotic, religious and public-spirited uses.
§ 4-9.2. Authorized Organizations. [Ord. No. 2013-15 § 2]
Only the after-described organizations or types of organizations shall be
authorized to conduct raffles or games of chance in the Township of
Holmdel: bona fide organizations or associations of veterans of any war
in which the United States has been engaged; churches or religious
congregations and religious organizations; charitable, educational and
fraternal organizations; nonprofit organizations; civic and service clubs;
officially recognized volunteer fire companies; officially recognized
volunteer first-aid or rescue squads; and senior citizen associations and
clubs. Any other groups will require Township Committee approval.
§ 4-9.3. Authorized Games. [Ord. No. 2013-15 § 2]
The games of chance authorized by this section are those games of chance
commonly known as "raffles," which are played by drawing for prizes or the
allotment of prizes by chance by the selling of shares or tickets or rights to
participate in such games of chance. Such games of chance shall be held,
operated and conducted by the active members of the organizations and
associations as herein described.
§ 4-9.4. Applicability of Statutory Provisions. [Ord. No. 2013-15 § 2]
All such games of chance shall be conducted pursuant to appropriate
provisions of the New Jersey Administrative Code in keeping with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq., the provisions of each of which are
incorporated herein by reference.
§ 4-9.5. Application Required. [Ord. No. 2013-15 § 2]
All of those organizations and associations desiring to conduct raffles as
herein described shall submit applications to the Township Clerk of the
Township of Holmdel in conformance with the provisions of the statute and
Administrative Code above described.
§ 4-9.6. Sunday Conduct of Games. [Ord. No. 2013-15 § 2]
There is hereby authorized the conduct of games of chance under the
Bingo Licensing Law, N.J.S. 5:8-24 to 5:8-49, on the first day of the week,
commonly known and designated as "Sunday."
§ 4-9.1 HOLMDEL § 4-9.6
1:214
There is hereby authorized the conduct of games of chance under the
Raffles Licensing Law, N.J.S. 5:8-50 to 5:8-77, on the first day of the week,
commonly known and designated as "Sunday."
§ 4-9.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2013-15 § 2]
Any person, company, association or organization other than those
expressly described in this section conducting a raffle in the Township of
Holmdel or any organization or association conducting a raffle without the
express authorization from the Township of Holmdel shall be deemed to be
in violation of this section and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable
as provided in Section 1-5 of this Code.
§ 4-9.8. Establishment of Fees. [Ord. No. 2013-15 § 2]
The Township shall charge a municipal license fee for raffles and other
legalized games of chance in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:47-4.10, in an
amount equal to or less than the amount charged by the State Legalized
Games of Chance Control Commission.
§ 4-9.9. Authority Granted. [Ord. No. 2013-15 § 2]
The Township Committee designates the Municipal Clerk or Deputy
Municipal Clerk of the Township of Holmdel as the person having the
authority to approve the granting of raffle and bingo licenses pursuant to
the terms of N.J.A.C. 13:47-1.1.
§ 4-9.10. Filing with State. [Ord. No. 2013-15 § 2]
The Municipal Clerk shall file a certified copy of this section with the
Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission.
§ 4-10. LICENSING VARIOUS COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL
BUILDINGS.
§ 4-10.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2013-27 § 2]
As used in this section, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADEQUATE RADIO COVERAGE — Shall mean the following:
The minimum usable signal required to provide a clear message that is
intelligible and where each word is understandable in the presence of
occasional noise or occasional distortion in 95% of the area of each floor
of the building when transmitted from the closest Holmdel Township
Police Radio Communications system site;
1.
The minimum usable signal required to provide a clear message that
is intelligible and where each word is understandable in the presence
of occasional noise or occasional distortion at the closest Holmdel
2.
§ 4-9.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-10.1
1:215
GROSS FLOOR AREA — Shall mean the sum of the areas of the floor or
floors of a building which are enclosed and suitable for human occupancy
and having a clear ceiling height of at least seven feet, six inches, but
including closet space, attached garages and hallways, and excluding
cellars, attics, dead air space, open porches, breezeways, and all accessory
buildings. Such area shall be measured from outside to outside of exterior
walls.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean any combination of materials forming a
construction, assembly or erection, the use of which require location upon
or below the ground or attachment to something having a location upon or
below the ground, including among other things, buildings, motor vehicle
parking garages, fences, walls, signs, radio towers, swimming pools, light
stanchions, platforms and mobile homes.
§ 4-10.2. Applicability; Effect of Failure to Secure License. [Ord. No.
2013-27 § 2]
The owner of a structure used as a motor vehicle parking facility and the
owner of each nonresidential structure in the Township which is 250,000
square feet or more of gross floor area and 35 feet or more in height
must annually apply for and receive a license from the Township for such
structure. No structure, required under this section to be licensed, shall be
used or occupied unless licensed.
§ 4-10.3. Application for License; Fee. [Ord. No. 2013-27 § 2]
Licenses shall be issued on a calendar year basis. Application for a license
hereunder shall be secured from the Office of the Township Clerk.
Completed applications together with a fee of $30 shall be filed no later
than November 1 prior to the license year.
§ 4-10.4. Requirements for License. [Ord. No. 2013-27 § 2]
Township Police Radio Communications site when transmitted from
95% of the area of each floor of the building;
The frequency range which must be supported shall be the frequency
ranges and channels that the Police, Fire, First Aid, and Public Works
utilize;
3.
4. A 100% reliability factor.
a. No structure shall be licensed unless there is adequate radio coverage
as verified by a radio coverage survey as described hereafter, except
that a license may be issued for the first calendar year following
adoption of this section, (adopted September 3, 2013) if:
1. A complete application is filed, and
2. The application fee is paid; and
§ 4-10.1 HOLMDEL § 4-10.4
1:216
§ 4-10.5. Radio Coverage Survey. [Ord. No. 2013-27 § 2]
In order to determine if a new building or structure needs radio equipment,
a computer generated radio coverage prediction using a state-of-the-art
propagation analysis system such as RCC's COMSITE™ or its equivalent, will
be performed against the above criteria by Holmdel Township authorized
personnel. If a determination is made that the new building or structure
needs radio equipment, a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until
the new radio equipment is tested and meets the adequate radio coverage
as described in this section.
§ 4-10.6. Amplification Systems Allowed. [Ord. No. 2013-27 § 2]
Buildings and structures which cannot support the required level of radio
coverage shall be equipped with either a radiating cable system or an
internal multiple antenna system with or without FCC type accepted
bidirectional UHF and VHF amplifiers as needed. If any part of the installed
system or systems contains an electrically powered component, the system
shall be capable of operating on an independent battery and/or generator
system for a period of at least 12 hours without external power input. The
battery system shall automatically charge in the presence of an external
power input.
§ 4-10.7. Testing Procedures. [Ord. No. 2013-27 § 2]
3. The testing procedure described in subsection 4-10.7 is undertaken
and results obtained; and
4. The applicant presents a viable plan for assuring adequate radio
coverage will be achieved within nine months from the effective
date of this section; and
5. The applicant submits a written certification that all necessary
steps to achieve adequate radio coverage will be completed prior to
one year from the effective date of this section.
a. Acceptance Test Procedure. When an in-building radio system is
required, and upon completion of installation, it will be the building
owner's responsibility to have the radio system tested to ensure that
two-way coverage on each floor of the building is a minimum of 95%.
Each floor of the building shall be divided into a grid of approximately
20 equal areas. A maximum of one area will be allowed to fail the test. If
more than one area fails the test, the building owner shall have the
system altered to meet the 95% coverage requirement. The test shall be
conducted under the observation of a Township employee using a hand
held type Holmdel Township portable, worn on the hip, with the use of
standard lapel speaker/microphone, talking through Township Police
Radio Communications System. A spot located approximately in the
center of a grid area will be selected for the test, then the radio will be
keyed to verify two-way communications to and from the outside of the
§ 4-10.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-10.7
1:217
§ 4-10.8. Qualifications of Testing Personnel. [Ord. No. 2013-27 § 2]
All tests shall be conducted, documented and signed by a person in
possession of a current FCC license, or a current technical certification
issued by the Associated Public-Safety Communications Officials
International (APCO) or the Personal Communications Industry Association
(PCIA). All test records shall be retained on the inspected premises by
the building owner and a copy submitted to the Holmdel Township Police
Department.
§ 4-10.9. Field Testing. [Ord. No. 2013-27 § 2]
Holmdel Township Police personnel and/or their technical representatives,
after providing reasonable notice to the owner or his representative, shall
have the right to enter onto the property to conduct field testing to be
certain that the required level of radio coverage is present. Before doing so,
the Police Department shall notify the various Fire Companies and the First
Aid Squad serving the Township that such field testing is being scheduled so
that if any such companies/squad want to participate in such field testing,
building through the Holmdel Township Police Department
Communications System. Once the spot has been selected, prospecting
for a better spot within the grid area will not be permitted.
The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the test
measurement results shall be kept on file with the building owner so
that the measurements can be verified each year during the annual
tests. In the event that the measurement results become lost, the
building owner will be required to rerun the test so to reestablish the
gain values.
b. Annual Tests. When an in-building radio system is required, the
building owner shall test all active components of the system, including
but not limited to amplifiers, power supplies, and backup batteries, a
minimum of once every 12 months. Amplifiers shall be tested to ensure
that the gain is the same as it was upon initial installation and
acceptance. Backup batteries and power supplies shall be tested under
load for a period of one hour to verify that they will properly operate
during an actual power outage. If within the one hour test period, in the
opinion of the testing technician, the battery exhibits symptoms of
failure, the test shall be extended for additional one hour periods until
the testing technician confirms the integrity of the battery. All other
active components shall be checked to determine that they are
operating within the manufacturer's specifications for the intended
purpose.
c. Five Year Tests. In addition to the annual test, the building owner shall
perform a radio coverage test a minimum of once every five years to
ensure that the radio system continues to meet the requirements of the
original acceptance test. The procedure set forth above shall apply to
such tests.
§ 4-10.7 HOLMDEL § 4-10.9
1:218
they may do so at the same time as the field testing is being done by the
Police Department.
§ 4-10.10. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2013-27 § 2]
Upon conviction or guilty plea for violation of any provision of this section,
the person/entity so pleading or convicted shall be liable for the penalties
prescribed by Section 1-5 of these Revised General Ordinances.
Chapter 4A
TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSING
§ 4-10.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-10.10
1:219

ARTICLE I
General
§ 4A-1. PURPOSE AND FINDINGS. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-1]
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
a. Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and
services;
b. Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the
exercise of local authority with respect to regulation of
telecommunications providers and services;
c. Promote competition in telecommunications;
d. Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers
and services;
e. Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive
telecommunications services on the widest possible basis to the
businesses, institutions and residents of the Township;
f. Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the
Township for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral
basis;
g. Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in trust
by the Township;
h. Assure that the Township's current and ongoing costs of granting and
regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by
the persons seeking such access and causing such costs;
i. Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities within
the Township comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the
Township;
j. Assure that the Township can continue to fairly and responsibly protect
the public health, safety and welfare;
k. Enable the Township to discharge its public trust consistent with
rapidly evolving Federal and State regulatory policies, industry
competition and technological development.
1. The Township Committee finds that due to the passage of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 and the proliferation of
telecommunication companies seeking to use its public ways, the
passage of this chapter is necessary to ensure the health, safety
and welfare of its residents. The Committee further finds that it is
empowered to enact such a licensing ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:42-1 and N.J.S.A. 48:17-11.
§ 4A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4A-2
1:221
§ 4A-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-2]
For the purpose of this chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement
thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings,
unless the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate
otherwise:
AFFILIATE — Shall mean a person that directly or indirectly owns or
controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or
control with another person.
EXCESS CAPACITY — Shall mean the volume or capacity in any existing
or future duct, conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within
the public way that is or will be available for use for additional
telecommunications facilities.
FCC — Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
OTHER WAYS — Shall mean the highways, streets, alleys, utility easements
or other rights-of-way within the Township but under the jurisdiction and
control of a governmental entity other than the Township.
OVERHEAD FACILITIES — Shall mean utility poles, utility facilities and
telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground,
including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.
PERSON — Shall mean and include corporations, companies, associations,
joint stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability
companies and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and
receivers.
PUBLIC STREET — Shall mean any highway, street, alley or other public
right-of-way for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of
the Township which has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted
to highway purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
PUBLIC WAY — Shall mean and include all public streets and utility
easements, as those terms are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by
the Township, but only to the extent of the Township's right, title, interest or
authority to grant a license to occupy and use such streets and easements
for telecommunications facilities.
STATE — Shall mean the State of New Jersey.
SURPLUS SPACE — Shall mean that portion of the usable space on a utility
pole which has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required
by the orders and regulations of the Board of Public Utilities, to allow its
use by a telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER — Shall mean and include every
person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant,
equipment, or property within the Township, used or to be used for the
purpose of offering telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — Shall mean the plant, equipment
and property, including but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts,
§ 4A-2 HOLMDEL § 4A-2
1:222
pedestals, antenna, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be
used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunication
services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER — Shall mean and include every
person who provides telecommunications services over telecommunications
facilities without any ownership or management control of the facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — Shall mean the providing or offering
for rent, sale or lease, or an exchange for other value received, of the
transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming
information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser,
microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of
any closed transmission medium.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Holmdel.
TOWNSHIP PROPERTY — Shall mean and include all real property owned
by the Township, other than public streets and utility easements as those
terms are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity
by the Township, which are not subject to the right-of-way licensing as
provided in this chapter.
TREE — Shall mean any perennial plant having a diameter of four inches or
greater measured at a point four feet above the ground.
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES — Shall mean utility and telecommunications
facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the
underground foundation or supports for overhead facilities.
USABLE SPACE — Shall mean the total distance between the top of the
utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the
minimum allowable vertical clearance as specified in the orders and
regulations of the Board of Public Utilities (B.P.U.).
UTILITY EASEMENT — Shall mean any easement owned by the Township
and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes
not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
UTILITY FACILITIES — Shall mean the plant, equipment and property,
including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables,
wires, plant and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the
ground within the public ways of the Township and used or to be used for
the purpose of providing utility or telecommunications services.
§ 4A-3. TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-3]
Except as otherwise provided therein, any telecommunications carriers
who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the
Township for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications service to
persons in areas outside the Township shall first obtain a license granting
the use of such public ways from the Township pursuant to Article II of this
chapter.
§ 4A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4A-4
1:223
§ 4A-4. PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-4; Ord. No. 2006-07 § V]
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $2,000 for each offense. A separate and
distinctive offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation
occurs or continues.
§ 4A-5. OTHER REMEDIES. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-5]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies
that the Township may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this
chapter.
§ 4A-6. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-6]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this
chapter, or its application to any person, is, for any reason, declared invalid,
in whole or in part by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, said
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ 4A-4 HOLMDEL § 4A-6
1:224
ARTICLE II
Telecommunications License
§ 4A-7. TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-7]
A telecommunications license shall be required of any telecommunications
carrier who desires to occupy specific public ways of the Township for the
sole purpose of providing telecommunications services to persons or areas
within or outside the Township.
§ 4A-8. LICENSE APPLICATION. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-8]
Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this
Article II shall file an application with the Township which shall include the
following information.
a. The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the
applicant.
b. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be
offered or provided by licensee over its telecommunications facilities.
c. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
d. Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the
facilities to be located within the Township, all in sufficient detail to
identify:
1. The location and route requested for applicant's proposed
telecommunications facilities;
2. The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other
facilities in the public way along the proposed route;
3. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other communications carriers;
4. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or
permanently remove or relocate.
e. If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that
surplus space is available for loading its telecommunications facilities
on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
f. If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts
or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to
identify:
1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits
before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities;
§ 4A-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4A-8
1:225
§ 4A-9. DETERMINATION BY THE TOWNSHIP. [Ord. No. 99-29
§ 4A-9]
Within 120 days after receiving a complete application under Section 4A-8
hereof, the Township Committee shall issue a written determination
granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the
following standards. If the application is denied, the written determination
shall include the reasons for denial.
2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits
after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
g. If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts
or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
h. A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
i. A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the N.J.
Department of Transportation regulations.
j. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
k. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical
qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.
l. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the
facilities and to offer to provide the telecommunications services.
m. All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to Article III of this
chapter.
n. Such other and further information as may be required by the Township
Committee.
a. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
b. The legal ability of the applicant.
c. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's
proposed facilities.
d. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and
telecommunications facilities if the license is granted.
§ 4A-8 HOLMDEL § 4A-9
1:226
§ 4A-10. AGREEMENT. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-10]
No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and the
Township have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular
terms and provisions under which the license to occupy and use public ways
of the Township will be granted.
§ 4A-11. NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-11]
No license granted under this Article shall confer any exclusive right,
privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the
Township for delivery of telecommunications services or any other
purposes.
§ 4A-12. RIGHTS GRANTED. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-12]
No license granted under this Article shall convey any right, title or interest
in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to use and occupy the
public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further,
no license shall be construed as any warranty of title.
§ 4A-13. TERM OF GRANT. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-12]
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications
license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five years.
§ 4A-14. LICENSE ROUTE. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-13]
A telecommunications license granted under this Article shall be limited to
a grant of specific public ways and defined portions thereof.
e. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted.
f. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways.
g. The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
h. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the license is
granted.
i. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed
facilities.
j. Applicable Federal and State telecommunications laws, regulations and
policies.
k. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public
ways will serve the community interest.
§ 4A-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4A-15
1:227
§ 4A-15. LOCATION OF FACILITIES. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-15]
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, all facilities shall be
constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms
and conditions.
§ 4A-16. CONSTRUCTION PERMITS. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-16)
All licensees are required to obtain construction permits for
telecommunications facilities as required in Article IV of this chapter
provided, however, that nothing in this Article shall prohibit the Township
and a licensee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and
construction procedures in a license agreement, provided such alternative
procedures provided substantially equivalent safeguards for reasonable
construction practices and are not in derogation of any applicable
provisions of the Uniform Construction Code.
§ 4A-17. AMENDMENT OF GRANT. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-17]
a. Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing
underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within
such utility facility.
b. A licensee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its
telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility
poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.
c. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public
way of the Township, a licensee with permission to occupy the same
public way must also locate its telecommunications facilities
underground.
d. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground
within a public way of the Township, a grantee that currently occupies
the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a
reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the
grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as
determined by the Township Engineer, such relocation shall be made
concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.
e. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity
of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide
additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for
nondiscriminatory access to future telecommunications carriers.
a. A new license application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways of the Township which are
not included in a license previously granted under this chapter.
§ 4A-15 HOLMDEL § 4A-17
1:228
§ 4A-18. RENEWAL APPLICATIONS. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-18]
A licensee that desires to renew its license under this Article shall, not more
than 180 days nor less than 90 days before expiration of the current license,
file an application with the Township for renewal of its license which shall
include the following information.
§ 4A-19. RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-19]
Within 90 days after receiving a complete application under Section 4A-18
hereof, the Township shall issue a written determination granting or
denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following
standards. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination
shall include the reasons for non-renewal.
§ 4A-20. OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL.
[Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-20]
No license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the
licensee's performance of the license agreement, or of the requirements of
this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be
taken by the grantee has been approved by the Township.
b. If ordered by the Township to locate or relocate its telecommunications
facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted license, the
Township shall grant a license amendment without further application.
a. The information required pursuant to Section 4A-8 of this Article.
b. Any information required pursuant to the license agreement between
the Township and the grantee.
c. Such additional reasonable and relevant information as may be
determined by the Township Committee as essential for acting upon the
renewal application.
a. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
b. The legal ability of the applicant.
c. The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant's existing facilities.
d. The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter and
the license agreement.
e. Applicable Federal, State and local telecommunications laws, rules and
policies.
f. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use
the public ways will serve the community interest.
§ 4A-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4A-20
1:229

ARTICLE III
Fees and Compensation
§ 4A-21. PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-21]
It is the purpose of this Article to provide for the payment and recovery of
all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the Township related to the
enforcement and administration of this chapter.
§ 4A-22. APPLICATION FEE. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-22]
§ 4A-23. OTHER TOWNSHIP COSTS. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-23]
All license applicants and licensees shall establish and maintain an escrow
deposit in the amount of $3,000 with the Township. The Township shall
be entitled to reimbursement from the escrow account for all direct and
indirect costs and expenses incurred by the Township in connection with
any review, modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the license,
license application or any license agreement. Any interest earned on the
deposit shall accumulate and be credited to the escrow amount being held
by the Township. In the event the escrow or deposit shall be reduced to
$1,000 or less, upon notice from the Township's Chief Financial Officer, the
applicant or licensee shall replenish the escrow account to $3,000 within 15
days of the date of the notice. Upon written request made by the applicant
or licensee upon the Township's Chief Financial Officer, it shall be entitled
to an itemized accounting of deposits and withdrawals to and from its
escrow fund. Such request may not be made more often than monthly and
may not cover a period of time more than 12 months prior to the request.
§ 4A-24. CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEES. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-24]
Prior to the issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall pay a
permit fee of $150, which represents the Township's costs of processing
said permit.
§ 4A-25. REGULATORY FEES AND COMPENSATION NOT A TAX.
[Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-25]
The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this Article, are separate
from, and additional to, any and all Federal, State, local and Township taxes
as may be levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications carrier or
provided, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale,
delivery or transmission of telecommunications services.
a. Any applicant for a license pursuant to Article II of this chapter shall
pay a fee of $250, which represents the Township's costs in processing
said application.
b. The application fee shall be deposited with the Township as part of the
application filed pursuant to Article II of this chapter.
§ 4A-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4A-25
1:231

ARTICLE IV
Additional Conditions of License
§ 4A-26. COMPLIANCE WITH B.P.U. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-26]
All license or franchise grantees shall, before commencing any construction
in the public ways, comply with all regulations of the B.P.U. and of the
applicable State, Federal and local regulations.
§ 4A-27. INTERFERENCE WITH THE PUBLIC WAYS. [Ord. No.
99-29 § 4A-27]
No licensee may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as
to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public ways by the Township,
by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in
or upon the public ways. All such facilities shall be moved by the licensee,
temporarily or permanently, as determined by the Township Engineer.
§ 4A-28. DAMAGE TO PROPERTY. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-28]
No licensee nor any person acting on a licensee's behalf shall take any
action or permit any action to be done which may impair or damage any
Township property, public ways of the Township, other ways or other
property located in, on or adjacent thereto.
§ 4A-29. NOTICE OF WORKS. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-29]
Unless otherwise provided in a license agreement, no licensee nor any
person acting on the licensee's behalf, shall commence any non-emergency
work in or about the public ways of the Township or other ways within 10
working days' advance notice to the Township.
§ 4A-30. REPAIR AND EMERGENCY WORK. [Ord. No. 99-29
§ 4A-30]
In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a licensee may
commence such repair and emergency response work as required under the
circumstances, provided the licensee shall notify the Township as promptly
as possible, before such repair or emergency work or as soon thereafter as
possible if advance notice is not practicable.
§ 4A-31. MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-31]
Each licensee shall maintain its facilities in good and safe condition and
in a manner that complies with all applicable Federal, State and local
requirements.
§ 4A-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4A-32
1:233
§ 4A-32. RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF FACILITIES. [Ord. No.
99-29 § 4A-32]
Within 30 days following written notice from the Township, a licensee shall,
at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change
or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the public
ways whenever the Township shall have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:
§ 4A-33. REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED FACILITIES. [Ord. No.
99-29 § 4A-33]
Within 30 days following written notice from the Township, any licensee,
telecommunications carrier, or other person that owns, controls or
maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility or related
appurtenances within the public ways of the Township shall, at its own
expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public ways of
the Township. A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances.
§ 4A-34. EMERGENCY REMOVAL OR RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
[Ord. No. 9-29 § 4A-34]
The Township retains the right and privilege to cut or move any
telecommunications facilities located within the public ways of the
Township, as the Township may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency.
§ 4A-35. DAMAGE TO LICENSEES FACILITIES. [Ord. No. 99-29
§ 4A-35]
Unless directly and proximately caused by the willful, intentional or
malicious acts by the Township, the Township shall not be liable for any
a. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any Township or
other public improvement in or upon the public ways.
b. The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in or upon
the public ways.
a. Upon expiration or termination of the licensee's telecommunications
license.
b. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the Township.
c. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a telecommunications license.
d. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior
issuance of a required construction permit.
e. If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the licensee's telecommunications license.
§ 4A-32 HOLMDEL § 4A-35
1:234
damage to or loss of any telecommunications facility within the public ways
of the Township as a result of or in connection with any public works,
public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of
any kind in the public ways by or on behalf of the Township.
§ 4A-36. RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS, OTHER WAYS AND
TOWNSHIP PROPERTY. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-36]
§ 4A-37. FACILITIES MAPS. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-37]
Each licensee shall provide the Township with an accurate map or maps
certifying the location of all telecommunications facilities within the public
ways. In addition, the licensee shall provide a computer aided design and
drafting (CADD) diskette containing the facilities' mapping in the .dxf
format. Each licensee shall provide updated maps and diskettes annually.
§ 4A-38. DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION. [Ord. No. 99-29
§ 4A-38]
Within 10 days of a written request from the Township Committee, each
licensee shall furnish the Township with information sufficient to
demonstrate:
a. When a licensee or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or
affecting any public ways, other ways or Township property, it shall, at
its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and
restore such ways or property to as good a condition as existed before
the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the Township.
b. If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration
required by this section, the licensee shall temporarily restore the
affected ways or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the
licensee's sole expense and the licensee shall promptly undertake and
complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or
other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration.
c. A licensee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable
barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as required
for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury
or damage to any person, vehicle property by reason of such work in or
affecting such ways or property.
a. That licensee has complied with all requirements of this chapter.
b. All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the
licensee with respect to its facilities within the public ways shall be
made available for inspection by the Township at reasonable times and
intervals.
§ 4A-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4A-39
1:235
§ 4A-39. LEASED CAPACITY. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-39]
A licensee shall have the right, without prior Township approval, to offer or
provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided:
§ 4A-40. LICENSEE INSURANCE. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-40]
Unless otherwise provided in a license agreement, each licensee shall,
as a condition of the license, secure and maintain the following liability
insurance policies insuring both the licensee and the Township, and its
elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as
coinsureds.
a. Licensee shall furnish the Township with a copy of any such lease or
agreement.
b. The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with the
requirements of this chapter.
a. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:
1. $5,000,000 for bodily injury or death to each person;
2. $5,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one accident;
3. $5,000,000 for all other types of liability.
b. Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
limit of $3,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident.
c. Worker's compensation within statutory limits and employer's liability
insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.
d. Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse
hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits
of not less than $3,000,000.
e. The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be
maintained by the licensee throughout the term of the
telecommunications license, and such other period of time during
which the licensee is operating without a license hereunder, or is
engaged in the removal of its telecommunications facilities. Each such
insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement.
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after
receipt by the Township, by registered or certified mail, of a written
notice, addressed to the Township Clerk, of such intent to cancel or not
to renew."
f. Within 60 days after receipt by the Township of said notice, and in no
event later than 30 days prior to said cancellation, the licensee shall
obtain and furnish to the Township replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
§ 4A-39 HOLMDEL § 4A-41
1:236
§ 4A-41. GENERAL INDEMNIFICATION. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-41]
Each license agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law,
licensee's express undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold the Township
and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and
against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from
or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful
acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the licensee or its affiliates,
officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontracts in the construction,
operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its telecommunications
facilities, and in providing or offering telecommunications services over
the facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized,
allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a grant agreement made or
entered into pursuant to this chapter.
§ 4A-42. PERFORMANCE AND CONSTRUCTION SURETY. [Ord. No.
99-29 § 4A-41]
Before a license granted pursuant to this chapter is effective, and as
necessary thereafter, the licensee shall provide and deposit such monies,
bonds, letters of credit or other instruments in form and substance
acceptable to the Township as may be required by this chapter or by an
applicable license.
§ 4A-43. CONSTRUCTION AND COMPLETION BOND. [Ord. No.
99-29 § 4A-43]
Unless otherwise provided in a license agreement, a performance bond
written by a corporate surety acceptable to the Township equal to at least
100% of the estimated cost of constructing licensee's telecommunications
facilities within the public ways of the Township shall be deposited before
construction is commenced.
a. The construction bond shall remain in force until released by the
Township. Licensee may apply, in writing, for such release upon the
lapse of at least 60 days after substantial completion of the work, as
determined by the Township Engineer, including restoration of public
ways and other property affected by the construction. The Township
Engineer shall, within 45 days of receipt of the licensee's written
request for release, file a written recommendation with the governing
body concerning the release. The Township Committee shall take
formal action on the request for release within 45 days of the filing of
the Township Engineer's recommendation.
b. The construction bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the
Township:
1. Timely completion of construction;
§ 4A-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4A-43
1:237
§ 4A-44. COORDINATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES. [Ord.
No. 99-29 § 4A-44]
All licensees are required to cooperate with the Township and with each
other.
§ 4A-45. ASSIGNMENTS OR TRANSFERS OF LICENSE. [Ord. No.
99-29 § 4A-45]
Ownership or control of a telecommunications system or license may not,
directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease,
merger, consolidation or other act of the licensee, by operation of law or
otherwise, without the prior consent of the Township, which consent shall
not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, as expressed by formal act and
then only on such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed therein.
2. Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits,
technical codes and standards;
3. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the Township;
4. Restoration of the public ways and other property affected by the
construction;
5. The submission of "as-built" drawings, as well as a computer aided
design and drafting (CADD) diskette containing the drawings in the
.dxf format, after completion of the work as required by this
chapter; and
6. Timely payment and satisfaction of all payments then due to the
Township, all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or
services provided in connection with the work.
a. By February 1 of each year, licensees shall provide the Township with a
schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that
may affect the public ways.
b. Each licensee shall meet with the Township, other licensees and users
of the public ways annually or as determined by the Township to
schedule and coordinate construction in the public ways.
c. All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated,
as ordered by the Township Engineer, to minimize public
inconvenience, disruption or damages.
a. No license shall be assigned or transferred in any manner within 12
months after the initial grant of the license, unless otherwise provided
in a license agreement.
b. Absent extraordinary and unforeseeable circumstances, no grant,
system or integral part of a system shall be assigned or transferred
before construction of the telecommunications system has been
completed.
§ 4A-43 HOLMDEL § 4A-45
1:238
§ 4A-46. TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING CONTROL OF GRANT. [Ord.
No. 99-29 § 4A-46]
Any transactions which singularly or collectively result in a change of
10% or more of the ownership or working control of the licensee, of the
ownership or working control of a telecommunications license or the
ownership or working control of affiliated entities having ownership or
working control of the licensee or of a telecommunications system, or
of control of the capacity or bandwidth of licensee's telecommunications
system, facilities or substantial parts thereof, shall be considered an
assignment or transfer requiring Township approval pursuant to Section
4A-45 hereof. Transactions between affiliated entities are not exempt, from
Township approval.
§ 4A-47. REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF LICENSE. [Ord. No.
99-29 § 4A-47]
A license granted by the Township to use or occupy public ways of the
Township may be revoked for the following reasons;
c. Licensee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the grant or
system shall provide and certify the following information to the
Township not less than 150 days prior to the proposed date of transfer:
1. Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and
conditions of the proposed transfer or assignment;
2. All information required of a telecommunications license applicant
pursuant to Article II of this chapter with respect to the proposed
transferee or assignee;
3. Any other information reasonably required by the Township.
d. No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the
legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold
and operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this chapter.
e. Unless otherwise provided in a license agreement, the grantee shall
reimburse the Township for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and
expenses reasonably incurred by the Township in considering a request
to transfer or assign a telecommunications license.
f. Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications grant, system or
integral part of a system without prior approval of the Township under
this section or pursuant to a license agreement shall be void and is
cause for revocation of the license.
a. Construction or operation in the Township or in the public ways of the
Township contrary to a license grant.
b. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
c. Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the licensee.
§ 4A-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4A-47
1:239
§ 4A-48. NOTICE AND DUTY TO CURE. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-48]
In the event that the Township Committee believes that grounds exist
for revocation of a license, it shall give the licensee written notice of
the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise
statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance,
and providing the licensee a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30
days to furnish evidence:
§ 4A-49. HEARING. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-49]
In the event that a licensee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory
to the Township Committee as provided in Section 4A-48 hereof, the
Committee shall provide the licensee with notice and a reasonable
opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.
§ 4A-50. STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION OR LESSER SANCTIONS.
[Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-50]
If persuaded that the licensee has violated or failed to comply with material
provisions of this Chapter, or of a license agreement, the Committee shall
determine whether to revoke the license or to establish some lesser
sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and
gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors.
d. Unauthorized assignment of a license.
e. Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of licensee's assets, or a
substantial interest therein.
f. Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a licensee in any
application to the Township.
g. Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways.
h. Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this Title.
i. Failure to pay fees and costs when and as due the Township.
j. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the licensee.
k. Violation of material provisions of this Title.
1. Violation of the material terms of a license agreement.
a. That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously
pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance.
b. That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.
c. That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or
sanction less than revocation.
a. Whether the misconduct was egregious.
§ 4A-47 HOLMDEL § 4A-50
1:240
b. Whether substantial harm resulted.
c. Whether the violation was intentional.
d. Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other
requirements.
e. Whether there is a history of overall compliance.
f. Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.
§ 4A-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4A-50
1:241

ARTICLE V
Construction Standards
§ 4A-51. GENERAL. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-51]
No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation
or operation of telecommunications facilities within the Township except as
provided in this Article.
§ 4A-52. CONSTRUCTION CODES. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-52]
Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and
maintained in accordance with all applicable Federal, State, and local
codes, rules and regulations including the National Electrical Safety Code.
§ 4A-53. CONSTRUCTION PERMITS. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-53]
No person shall construct or install any telecommunications facilities within
the Township without first obtaining a construction permit therefor,
provided, however:
§ 4A-54. APPLICATIONS. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-54]
Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities shall
be submitted upon forms to be provided by the Township and shall be
accompanied by detailed engineering drawings, plans and specifications in
sufficient detail to demonstrate:
a. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities in the public ways unless the
telecommunications carrier has applied for and received a license
pursuant to Article II of this chapter.
b. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities without payment of the construction
permit fee established in section 4A-24 of this chapter.
a. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable
codes, rules and regulations.
b. The location and route of all facilities to be installed on existing utility
poles.
c. The location and route of all facilities to be located under the surface of
the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all
points along the route which are within the public ways.
d. The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes,
mains and installations which are within the public ways along the
underground route proposed by the applicant.
e. The location of all other facilities to be constructed within the
Township, but not within the public ways.
§ 4A-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4A-54
1:243
§ 4A-55. ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATION. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-55]
All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a
professional engineer licensed in New Jersey that the drawings, plans and
specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable
technical codes, rules and regulations.
§ 4A-56. TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-56]
All permit applications which involve work on, in, under across or along any
public ways shall be accompanied by a traffic control plan demonstrating
the protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent
with the New Jersey Department of Transportation regulations, to prevent
injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to
efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The plan will be submitted to the
Holmdel Township Chief of Police for review and approval. The Township
may require the applicant to hire traffic directors (off-duty police officer) on
an as-needed basis.
§ 4A-57. ISSUANCE OF PERMIT. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-57]
Within 45 days after submission of all plans and documents required of
the applicant and payment of the permit fees required by this chapter, the
Township Engineer, if satisfied that the applications, plans and document
comply with all requirements of this chapter, shall issue a permit
authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions,
restrictions, or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of
performing the work as he may deem necessary or appropriate.
§ 4A-58. CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-58]
The licensee shall submit a written construction schedule to the Township
Engineer 10 working days before commencing any work in or about the
public ways. The licensee shall further notify the Township Engineer not
less than two working days in advance of any excavation or work in the
public ways.
f. The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing
structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public ways.
g. The location, dimension and types of all trees within or adjacent to the
public ways along the route proposed by the applicant, together with a
landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and
restoring any trees or areas to be disturbed during construction.
h. The plans are to be designed utilizing a current survey based on the
New Jersey Plan Coordinate System.
§ 4A-54 HOLMDEL § 4A-59
1:244
§ 4A-59. COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-59]
All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the
permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The
Township Engineer and his representatives shall be provided access to the
work and such further information as he or she may reasonably require to
ensure compliance with such requirements.
§ 4A-60. DISPLAY OF PERMIT. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-60]
The licensee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and approved
plans at the construction site, which shall be displayed and made available
for inspection by the Township Engineer or his representatives at all times
when construction work is occurring.
§ 4A-61. SURVEY OF UNDERGROUND FACILITIES. [Ord. No. 99-29
§ 4A-61]
If the construction permit specifies the location of facilities by depth, line,
grade, proximity to other facilities or other standard, the licensee shall
cause the location of such facilities to be verified by a licensed New Jersey
Land Surveyor. The licensee shall relocate any facilities which are not
located in compliance with permit requirements.
§ 4A-62. NONCOMPLYING WORK. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-62]
Upon order of the Township Engineer, all work which does not comply
with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work, or the
requirements of this chapter, shall be removed.
§ 4A-63. COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION. [Ord. No. 99-29
§ 4A-63]
The licensee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to
minimize disruption of the Township ways and other public and private
property. All construction work authorized by a permit within Township
ways, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date
of issuance.
§ 4A-64. AS-BUILT DWELLINGS. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-64]
Within 60 days after completion of construction, the licensee shall furnish
the Township with two complete sets of plans, drawn to scale and certified
to the Township as accurately depicting the location of all
telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. This
information shall be provided on computer aided design and drafting
(CADD) diskette in a .dxf file format.
§ 4A-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4A-65
1:245
§ 4A-65. RESTORATION OF IMPROVEMENTS. [Ord. No. 99-29
§ 4A-65]
Upon completion of any construction work, the licensee shall promptly
repair any and all public and private property improvements, fixtures,
structures and facilities in the public ways or otherwise damaged during
the course of construction, restoring the same as nearly as practicable to its
condition before the start of construction.
§ 4A-66. LANDSCAPE RESTORATION. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-66]
§ 4A-67. CONSTRUCTION SURETY. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-67]
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the licensee shall provide a
performance bond, as provided in Section 4A-43 of this chapter.
§ 4A-68. EXCEPTIONS. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-68]
Unless otherwise provided in a license agreement, all telecommunications
carriers are subject to the requirements of this Article V.
§ 4A-69. RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4A-69]
The owner of the facilities to be constructed and, if different, the licensee,
are responsible for performance of and compliance with all provisions of
this Article.
a. All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a
result of the construction, installation, maintenance, repair or
replacement of telecommunications facilities shall be replaced or
restored as nearly as may be practicable, to the condition existing prior
to performance of work.
b. All restoration work within the public ways shall be done in accordance
with landscape plans approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 4A-65 HOLMDEL § 4A-69
1:246
Chapter 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
Editor's Note: See also Board of Health ordinances regarding
License Fees for Dogs, Rabies Vaccination of Cats and Rabies
Vaccination of Dogs.
§ 5-1. LICENSING OF DOGS.
§ 5-1.1. Required. [1976 Code § 38-7; Ord. No. 27-82; Ord. No.
86-29)
Each and every dog shall be duly licensed and shall bear evidence of such
license at all times, in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
The annual fee for such license shall be as provided herein.
§ 5-1.2. Expiration of License; Annual Fee. [1976 Code § 38-7; Ord.
No. 27-82; Ord. No. 86-29]
Licenses, registration tags and the renewal thereof shall expire on the last
day of January of each year. A late fee shall be due and owing to the
Township for each and every dog licensed after the 31st day of January of
any year.
§ 5-2. CONTROL OF DOGS.
§ 5-2.1. Dogs Running at Large Restricted. [1976 Code § 38-1]
No dog shall run at large at any time in this Township, except that this
provision shall not apply to hunting dogs during hunting season or while
they are being trained, provided that, at all times, such dogs are under the
control of the owner or trainer.
§ 5-2.2. Dogs Leaving Premises Restricted. [1976 Code § 38-2]
No person owning or having the care, custody or control of any dog shall
suffer or permit such dog to go or be off the premises owned by or in
the possession of such person, unless the dog shall be accompanied by a
person who is capable of controlling such dog and who has the dog securely
confined and controlled by an adequate leash hot more than six feet long.
§ 5-2.3. Dogs Prohibited from Soiling or Committing Nuisances on
Sidewalks, Streets and Thoroughfares. [1976 Code § 38-3]
No person owning or having the care, custody or control of any dog shall
permit such dog to soil or defile or to commit any nuisance upon any
sidewalk, street or thoroughfare in or upon any public property or in or
upon the property of persons other than the owner or person having the
care, custody or control of such dog.
§ 4A-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2.4
1:247
§ 5-2.4. Permitting Dogs to Soil or Damage Lawns, Shrubbery, Trees
or Flowers. [1976 Code § 38-4]
No person owning or having the care, custody or control of any dog shall
suffer or permit it to soil or defile or do any injury or damage to any lawn,
shrubbery, trees, flowers, grounds or any property of persons other than the
owner or person having the care, custody or control of such dog.
§ 5-2.5. Barking or Crying Dogs. [1976 Code § 38-5]
No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually barks or
cries so as to disturb the public peace.
§ 5-2.6. Owners of Dogs Responsible for Damage Caused. [1976
Code § 38-6]
The owner or custodian of any dog shall be responsible for any damage done
by such dog.
§ 5-3. VICIOUS DOGS/POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS;
IMPOUNDMENT.30
§ 5-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 96-34 § I]
As used in this section:
OWNER — Shall mean any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog
within the Township.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Shall mean any dog or dog hybrid
which has been declared by a Municipal Judge to be potentially dangerous.
POUNDMASTER — Shall mean a certified Animal Control Officer as defined
in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1.
VICIOUS DOG — Shall mean any dog or dog hybrid which has been declared
by a Municipal Judge to be a vicious dog.
§ 5-3.2. Complaint; Investigation; Report; Notification. [Ord. No.
96-34 § I]
a. It shall be the duty of the Poundmaster or his designee to receive and
investigate complaints against dogs. If he reasonably believes any dog
complained of to be a vicious or potentially dangerous dog, he shall
report his findings in writing to the Municipal Judge.
b. The Poundmaster or his designee shall notify the Municipal Court and
the municipal health officer immediately that he has seized and
impounded a dog pursuant to this section or that he has reasonable
cause to believe that a dog has killed another domestic animal and that
a hearing is required. The Poundmaster or his designee shall through a
30.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1976 Code § 38-9.
§ 5-2.4 HOLMDEL § 5-3.2
1:248
§ 5-3.3. Notice; Hearing. [Ord. No. 96-34 § I]
The Municipal Judge shall notify in writing the owner or keeper of an
allegedly vicious or potentially dangerous dog that a complaint has been
made and require the person to appear before him at a stated time and
place for a hearing.
§ 5-3.4. Finding to Declare Dog Vicious; Grounds. [Ord. No. 96-34
§ I]
§ 5-3.5. Finding to Declare Dog Potentially Dangerous. [Ord. No.
96-34 § I]
reasonable effort attempt to determine the identity of the owner of any
dog seized and impounded pursuant to this section. If its owner cannot
be identified within seven days, that dog may be humanely destroyed.
c. The Poundmaster or his designee shall, within three working days of the
determination of the identity of the owner of a dog seized and
impounded pursuant to this section, notify by certified mail, return
receipt requested, the owner concerning the seizure and impoundment
and that, if the owner wishes, a hearing will be held to determine
whether the impounded dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. This
notice shall also require that the owner return within seven days, by
certified mail or hand delivery, a signed statement indicating whether
he wishes the hearing to be conducted or, if not, to relinquish
ownership of the dog, in which case the dog may be humanely
destroyed. If the owner cannot be notified by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or refuses to sign for the certified letter, or does not
reply to the certified letter with a signed statement within seven days of
receipt, the dog may be humanely destroyed.
a. The Municipal Court shall declare the dog vicious if it finds by clear and
convincing evidence that the dog:
1. Killed a person or caused serious bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:11-1(b) to a person; or
2. Has engaged in dog fighting activities as described in N.J.S.A.
4:22-24 and N.J.S.A. 4:22-26.
b. A dog shall not be declared vicious for inflicting death or serious bodily
injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) upon a person if the dog was
provoked. The municipality shall bear the burden of proof to
demonstrate that the dog was not provoked.
c. If the Municipal Court declares a dog to be vicious, and no appeal is
made of this ruling pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-25, the dog shall be
destroyed in a humane and expeditious manner, except that no dog may
be destroyed during the pendency of an appeal.
§ 5-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3.5
1:249
§ 5-3.6. Control of Vicious Dogs. [Ord. No. 96-34 § I]
No person owning or keeping a vicious dog shall permit the dog to be off
the property of the owner or keeper without being securely muzzled.
§ 5-3.7. Order and Schedule for Compliance for Potentially
Dangerous Dog; Conditions. [Ord. No. 96-34 § I]
If the Municipal Court declares the dog to be potentially dangerous, it shall
issue an order and a schedule for compliance which, in part:
a. The Municipal Court shall declare a dog to be potentially dangerous if it
finds by clear and convincing evidence that the dog:
1. Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person
during an unprovoked attack, and poses a serious threat of bodily
injury or death to a person; or
2. Killed another domestic animal; and
(a) Poses a threat of serious bodily injury or death to a person; or
(b) Poses a threat of death to another domestic animal; or
3. Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
b. A dog shall not be declared potentially dangerous for:
1. Causing bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person if
the dog was provoked; or
2. Killing a domestic animal if the domestic animal was the aggressor.
For the purpose of paragraph b1 of this subsection, the municipality shall
bear the burden of proof to demonstrate that the dog was not provoked.
a. Shall require the owner to comply with the following conditions:
1. To apply, at his own expense, to the Municipal Clerk or other official
designated to license dogs pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.2, for a
special municipal potentially dangerous dog license, municipal
registration number, and red identification tag. The owner shall, at
his own expense, have the registration number tattooed upon the
dog in a prominent location. The potentially dangerous dog shall be
impounded until the owner obtains a municipal potentially
dangerous dog license, municipal registration number, and red
identification tag;
2. To display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his premises warning
that a potentially dangerous dog is on the premises. The sign shall
be visible and legible from 50 feet of the enclosure required
pursuant to paragraph a3 of this subsection;
§ 5-3.5 HOLMDEL § 5-3.7
1:250
§ 5-3.8. Procedures for Appeal. [Ord. No. 96-34 § I]
The owner of the dog, or the Poundmaster or his designee may appeal
any final decision, order, or judgment, including any conditions attached
thereto, of a Municipal Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. by filing an
appeal with the Superior Court, Law Division, in accordance with the Rules
Governing The Courts of the State of New Jersey pertaining to appeals from
courts of limited jurisdiction. The Superior Court shall hear the appeal by
conducting a hearing de novo in the manner established by those rules for
appeals from courts of limited jurisdiction.
§ 5-3.9. Liability of Owner for Costs of Impoundment and
Destruction. [Ord. No. 96-34 § I]
3. To immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the potentially
dangerous dog on the property where the potentially dangerous
dog will be kept and maintained, which has sound sides, top and
bottom to prevent the potentially dangerous dog from escaping by
climbing, jumping or digging and within a fence of at least six feet
in height separated by at least three feet from the confined area.
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall securely lock the
enclosure to prevent the entry of the general public and to preclude
any release or escape of a potentially dangerous dog by an
unknowing child or other person. All potentially dangerous dogs
shall be confined in the enclosure or, if taken out of the enclosure,
securely muzzled and restrained with a tether approved by the
Poundmaster or his designee and having a minimum tensile
strength sufficiently in excess of that required to restrict the
potentially dangerous dog's movements to a radius of no more than
three feet from the owner and under the direct supervision of the
owner;
b. May require the owner to maintain liability insurance in an amount
determined by the Municipal Court to cover any damage or injury
caused by the potentially dangerous dog. The liability insurance, which
may be separate from any other homeowner policy, shall contain a
provision requiring the Township of Holmdel to be named as an
additional insured for the sole purpose of being notified by the
insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the
liability insurance policy.
a. If a dog is declared vicious or potentially dangerous, and all appeals
pertaining thereto have been exhausted, the owner of the dog shall be
liable to the Township of Holmdel for the costs and expenses of
impounding and destroying the dog. The owner shall incur the expense
of impounding the dog in a facility other than the municipal pound,
regardless of whether the dog is ultimately found to be vicious or
potentially dangerous.
§ 5-3.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3.9
1:251
§ 5-3.10. Right to Convene Hearing for Subsequent Actions of Dog.
[Ord. No. 96-34 § I]
If the Municipal Court finds that the dog is not vicious or potentially
dangerous, the Municipal Court shall retain the right to convene a hearing
to determine whether the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous for any
subsequent actions of the dog.
§ 5-3.11. Duties of Owner of Potentially Dangerous Dog. [Ord. No.
96-34 § I]
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall:
§ 5-3.12. Violations by Owner; Penalties; Enforcement; Seizure and
Impoundment of Dog; Destruction by Order of Court. [Ord. No.
96-34 § I; Ord. 2006-07 § VI]
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who is found by clear and
convincing evidence to have violated this chapter, or to have failed to
comply with a court's order shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$2,000 per day of the violation, and each day's continuance of the violation
shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. The Municipal Court shall
have jurisdiction to enforce this section. The Poundmaster or his designee
b. If the dog has bitten or exposed a person within 10 days previous to the
time of euthanasia, its head shall be transported to the New Jersey
State Department of Health laboratory for rabies testing.
a. Comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. in accordance
with a schedule established by the Municipal Court but in no case more
than 60 days subsequent to the date of determination;
b. Notify the licensing authority, the Police Department and the
Poundmaster or his designee if a potentially dangerous dog is at large,
or has attacked a human being or killed a domestic animal;
c. Notify the licensing authority, the Police Department and the
Poundmaster or his designee within 24 hours of the death, sale or
donation of a potentially dangerous dog;
d. Prior to selling or donating the dog, inform the prospective owner that
the dog has been declared potentially dangerous;
e. Upon the sale or donation of the dog to a person residing in a different
municipality, notify the health department and the licensing authority,
Police Department or force, and Animal Control Officer of that
municipality of the transfer of ownership and the name, address and
telephone of the new owner; and
f. In addition to any license fee required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3,
pay a potentially dangerous dog license fee to the municipality as
provided by N.J.S.A. 4:19-31.
§ 5-3.9 HOLMDEL § 5-3.12
1:252
is authorized to seize and impound any potentially dangerous dog whose
owner fails to comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq., or
any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or a court's order. The
Municipal Court may order that the dog so seized and impounded be
destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.
§ 5-3.13. Potentially Dangerous Dog Registration Number, Red
Identification Tag and License; Issuance; Telephone Number to
Report Violations; Publicity. [Ord. No. 96-34 § I]
§ 5-3.14. Impounding and Destruction of Certain Dogs. [Ord. No.
96-34 § I]
a. There shall be issued a potentially dangerous dog registration number
and red identification tag along with a municipal potentially dangerous
dog license upon a demonstration of sufficient evidence by the owner to
the Poundmaster or his designee that he has complied with the court's
orders. The last three digits of each potentially dangerous dog
registration number issued will be the three number code assigned to
the Township of Holmdel in the regulations promulgated pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 4:19-33. The Poundmaster or his designee shall verify, in
writing, compliance to the Municipal Clerk or other official designated
to license dogs in the Township of Holmdel;
b. The Township of Holmdel will publicize a telephone number for
reporting violations of this chapter. This telephone number shall be
forwarded to the State of New Jersey Department of Health and any
changes in this number shall be reported immediately to the State of
New Jersey Department of Health.
a. Causes for Impounding. The Poundmaster or his designee shall take
into custody and impound, or cause to be taken into custody and
impounded, any of the following dogs:
1. Any unlicensed dog running at large in violation of the provisions of
this chapter.
2. Any dog off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or
harboring the dog which the dog warden or his agent has reason to
believe is a stray dog.
3. Any dog off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or
harboring such dog without a current registration tag on its collar.
4. Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring such dog.
5. Any dog which has been determined to be a vicious dog as provided
in subsection 5-3.4, provided that these dogs may also be seized by
any law enforcement officer, and provided further that if the dogs
cannot be seized with safety, they may be killed.
§ 5-3.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3.14
1:253
§ 5-3.15. Redemption of Seized Animals. [Ord. No. 2015-09 § 1]
§ 5-4. POUNDMASTER.
§ 5-4.1. Appointment and Duty of Poundmaster; Power of Township
Committee to Contract Services. [1976 Code § 38-8]
The Township Committee shall have power to appoint a Poundmaster or
other designated authority, whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions
of this chapter. The Township Committee shall also have power to enter
into a contract with one or more persons for the exercise of the duty of
Dogcatcher, Dog Warden or Poundmaster and to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
6. Any dog or other animal which is suspected to be rabid.
7. Any dog or other animal off the premises of the owner reported to
or observed by the Poundmaster or his designee to be ill, injured or
creating a threat to public health, safety and welfare or otherwise
interfering with the enjoyment of property.
8. Any dog or dog hybrid which the Poundmaster or his designee has
reasonable cause to believe that the dog or dog hybrid has attacked
a person and caused death or serious bodily injury as defined in
N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) to that person; or has caused bodily injury as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person during an unprovoked
attack and poses a serious threat of harm to persons or domestic
animals; or has engaged in dog fighting activities as described in
N.J.S.A. 4:22-26; or has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited
or encouraged to engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or
domestic animals.
a. If an animal taken into custody and impounded that can be traced to the
owner or person charged with the care of the animal, the certified
Animal Control Officer shall ascertain the name and address of the
owner or the person charged with the care of the animal, and serve to
the identified person, as soon as practicable, a notice in writing that the
animal has been seized and the owner or the person charged with the
care of the animal will be liable for all fees incurred, by the municipality,
from a licensed kennel or shelter.
b. Any owner or person charged with the care of the animal who refuses or
neglects to pay forthwith the costs and charges incident thereto shall
be deemed to have violated the provisions of this subsection.
c. Redemption fees shall not exceed $275/cat and $300/dog along with
appropriate veterinary fees.
§ 5-3.14 HOLMDEL § 5-5
1:254
§ 5-5. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [1976 Code § 38-11]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $25 for the first conviction of such violation and,
upon failure to pay the fine and the costs and charges incidental thereto,
may be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding 10 days and,
in the case of a conviction for a second, subsequent or continuing violation,
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 for each offense and, upon
failure to pay the fine and the costs and charges incidental thereto, may be
imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 5-6. PET SHOP DISCLOSURE.
§ 5-6.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2015-09 § 2]
As used in this section:
KENNEL — Shall mean any establishment wherein or whereon the business
of boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a
pet shop.
PET SHOP — Shall mean any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition
pen, not part of a kennel, wherein animals for sale are kept or displayed.
§ 5-6.2. Disclosure Required. [Ord. No. 2015-09 § 2]
a. Every pet shop shall submit to the Township Clerk or other official
designated to license dogs in the Township, a report providing the
following information from the prior year of operation:
1. The name, full street address, email address, if available, and
USDA license number of: (i) any breeder from which the pet shop
purchased an animal, whether or not the pet shop offered the
animal for sale, (ii) any breeder that bred an animal that the pet
shop purchased from a broker, whether or not the pet shop offered
the animal for sale, and (iii) any broker from which the pet shop
purchased an animal, whether or not the pet shop offered the
animal for sale;
2. If a breeder whose identity the pet shop is required to report
pursuant to subsection 5-6.2a1 is required to be licensed in the
state in which the breeder is located, the breeder's state license
number;
3. If a broker whose identity the pet shop is required to report
pursuant to subsection 5-6.2a1 is different from any breeder whose
identity the pet shop is required to report pursuant to subsection
5-6.2a1, and the broker is required to be licensed in the state in
which the broker is located, the broker's state license number; and
4. The total number of animals for each breeder and broker for which
the pet shop has reporting requirements subsection 5-6.2a1.
§ 5-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-6.2
1:255
§ 5-7. RESTRICTIONS ON SALE OF CATS AND DOGS.
§ 5-7.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2018-02]
ANIMAL RESCUE FACILITY — Means the home or other facility in which an
animal rescue organization houses or cares for animals.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — Means an individual or group of
individuals who, with or without salary or compensation, house and care for
homeless animals in the home of an individual or in other facilities, with the
intent of placing the animals in responsible, more permanent homes as soon
as possible.
CATS — Means a member of a species of domestic cat, Felis catus.
DOGS — Means a member of a species of domestic dog, Canis familiaris.
PET SHOP — Means a retail establishment where dogs and cats are sold,
exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public
at retail. Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or animal
rescue organization, as defined.
OFFER FOR SALE — Means to sell, deliver, offer for sale or adoption,
advertise for the sale of, barter, auction, give away, or otherwise transfer or
dispose of a dog or cat.
§ 5-7.2. Restrictions on the Sale of Animals. [Ord. No. 2018-02]
No pet shop may offer for sale any cats or dogs. Nothing in this section shall
prohibit pet shops from collaborating with animal care facilities or animal
rescue organizations to offer space for such entities to showcase dogs and
cats in their custody or control for adoption.
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [New]
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township of Holmdel in accordance with the provisions of
an act of Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled An Act Concerning
Alcoholic Beverages, comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933, its
supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S. 33:1-1 et seq.,
and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
b. This subsection 5-6.2 shall not apply to a pet shop submitting an initial
license application to the Township.
§ 5-6.2 HOLMDEL § 6-2
1:256
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [New]
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meaning as in N.J.S. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [New]
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the act, rules and regulations
referred to in Section 6-1, and all other applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey or the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Issuing Authority; Disposition of Fees. [New]
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the Township
Committee which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.3. License Required. [New]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Township
without obtaining a license in accordance with the Act referred to in Section
6-1 and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.4. License Fees; Maximum Number. [1976 Code § 26-6; Ord.
No. 19-76; Ord. No. 10-84; Ord. No. 89-31; Ord. No. 89-31A; Ord.
No. 91-10; Ord. No. 92-8; Ord. No. 93-8; Ord. No. 94-9; Ord. No.
95-6; Ord. No. 96-17; Ord. No. 97-10 § 1; Ord. No. 97-18 § 1; Ord.
No. 2003-08 § I; Ord. No. 2004-14 § I]
The annual fee of licenses for the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages
in the Township shall be as follows:
Class of License Annual Fee Number
Plenary Retail Consumption
License
$2,000 5
Hotel/Motel License 2,000 1
Plenary Retail Distribution
License
1,347 2
a. Upon filing application, all license fees shall be paid in full, or a
prorated fee in the event application is made during the fiscal year, to
the Township Clerk and all such receipts shall be turned over by the
Clerk when and as received to the Chief Financial Officer.
b. The Township Clerk is hereby designated as the proper person to sign
all the licenses in behalf of the Township Committee.
§ 6-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-3.4
1:257
The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued. The license fees shall be payable in accordance with
the New Jersey Statutes and rules and regulations promulgated by the
Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-4. REGULATIONS OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale. [1976 Code § 26-1]
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver, or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverages or permit the consumption
of any alcoholic beverages on licensed premises on weekdays or Saturday
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 6-4.2. Sundays. [1976 Code § 26-1; Ord. No. 89-31A]
The provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on Sundays. On Sundays,
no licensee shall sell, serve, deliver, or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverages or permit the consumption
of any alcoholic beverages on licensed premises between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
§ 6-4.3. New Year's Day. [1976 Code § 26-1]
Provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on January 1. On that day
alcoholic beverages may not be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in
the licensed premises between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. when it
falls on a weekday. When January 1 falls on a Sunday, no alcoholic beverages
may be sold, served, delivered or consumed between the hours of 5:00 a.m.
and 12:00 noon.
§ 6-4.4. Sales to Certain Persons. [New]
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly
or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any intoxicated person or person
under the legal age, or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on
any licensed premises by any of the above-named persons.
§ 6-4.5. Closing Provisions. [1976 Code § 26-3]
During the hours when sales of alcoholic beverages are prohibited, the
entire licensed premises shall be closed and no person or persons shall be
admitted or permitted to remain therein except the licensee or bona fide
employees of the licensee; provided, however, that this closing provision
shall not apply to bona fide hotels or to restaurants as defined in N.J.S.
33:1-1t.
§ 6-3.4 HOLMDEL § 6-4.6
1:258
§ 6-4.6. Sales During Election Hours. [1976 Code § 26-2]
Any licensee shall be permitted to sell or offer for sale at retail or deliver to
any consumer any alcoholic beverages during a general, municipal, primary
or special election during the hours the polls are open for voting, as well as
any other hours otherwise allowed by this ordinance or by law.
§ 6-5. REVOCATION OF LICENSE. [New]
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for
hearing. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any
other penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
§ 6-6. PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE.
§ 6-6.1. Sale of Alcoholic Beverages. [New]
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the service
or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, to any person
under the legal age.
§ 6-6.2. Entering Premises. [New]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age to enter any premises
licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of
purchasing, or having served or delivered to him or her, any alcoholic
beverage.
§ 6-6.3. Consumption; Purchase. [New]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age to consume any
alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages, or to purchase, attempt to purchase or have another purchase
for him or her any alcoholic beverage.
§ 6-6.4. Misrepresentation of Age. [New]
It shall be unlawful for a person to misrepresent or misstate his or her age
or the age of any other person for the purpose of inducing any retail license
to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a person under the legal
age.
§ 6-4.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-6.5
1:259
§ 6-6.5. Violations and Penalties. [New]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be deemed and adjudged to be a disorderly person, and upon conviction
thereof and in accordance with N.J.S. 33:1-81, shall be punished by a fine
of not less than $100. In addition, the Court shall suspend the person's
license to operate a motor vehicle for six months or prohibit the person
from obtaining a license to operate a motor vehicle in this State for six
months beginning on the date he becomes eligible to obtain a license or
on the date of conviction, whichever is later. In addition to the general
penalty prescribed for an offense, the Court may require any person under
the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who violates this act to
participate in an alcohol education or treatment program authorized by the
Department of Health for a period not to exceed the maximum period of
confinement prescribed by law for the offense for which the individual has
been convicted.
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
§ 6-6.5 HOLMDEL § 6-6.5
1:260
PART I
On-Street Regulations
§ 7-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 7-1.1. Words and Phrases. [1976 Code § 74-14]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Statutes shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein.
§ 7-1.2. Official Time Standard. [New]
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use.
§ 7-2. AUTHORIZATION FOR THE CLOSING OF ANY STREET. [Ord.
No. 94-33 §§ 1-4]
§ 7-3. TOW-AWAY. [New]
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any peace
officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall bear
the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 7-4. PENALTIES. [New]
Unless another penalty is expressed provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
a. The Chief of Police and/or the Township Engineer is hereby authorized
to provide by regulation for the closing of any street or portion thereof
to motor vehicle traffic on any day or days during specified hours on any
day or days whenever he finds that such closing is necessary for the
preservation of public safety, health or welfare.
b. Any regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police or the Township
Engineer and in accordance with paragraph a above, shall provide for
the posting of proper warning signs of such closing on any street or
portion thereof during the time the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
c. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
d. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-4
1:261
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 7-5. EFFECT OF CHAPTER. [New]
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 7-6. REPEAL. [New]
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Holmdel are hereby
repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except
that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment
of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 7-7. PARKING.
§ 7-7.1. Regulations Not Exclusive. [New]
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as
set forth in N.J.S. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 7-7.2. Parking Prohibited During State of Emergency. [1976 Code
§§ 74-51, 74-52]
§ 7-7.3. Temporary Parking Prohibition for Snow Plowing and
Removal. [1976 Code §§ 74-51, 74-52; Ord. No. 12-79; amended
9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the
ranking police officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, road construction, fire, large events, or public
celebrations dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other conditions
which interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that
EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be
given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked
prior to the posting of the signs. [Amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
b. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
§ 7-4 HOLMDEL § 7-7.3
1:262
a. It is the purpose and intent of this subsection, in the interest of public
safety and the general welfare of the Township, to facilitate snow
removal from curb to curb on public streets of the Township as
efficiently and expeditiously as possible after a snowfall.
b. As used in this section, the term "snow" shall mean any precipitation
depositing any accumulation on the public streets of the Township,
including, without limitation, snow, sleet, hail, or ice.
c. Notwithstanding any ordinance or regulation to the contrary, no person
shall park a vehicle upon either side of a public street or allow any
portion of a vehicle to extend into a public street at any time from when
snow has covered the public roadway sufficient to obscure road
markings or the road surface. Upon such conditions, the foregoing
parking restriction shall remain in effect for a period of 12 hours after
the snow has ceased, subject to extension by the Township
Administrator, Chief of Police, or Director of Public Works in the event
that snow removal has not been completed during that time period.
d. Regulatory and warning signs in accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-138
shall be erected and maintained at major street entrances to the
Township for motor vehicles, and shall be deemed adequate for
enforcement of the provisions of Subsection C. Any extension of the
parking prohibitions pursuant to Subsection C shall be deemed
effective upon notice prominently posted on the Township website and
transmitted via prerecorded telephone message to Township residents.
e. The Township Administrator, Chief of Police, and Director of Public
Works, and their respective designees, shall have the authority, at their
discretion, to waive or modify parking regulations, including hourly
limits, permit fees, and parking prohibitions, at all municipally owned
or controlled parking lots during a declared snow emergency, or at such
time as storm warnings have been issued by a recognized weather
service, or a reasonable basis otherwise exists to anticipate an
accumulation of snow greater than two inches.
f. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
subsection shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and
proper regulation of traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the
removal and storage, which may result from such removal, before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
g. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $100 for the first offense,
and a fine not to exceed $500 for each offense thereafter occurring
within six months of the previous offense. Each day on which a violation
of this subsection exists shall be considered a separate and distinct
violation and shall be subject to imposition of a separate penalty for
each day of the violation as the Municipal Court Judge may determine.
§ 7-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.4
1:263
§ 7-7.4. Stopping or Standing Prohibited During Certain Hours on
Certain Streets. [Ord. No. 23-79; New; Ord. No. 2000-13 § I]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified on any
day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
County Road
Route 4 Holmdel
Road)
Both 24 150 feet north and south of
County Road Route 520 (East
and West Main Street)
§ 7-7.5. Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown between
the hours listed on any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described.
Name of
Street
Side Time Limit Days/Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-7.6. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain
Streets. [1976 Code §§ 74-24, 74-41; Ord. No. 17-76; Ord. No.
2000-13 § I]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified on any day
(except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All Streets
[Repealed
9-10-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-19]
Bailey Lane Both 11:30 p.m. to
8:00 a.m.
Beginning at a point 775
feet from its
intersection with
Holmdel Road, its entire
length, to its
termination at the
parking area to the
Holmdel Swim Club
Holmdel Swim
and Tennis Clubs
11:30 p.m. to
8:00 a.m.
All parking areas
adjacent to the Holmdel
Swim and Tennis Clubs
§ 7-7.4 HOLMDEL § 7-7.7
1:264
§ 7-7.7. Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain Streets. [1976
Code § 74-15, Schedule IV; Ord. No. 8-72; Ord. No. 12-74; Ord. No.
20-74; Ord. No. 21-71; Ord. No. 23-79; Ord. No. 25-75; Ord. No.
86-5; Ord. No. 89-16; Ord. No. 94-15; Ord. No. 96-22 § II; Ord. No.
97-25 § I; Ord. No. 2000-13 § I; Ord. No. 2000-27 § I; Ord. No.
2008-02 § I; Ord. No. 2012-17; Ord. No. 2014-22]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts thereof
described.
Name of Street Side Location
Bayberry Drive Both Entire length
Beers Street Both From the intersection of Beers
Street and Holmdel Road
(County Route 4) in a generally
northerly direction to the
intersection of Beers Street with
Bethany Road
Belleview Road Both Entire length
Brook Lane Both Entire length
Chestnut Ridge Road Both Beginning 18 feet south of the
center line of Brentwood Road to
a point 200 feet north thereof
Cindy Lane Both Entire length
Cornwallis Drive Both Entire length
Crawford's Corner-
Everett Road
Both From its intersection with Red
Hill Road (at Middletown Road)
northerly to its terminus at
Holmdel-Keyport Road
Cross Road Both Entire length
Deercrest Drive Both Entire length
Donner Street Both Entire length
Flora Drive Both Entire length
Grandview Drive Both Entire length
Hawthorne Drive Both Entire length
Hillcrest Road Both Entire length
Holmdel-Keyport Road Both South of Main Street to the
Township line and north of Main
Street to its intersection with
Bethany Road except that 150
feet north and south of Main
Street shall be no stopping and
standing
§ 7-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.7
1:265
Name of Street Side Location
Holmes Court Both Entire length
Linden Court Both Entire length
Both From its intersection with
Holmdel-Keyport Road to its
intersection with Van Brackle
East From its intersection with
Bethany Road to 803 feet south
Line Road
East From its intersection with Van
Brackle to 537 feet north of its
intersection with Dora Lane
Lois Place Both Entire length
Longbridge Road Both Entire length
Longstreet Road Both Entire length
North Entire length [Ord. No.
2014-22]
South From its intersection with
Middletown Road 161 feet to the
end of the first entrance into
Village Elementary School [Ord.
No. 2014-22]
McCampbell Road
South From the beginning of the
entrance/exit of Village
Elementary School to the
intersection with Everett Road
(County Route 52) [Ord. No.
2014-22; amended 9-10-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-19]
Middletown Road Both Entire length
Monmouth County
Route 4 (Holmdel
Road)
Both From its boundary line with Colts
Neck Township, northerly to its
intersection with Bethany Road,
except that 150 feet north and
south of County Route 520 shall
be no stopping or standing
Monmouth County
Route 7 (Palmer
Avenue)
West From its intersection with State
Highway 35 northerly until its
boundary line with Hazlet
Township
§ 7-7.7 HOLMDEL § 7-7.7
1:266
Name of Street Side Location
West From its intersection with County
Route 520 northerly to its
intersection with the New Jersey
Transit Bridge
Monmouth County
Route 52 (Everett
Road, Red Hill Road,
Van Schoick Road,
Laurel Avenue) Both From its intersection with New
Jersey Transit Bridge northerly to
its intersection with State
Highway 35
Monmouth County
Route 516 (Laurel
Avenue, Middle Road)
Both From its intersection with State
Highway 35 northerly until its
boundary line with Hazlet
Township
Monmouth County
Route 520 (Main
Street)
Both From its boundary line with
Middletown Township on the east
to its boundary line with Colts
Neck Township on the west
Old Mill Road Both Entire length
Pleasant Valley Road Both From its boundary with Route 34
to the Holmdel-Marlboro line
Riverside Drive Both Entire length
Roberts Road Both Entire length
Schanck Road Both From its intersection with Route
34 to its intersection with
Holmdel Road, thence with its
intersection of Highway 34 to the
Township line with Marlboro
Township
Silver Beech Court Both Entire length
South Beers Street Both Entire length
South Holland Road Both Entire length
Stillwell Road Both Entire length
Takolusa Drive North Entire length
Telegraph Hill Road Both Entire length
Twin Terrace Both Entire length
Van Brackle Road Both From its intersection with
Holmdel-Keyport Road generally
north to its intersection with Line
Road
Willow Brook Road Both From its intersection with
Longbridge Road to the Holmdel-
Colts Neck boundary line
§ 7-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.7
1:267
Name of Street Side Location
Woodside Place Both Entire length
§ 7-8. VEHICLES IN EXCESS OF DESIGNATED WEIGHT.
§ 7-8.1. Parking of Certain Vehicles Prohibited on Certain Streets.
§ 7-8.2. Routes for Trucks Over Four Tons. [New; Ord. No. 2000-13
§ I]
Pursuant to N.J.S. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described are
hereby designated as Route for Vehicles Over Four Tons. All trucks having
a total combined registered gross weight of vehicle plus load in excess of
four tons shall be excluded from all streets, except from those streets listed
which form a part of the system of truck routes. Vehicles will be permitted
on all streets for the purpose of the pick up and delivery of materials.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle of the Police or
Public Works Departments of the Township of Holmdel nor to any fire truck,
hospital ambulance and vehicles of any public service corporation while the
operator of such vehicle is operating the same in an emergency or in the
necessary performance of public duties, nor to school buses transporting
children to and from school.
Name of Street Location
Crawfords Corner Road Entire length
Holland Road From its intersection with Van
Schoick Road to its intersection with
Laurel Avenue
Middle Road Entire length
Union Avenue Entire length
a. No person shall park, or cause to be parked, any commercial motor
vehicle, non-commercial truck, truck, omnibus, school bus, pole trailer,
trailer, or recreational vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of four tons
or any camper, recreational vehicle, boat or utility trailer, regardless of
weight, on any Township street at any time.
b. Exceptions. The provisions of paragraph a shall not apply to any vehicle
which is parked upon any street for the purpose of loading or unloading
supplies, materials, foodstuffs or other such items or construction
vehicles during construction. The operator, owner, or person in
possession of the vehicle shall be responsible for any violation of this
subsection.
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-7.7 HOLMDEL § 7-8.3
1:268
§ 7-8.3. Vehicles Over Designated Weight Excluded From Certain
Streets. [1976 Code §§ 74-19.7, 74-42.3; Ord. No. 90-13; Ord. No.
90-33; Ord. No. 90-39; Ord. No. 92-21; New; Ord. No. 2000-13 § I;
Ord. No. 2000-31 § I]
Vehicles over the registered gross weight are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described except for the pick up and delivery of
materials on such streets.
Name of Street Weight Location
American Way 5 tons Entire length
Centerville Road 5 tons Entire length
Chardonnay Drive 5 tons Entire length
Cherry Hill Road 5 tons Entire length
Cindy Lane 5 tons Entire length
Deer Path 5 tons Entire length
Hawthorne Avenue 5 tons Entire length
McCampbell Road 5 tons Entire length
Middletown Road 5 tons Entire length
Mount Drive 5 tons Entire length
Overlook Drive 5 tons Entire length
Plum Lane 5 tons Entire length
Stillwell Road 5 tons Entire length
Sunapee Lane 5 tons Entire length
Takolusa Drive 5 tons Entire length
§ 7-8.4. No Through Commercial Traffic. [1976 Code § 74-42.2; Ord.
No. 90-12; Ord. No. 90-38; New; Ord. No. 2000-13 § I]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S. 39:4-197 (1)b., no person driving a
vehicle with commercial, omnibus or livery plates shall use the following
streets or portions of streets as a through street. This prohibition shall not
prohibit the use of the hereinafter described streets for the sole purpose of
pick up and delivery of persons or materials.
Name of Street Side Location
Hawthorne Avenue Both Entire length
Plum Lane Both Entire length
§ 7-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-9
1:269
§ 7-9. ONE-WAY STREETS. [New; Ord. No. 2000-13 § I]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated. Parking shall be permitted on the
sides indicated below.
Name of Street Direction Limits Parking
Permitted
(Reserved)
§ 7-10. THROUGH STREETS. [1976 Code § 74-8, Schedule I; Ord.
No. 18-71; Ord. No. 23-71; Ord. No. 88-14; Ord. No. 89-12; Ord. No.
89-14; Ord. No. 89-34; Ord. No. 95-13; Ord. No. 95-23; Ord. No.
96-18; Ord. No. 96-22; Ord. No. 96-23; New; Ord. No. 2000-13 § I]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as Through Streets. STOP
signs shall be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting
the Through Street except where YIELD signs are provided for in the
designation.
Name of Street Limits
Algonquin Road Between McCampbell Road on the north and
Heather Hill Way on the south
American Way [Added
9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
Between Middletown Road and Everett Road
(County Route 52); a yield sign shall be installed
on Everett Road (County Route 52) facing
southbound traffic
Apple Grove Road Between Centerville Road and a point 50 feet
beyond the easterly curbline of Empress Drive
Armand Court Entire length
Ashley Drive Between Highway 34 on the west and its
termination on the east
Bayberry Drive Between Hawthorne Road on the west and Twin
Terrace on the east
Bethany Road Between Line Road and County Route 4 (Holmdel
Road) and between County Route 4 (Holmdel
Road) and a point 50 feet east of Telegraph Hill
Road within the corporate limits of Holmdel
Township. A yield sign shall be installed on
Hillcrest Road facing eastbound traffic
Blue Hills Drive Entire length
Brentwood Road Between Chestnut Ridge Road on the west and
Old Manor Road on the east
§ 7-9 HOLMDEL § 7-10
1:270
Name of Street Limits
Briarcliff Lane
[Amended 9-10-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-19]
Between Windswept Drive on the north and East
Brook Drive (most southerly approach)
Cambridge Drive Between Ashley Drive on the north and Carolyn
Court on the south
Candlelight Drive Between Main Street (County Route 520) on the
north and its termination on the south
Cat Bird Alley Between Crawfords Corner Road on the south
and White Birch Lane on the north
Centerville Road Between Highway 35 and Takolusa Drive
Chardonnay Drive Between Barbera Drive and County Road 520
(Main Street)
Cherry Hill Road Between Telegraph Hill Road and Windswept
Road
Chestnut Ridge Road Between Bethany Road and Heyward Hills Drive
Cindy Lane — Malvern
Road [Amended
9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
Between Line Road and Deer Path
Crape Myrtle Drive
[Added 9-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-19]
Between Holmdel Road (County Route 4) and
Crimson King Drive
Crawfords Corner Road
[Amended 9-10-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-19]
Between Red Hill Road (County Route 52) and
Holmdel Road (County Route 4); a yield sign
shall be installed on Middletown Road facing
southbound traffic
Crimson King Drive
[Added 9-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-19]
Between Bailey Lane and its termination to the
east
Country View [Added
9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
Between Galloping Hill Road and its termination
to the south
Dearborn Drive Between Centerville Road and 50 feet beyond the
easterly curbline of Peach Tree Lane
Deercrest Drive Between Crawfords Corner Road on the south
and East Parkway Place on the north
Deer Path Between Line Road on the east and Highway 34
on the west
Deerfield Road Between Chestnut Ridge Road on the west and
Telegraph Hill Road on the east
§ 7-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-10
1:271
Name of Street Limits
Dimisa Drive Entire length
Dora Lane Entire length
East Brook Drive Between Briarcliff Lane northerly most
intersection and Briarcliff Lane most southerly
intersection
East Lawn Drive Between Highway 34 and a point 50 feet south of
the westbound intersection of East Lawn Drive
Ely Road From its intersection with Spring Valley Drive on
the southwest to its termination on the east
Exeter Way [Added
9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
Between Wilson Boulevard on the south to its
termination on the north
Falcons Ridge Circle
[Added 9-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-19]
Entire length (exception) a stop sign shall be
installed on Falcons Ridge Circle, facing
southwesterly bound traffic at Falcons Ridge
Circle
Galloping Hill Circle Entire length (exception) a stop sign shall be
installed on Galloping Hill Circle, facing
southwesterly bound traffic at Galloping Hill
Road
Galloping Hill Road Between Van Schoick Road on the east and
Galloping Hill Circle on the west. A stop sign
shall be installed on Galloping Hill Circle
Georjean Drive Between Holmdel Road on the east and its
termination on the west
Goldsmith Drive Between Line Road on the west and Mabern
Drive on the southeast
Grandview Drive Between Schanck Road on the southeast and
Schanck Road on the southwest
Hawthorne Avenue
[Amended 9-10-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-19]
Between Union Avenue and a point 50 feet east
of Prospect Street
Heather Hill Way Between McCampbell Road and a point 50 feet
east of Duncan Drive (most easterly intersection)
Heyward Hills Drive Between Telegraph Hill Road on the north and
the termination of the roadway on the south. A
stop sign shall be installed on the westerly leg of
Heyward Hills Drive
Hillcrest Road Between Holmdel Road on the east and Bethany
Road on the north
§ 7-10 HOLMDEL § 7-10
1:272
Name of Street Limits
Holland Road-
Telegraph Hill Road
Between Bethany Road and Laurel Avenue-Van
Schoick Road
Huntley Road Entire length
Ladwood Drive Between Rambling Brook Drive on the southwest
and Route 520 on the north
Line Road [Amended
9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
Between Bethany Road on the north and Van
Brackle Road, within the corporate limits of
Holmdel Township, and between Van Brackle
Road and Holmdel Road (County Route 4)
Longbridge Road Between County Route 520 and the Holmdel
Township-Colts Neck Township corporate line
Longstreet Road Between Roberts Road on the south and
Crawfords Corner Road on the west
Longview Drive Between Holmdel Road on the east and its
termination on the west
Maple Leaf Drive
[Added 9-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-19]
Between Centerville Road on the west and its
termination to the east
Maurice Avenue Between Palmer Avenue and a point 50 feet west
of Stempler Court
McCampbell Road Between Middletown Road on the west and
Everett Road on the east
Middletown Road
[Amended 9-10-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-19]
Between Crawfords Corner Road on the north
and County Route 520 on the south; a yield sign
shall be installed on Everett Road (County Route
52) facing Middletown Road northbound traffic
Miller Avenue Between the Holmdel Township/Hazlet Township
corporate line on the north and Orchard Avenue
West
Mount Drive Between Telegraph Hill Road on the west and
Overlook Drive on the east
Old Manor Road Between Bethany Road on the north and
Deerfield Road on the south
Plum Lane-Twin
Terrace
Between County Road 516 (Laurel Avenue) and
Hawthorne Avenue
Rambling Brook Drive Between County Route 520 on the north and
Ladwood Drive on the southeast
Roberts Road
[Amended 9-10-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-19]
Between Crawfords Corner Road and County
Route 4 (Holmdel Road)
§ 7-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-10
1:273
Name of Street Limits
Sage Street [Added
9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
Between Cinnamon Court to its termination to
the south
Schanck Road Between County Route 4 (Holmdel Road) on the
east and Highway 34 on the west, thence
between Highway 34 on the east and the
Holmdel Township corporate line
South Beers Street
[Added 9-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-19]
Between Van Brackle Road to the south and
Hillcrest Road to the north
South Holland Road Between Crawfords Corner Road on the south
and Telegraph Hill Road-Holland Road on the
northeast
South Telegraph Hill
Road [Amended
9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
Between Holland Road and the most easterly
intersection with Huntley Road
Spring Valley Drive Between Holmdel Road and a point 50 feet east
of Winding Brook Way
Stillwell Road Between Middletown Road on the west and
County Road 52 (Everett Road) on the east
Stoney Brook Road Between Centerville Road on the east and its
termination on the north
Sweet Briar Lane Entire length
Takolusa Drive Between County Road 516 (Laurel Avenue) and
Telegraph Hill Road-Holland Road
Tiberon Drive Entire length
Union Avenue Between State Highway 35 and the Holmdel
Township-Hazlet Township corporate line
Van Brackle Road Between County Route 4 (Holmdel Road) on the
east and Line Road on the west
West Parkway Place Between Wilshire Way and a point 50 feet east of
Stillwell Drive
Willowbrook Road Between Longbridge Road and the Holmdel
Township-Colts Neck boundary line
Wilson Boulevard
[Added 9-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-19]
Entire length
Winchester Lane Between Van Schoick Road (County Route 52)
and its termination on the west
§ 7-10 HOLMDEL § 7-10
1:274
Name of Street Limits
Winding Brook Way Between Spring Valley Drive on the northwest
and Spring Valley Drive on the northeast
Windswept Road
[Amended 9-10-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-19]
Between Sage Street to a point 50 feet south of
Red Berry Road
Winthrop Drive Between County Route 52 (Everett Road) and to
a point 50 feet west of Sentry Court
Woodland Road Between Chestnut Ridge Road on the west and
Old Manor Road on the east
§ 7-11. STOP INTERSECTION. [1976 Code § 74-9, Schedule II; Ord.
No. 3-68; Ord. No. 89-15; Ord. No. 95-23; Ord. No. 96-28; New; Ord.
No. 2000-13 § I]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall
be installed as provided therein.
Intersections Stop On
Alexis Court and Putnam Court
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Alexis Court
Allocco Drive and Theresa Drive Theresa Drive
American Way and Shefield Place Shefield Place
Armand Court and Cottonwood Lane
East [Added 9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
Armand Court
Aufra Road and Mabern Drive Mabern Drive
Barbera Drive and Chardonnay
Drive
Chardonnay Drive
Barrister Drive and Raintree Court Raintree Court
Bordeaux Lane and Burgundy Drive Burgundy Drive
Boxwood Terrace and Red Oak Run
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Red Oak Run
Briar Hill Road and Rosewood Drive
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Rosewood Drive
Bryce Road and Brown Court
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Brown Court
§ 7-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11
1:275
Intersections Stop On
Cambridge Road and Carolyn Court
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Cambridge Road
Cardinal Road and Robin Road
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Cardinal Road (western side)
Cinnamon Court and Sage Street
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Sage Street
Colts Drive and Colts Glen [Added
9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
Colts Glen
Donner Street and Flora Drive Flora Drive
Dora Lane and Hickory Hills Court
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Dora Lane
Duncan Drive and Carlisle Court
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Carlisle Court
Echo Court and Edgewood Drive
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Echo Court
Edgewood Drive and Ironhill Drive
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Edgewood Drive
Falcons Ridge Circle and Flemer
Court [Repealed 9-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-19]
Fawn Path and Taylor Run Fawn Path
Flora Drive and Holmes Court Holmes Court
Fox Hunt Road and Field Gate Court Field Gate Court
Freemont Lane and Wingate Terrace
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Wingate Terrace
Glenn Way and Bruce Place Bruce Place
Heartland Drive and Hayfield Court
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Heartland Drive
Highpoint Road and Doughil Court
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Doughil Court
§ 7-11 HOLMDEL § 7-11
1:276
Intersections Stop On
Homestead Place and Petit Court
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Petit Court
Honeysuckle Court and Hemlock
Lane [Added 9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
Hemlock Lane
Iaderosa Lane and Hickory Hills
Court
Hickory Hills Court
Indian Creek Road and Northview
Terrace [Added 9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
Northview Terrace
Jason Court and Thistle Lane Jason Court
Lois Place and Woodside Place
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Lois Place
Lori Lane and Cottonwood Lane
West [Added 9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
Lori Lane
Lori Lane and Jennifer Drive Jennifer Drive
Maacka Drive and Red Oak Run
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Red Oak Run (eastern side)
Mabern Drive and Goldsmith Drive Goldsmith Drive
Malvern Ridge and Partridge Run Partridge Run
Marion Drive and Raleigh Court
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Raleigh Court
Overlook Drive and Victoria Place Victoria Place
Palmer Court and Mill Lane [Added
9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
Mill Lane
Partridge Run and Breeze Knoll
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Breeze Knoll
Prospect Street and Patterson Court
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Patterson Court
East Parkway Place and Deercrest
Drive
Deercrest Drive
Randall Road and Douglas Drive Douglas Drive
Red Coach Lane and Oak Tree Lane Oak Tree Lane
§ 7-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11
1:277
Intersections Stop On
Red Oak Run and Maacka Drive
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Maacka Drive
Richards Way and Tolas Drive
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Tolas Drive
Ridge Hill Way and Oakcrest Court Oakcrest Court
Riverside Lane and Cornwallis Drive Cornwallis Drive
Robin Road and Cardinal Road
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Robin Road (eastern side)
Round Hill Road and Galloway Drive
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Galloway Drive
Rustic Lane and Old Farm Road
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Old Farm Road
Sharon Lane and Tanglewood Lane Tanglewood Lane
Seven Oaks Drive and Seven Oaks
Circle
Seven Oaks Circle
Seven Oaks Circle and Seven Oaks
Drive
Seven Oaks Drive
Seven Oaks Circle and Croydon
Court
Croydon Court
Shefield Place and Hastings Road Shefield Place
Stonehedge Drive and Wilshire Way
[Amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Wilshire Way
Turtle Creek Road and Jason Court Turtle Creek Road
Tricorne Court and Summer House
Hill
Summer House Hill
Valley Point Drive and Morse Way
North/Morse Way South [Added
9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
Valley Point Drive
Valley Point Drive and Pheasant Run Pheasant Run
Wagon Way and Paddock Court Paddock Court
White Birch Lane and East Parkway
Place
East Parkway Place
Wildhedge Lane and Sharon Court Sharon Court
§ 7-11 HOLMDEL § 7-11
1:278
Intersections Stop On
Willow Brook Road and Willow Road
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
Willow Road
Wilshire Way and Salisbury Court Salisbury Court
Windhill Way and Oak Tree Lane Oak Tree Lane
Woods End Way and Peach Tree
Lane [Added 9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
Woods End Way
Yellowbrook Road and Flemer Court Flemer Court
Yellow Brook Road and Skyview
Court [Added 9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
Skyview Court
§ 7-11.1. Multiple Stop Intersections. [Ord. No. 2001-04 § I; Ord.
No. 2004-21 § I; Ord. No. 2007-03 § I]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140 the following described
intersections are hereby designated as Multiple Stop Intersections. Stop
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
Intersection Stop Signs On
Bayberry Drive and Green Leaf Way All approaches to intersection
Bayberry Drive and Twin Terrace/Plum
Lane
All approaches to intersection
Chestnut Ridge Road and Brentwood Road All approaches to intersection
Line Road and Van Brackle Road All approaches to intersection
§ 7-12. YIELD INTERSECTION. [New; Ord. No. 2000-13 § I]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S. 39:4-140, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as Yield Intersections. Yield signs shall
be installed as provided therein.
Intersection Yield Sign On
Crawfords Corner Road and Holmdel Road
(County Route 4) (northbound) [Added
9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
Crawfords Corner Road
Crawfords Corner Road and Middletown
Road (southbound) [Added 9-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-19]
Crawfords Corner Road
Everett Road and American Way
(southbound)
American Way
§ 7-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-12
1:279
Intersection Yield Sign On
Hillcrest Road and Bethany Road
(eastbound)
Hillcrest Road
Middletown Road and Everett Road
(County Route 52) (eastbound) [Added
9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
Middletown Road
Middletown Road and Route 520
(westbound)
Middletown Road
Red Hill Road and Crawfords Corner Road
(westbound) [Added 9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
Red Hill Road
§ 7-13. TURN PROHIBITIONS. [New; Ord. No. 2000-13 § I]
No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the manner
described.
Intersection Turn
Prohibited
Movement Prohibited
Bethany Road and
Craig Street
Left From northbound on Bethany
Road onto the northernmost
intersection with Craig Road
Craig Street and
Bethany Road
Left From eastbound at the
northernmost intersection with
Craig Street and Bethany Road
Crawfords Corner Road
and the entrance
driveway of Bell Works
(former Bell Labs
complex at 101
Crawfords Corner
Road) [Added
9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
Left Northbound from Crawfords
Corner Road into the most
northerly entrance driveway of
Bell Works (former Bell Labs
complex at 101 Crawfords Corner
Road)
Crawfords Corner Road
and the exit driveway
of Bell Works (former
Bell Labs complex at
101 Crawfords Corner
Road) [Amended
9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
Left Southbound from the southerly
most driveway of Bell Works
(former Bell Labs complex at 101
Crawfords Corner Road) to
northbound onto Crawfords
Corner Road
§ 7-12 HOLMDEL § 7-13
1:280
Intersection Turn
Prohibited
Movement Prohibited
Union Avenue and the
exit driveway of the
commercial property
located at 2131
Highway 35 [Amended
9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-19]
Left Northbound from the easterly
driveway of the commercial
property located at 2131 Highway
35 to northbound on Union Avenue
§ 7-14. NO TURN ON RED. [1976 Code § 74-56; Ord. No. 37-83; Ord.
No. 2008-25 § I]
No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any location listed.
Location
From north on Line Road to east on Bethany Road
From south on South Holland Road to west on Crawfords Corner Road
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. Monday through Friday
§ 7-15. LOADING ZONES.
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in said locations during the times indicated other than
for the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
Name of Street Time Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-16. BUS STOPS.
The locations described are hereby designated as Bus Stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall be
permitted to occupy said locations between the hours indicated.
Street Location Hours
(Reserved)
§ 7-17. TAXI STANDS.
The locations described are hereby designated as Taxi Stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy said locations during the
times indicated.
Street Location Hours
(Reserved)
§ 7-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-18
1:281
§ 7-18. LANE USE RESERVATIONS.
The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use Reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection Movement
(Reserved)
§ 7-19. SPEED LIMITS. [1976 Code § 74-28; Ord. No. 91-28; Ord.
No. 89-7; New; Ord. No. 2000-13 § I; Ord. No. 2006-01 § I; Ord. No.
2006-29 § I]
The following described streets or parts of streets shall have the speed
limits designated below.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the below designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
Name of Street Side Speed
Limit
Location
American Way Both 30 mph Between its intersection
with Everett Road and its
intersection with
Middletown Road
Bethany Road Both 35 mph Entire length
25 mph In the St. Benedict School
zone during recess or while
children are going to or
leaving school during
opening and closing hours
Centerville Road Both 30 mph Entire length
Both 40 mph Between Middletown-Red
Hill Road and Roberts Road,
thence
Both 45 mph Between Roberts Road and
Holmdel Road
Crawfords
Corner Road
Both 30 mph In the school zone at
Holmdel High School and
Satz Intermediate School
during recess or while
children are going to or
leaving school during
opening or closing hours
Hillcrest Road Both 35 mph Entire length
§ 7-18 HOLMDEL § 7-19
1:282
Name of Street Side Speed
Limit
Location
Holland Road Both 35 mph Between its intersection
with Telegraph Hill Road
and the municipal boundary
with Middletown Township
Both 30 mph Between its intersection
with Holmdel Road and its
intersection with Bethany
Road/Church Street
Line Road
Both 25 mph School zone for St. John
Vianney High School during
recess or while students are
going to or leaving school
during opening and closing
hours
Longbridge Road Both 35 mph Entire length
Longstreet Road Both 35 mph Between its intersection
with Crawfords Corner
Road and its intersection
with Roberts Road
Both 35 mph Between Everett Road and
Middletown Road
McCampbell
Road [Amended
9-10-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-19]
Both 25 mph At the Village School school
zone, during recess or while
children are going to or
leaving school during
opening or closing hours
Both 35 mph Between its intersection
with County Road 520 (East
Main Street) and American
Way
Middletown Road
[Amended
9-10-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-19] Both 40 mph From American Way to its
intersection with Crawfords
Corner/Everett Road
North Beers
Street
Both 35 mph Between its intersection
with Holmdel Road and its
intersection with Bethany
Road
Pleasant Valley
Road
Both 35 mph Between its intersection
with State Highway 34 and
the municipal boundary
with Marlboro Township
§ 7-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-19
1:283
Name of Street Side Speed
Limit
Location
Roberts Road Both 40 mph Between its intersection
with State Highway 34 and
its intersection with
Crawfords Corner-Everett
Road
Both 35 mph From its intersection with
Holmdel Road to its
intersection with Highway
34, thence
Schanck Road
Both 35 mph Its intersection with
Highway 34 to the
municipal boundary with
Marlboro Township
South Beers
Street
Both 35 mph Between its intersection
with Van Brackle Road and
335 feet north of Hillcrest
Road
South Holland
Road
Both 45 mph Between its intersection
with Crawfords Corner
Road and Telegraph Hill
Road
Stillwell Road Both 30 mph Between its intersection
with Middletown Road and
its intersection with Everett
Road
Telegraph Hill
Road
Both 35 mph Entire length
Union Avenue Both 40 mph Between its intersection
with State Highway 35 and
the municipal boundary
between Holmdel Township
and Hazlet Township
Van Brackle Road Both 35 mph Entire length
Willow Brook
Road
Both 35 mph Entire length within
Holmdel Township
boundary
§ 7-20. CROSSWALKS. [New; Ord. No. 2008-15 § I; Ord. No.
2017-10; Ord. No. 2017-14; amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
§ 7-19 HOLMDEL § 7-20
1:284
a. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Bethany Road at
Saint Benedict School located 370 feet west of the westerly curbline of
Hillcrest Road and extending six feet westerly therefrom.
b. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Telegraph Hill
Road beginning at a point approximately 40 feet southerly along the
center line of Telegraph Hill Road from the intersection of the center
lines of Heyward Hills Drive and Telegraph Hill Road and extending to a
point six feet southerly therefrom.
c. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Roberts Road
located 1,165 feet west of the center line of Longstreet Road continuing
to a point west 10 feet therefrom.
d. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Holmdel Road
(County Road 4) beginning at a point approximately 1,007 feet
northerly along the center line of Holmdel Road from the intersection of
the center lines of North Beers Street and Holmdel Road (CR 4) and
extending to a point six feet northerly therefrom, located at the north
side of the most northerly driveway to the Indian Hill School.
e. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Line Road
beginning at a point approximately 577 feet northerly along the center
line of Line Road from the intersection of the center lines of Dora Lane
and Line Road and extending to a point six feet northerly therefrom,
located at the most southerly entrance to the Saint John Vianney High
School complex.
f. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Line Road
beginning at a point approximately 1,007 feet northerly along the
center line of Line Road from the intersection of the center lines of Dora
Lane and Line Road and extending to a point six feet northerly
therefrom, located at the most southerly exit to the Saint John Vianney
High School complex.
g. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Middletown Road
beginning at a point approximately 220 feet southerly along the center
line of Middletown Road from the intersection of the center lines of
McCampbell Road and Middletown Road and extending to a point six
feet southerly therefrom.
h. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on McCampbell
Road beginning at a point approximately 45 feet easterly along the
center line of McCampbell Road from the intersection of the center
lines of Blue Hills Drive and McCampbell Road and extending to a point
six feet easterly therefrom.
i. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Longbridge Road
beginning at a point approximately 39 feet southerly along the center
line of Longbridge Road from the intersection of the center lines of
Cross Road and Longbridge Road and extending to a point 10 feet
southerly therefrom.
§ 7-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-20
1:285
j. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Exeter Way
beginning at a point approximately 40 feet southerly along the center
line of Exeter Way from the intersection of the center lines of
Paddington Lane and Exeter Way and extending to a point six feet
southerly therefrom.
k. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Exeter Way
beginning at a point approximately 40 feet northerly along the center
line of Exeter Way from the intersection of the center lines of
Paddington Lane and Exeter Way and extending to a point six feet
northerly therefrom.
l. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Exeter Way
beginning at a point approximately 35 feet northerly along the center
line of Exeter Way from the intersection of the center lines of Prestwick
Court and Exeter Way and extending to a point six feet northerly
therefrom.
m. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Exeter Way
beginning at a point approximately 40 feet southerly along the center
line of Exeter Way from the intersection of the center lines of Prestwick
Court and Exeter Way and extending to a point six feet southerly
therefrom.
n. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Hayfield Court
beginning at a point approximately 282 feet southerly along the center
line of Hayfield Court from the intersection of the center lines of
Heartland Drive and Hayfield Court and extending to a point six feet
southerly therefrom.
o. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Hayfield Court
beginning at a point approximately 1,520 feet northwesterly along the
center line of Hayfield Court from the intersection of the center lines of
Heartland Drive and Hayfield Court and extending to a point six feet
westerly therefrom.
p. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Wilson Boulevard
beginning at a point approximately 39 feet easterly along the center
line of Wilson Boulevard from the intersection of the center lines of
Exeter Way/Ashton Court and Wilson Boulevard and extending to a
point six feet easterly therefrom.
q. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Wilson Boulevard
beginning at a point approximately 42 feet westerly along the center
line of Wilson Boulevard from the intersection of the center lines of
Exeter Way/Ashton Court and Wilson Boulevard and extending to a
point six feet westerly therefrom.
r. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Wilson Boulevard
beginning at a point approximately 320 feet easterly along the center
line of Wilson Boulevard from the intersection of the center lines of
§ 7-20 HOLMDEL § 7-20
1:286
§ 7-21. ON STREET PARKING FOR THE HANDICAPPED.
§ 7-21.1. Restricted Parking in Marked Spaces. [1976 Code
§ 74-50.1; Ord. No. 90-3]
No person, other than those persons who have been issued special vehicle
identification cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, pursuant to N.J.S.
52:27D-119 et seq.; N.J.S. 39:4-197.5; 39:4-204 et seq., or a temporary
handicap placard issued by the Chief of Police pursuant to N.J.S. 39:4-206,
or any other applicable law, shall be permitted to park a vehicle upon
any public or private property appropriately marked for vehicles for the
physically handicapped unless the vehicle is authorized by law to be parked
therein and a handicapped person is either the driver or a passenger in that
vehicle.
§ 7-21.2. Restricted Parking in Areas Designated. [1976 Code
§ 74-50.2; Ord. No. 90-3]
No person, other than those persons who have been issued special vehicle
identification cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, pursuant to N.J.S.
52:27D-119 et seq.; N.J.S. 39:4-197.5; 39:4-204 et seq., or a temporary
handicap placard issued by the Chief of Police pursuant to N.J.S. 39:4-206,
or any other applicable law, shall be permitted to park a vehicle upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described below in "Spaces Reserved for the
Handicapped," which may be amended from time to time which is attached
hereto and incorporated herein.
§ 7-21.3. Penalty. [1976 Code § 74-50.6; Ord. No. 90-3]
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of the
Township of Holmdel of a violation of the terms of this section shall be
subject to one or more of the following in the discretion of the Municipal
Court Judge: imprisonment in the County jail or in any place provided by
the municipality for the detention of prisoners, for any term not exceeding
90 days or by a minimum mandatory fine of $100 for the first offense. For
subsequent offenses a fine of at least $100 and up to 90 days community
Exeter Way/Ashton Court and Wilson Boulevard and extending to a
point six feet easterly therefrom.
s. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Exeter Way
beginning at a point approximately 58 feet northerly along the center
line of Exeter Way from the intersection of the center lines of Wilson
Boulevard and Exeter Way and extending to a point six feet northerly
therefrom.
t. There is hereby established a mid-block crosswalk on Ashton Court
beginning at a point approximately 55 feet southerly along the center
line of Ashton Court from the intersection of the center lines of Wilson
Boulevard and Ashton Court and extending to a point six feet southerly
therefrom.
§ 7-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.3
1:287
service on such terms and in such form as the Court shall deem appropriate,
or any combination thereof.
§ 7-21.4. Statutory Authorization. [New]
Pursuant to the authority granted to this municipality by N.J.S. 39:4-197,
the following locations are hereby designated as restricted parking spaces
for the use by persons who have been issued a special vehicle identification
card by the Division of Motor Vehicles. No other person or persons shall be
permitted to park in these spaces.
§ 7-21.5. Designation of Handicapped Parking Spaces. [New]
Certain areas shall be designated as handicapped parking spaces and shall
be so marked by signs and conformance with the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
§ 7-21.6. Towing of Unlawfully Parked Vehicles; Fees. [New]
Pursuant to N.J.S. 39:4-207.7, an eligible handicapped person may request
any law enforcement officer to arrange for the removal and storage of
a motor vehicle unlawfully parked in any handicapped parking space or
zone which is restricted for use by a handicapped person. It shall be the
obligation of the owner of the motor vehicle to pay the reasonable costs for
the removal and for any storage which may result from the removal.
§ 7-21.7. Spaces Reserved for the Handicapped.
(Reserved)
§ 7-22. TRAFFIC CONTROLS FOR STREET AND HIGHWAY
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OPERATIONS.
§ 7-22.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 98-8 § I; Ord. No. 2006-20 § I]
The Township Committee finds and declares that problems of traffic control
occur when traffic must be moved through or around street construction,
maintenance operations, and utility work, above or below the ground which
requires blocking the street and obstructing the normal flow of traffic; and
that such obstructions are or can become dangerous when not properly
controlled. In order to better promote the public health, safety, peace and
welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and regulations directed to the
safe and expeditious movement of traffic through and around construction
and maintenance zones and to provide safety for the work forces performing
these operations.
§ 7-21.3 HOLMDEL § 7-22.2
1:288
§ 7-22.2. Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways. [Ord. No. 98-8 § I; Ord. No. 2006-20 § I;
amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-22]
The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways,
hereafter known as M.U.T.C.D., is hereby adopted by reference, except as
hereby supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates whenever
construction, maintenance operations or utility work obstructs the normal
flow of traffic. Any person, contractor or utility that fails to comply with the
provisions of the most current version of the M.U.T.C.D. while performing
such work is in violation of this section.
§ 7-22.3. Preconstruction Meetings. [Ord. No. 98-8 § I; Ord. No.
2006-20 § I; amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-22]
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or public utility
operating pursuant to a public utility agreement, N.J.A.C. 16:25-2.1, wishing
to conduct work (hereinafter the "contractor") on, under or above the street
to contact the Holmdel Township Police Department in order to arrange a
preconstruction meeting and submit plans for the safe movement of traffic
during such period of construction work. The preconstruction meeting and
submittal of plans shall take place no earlier than five working days prior
to the requested start of such work. The Chief of Police, or his designee,
shall have discretion for the scheduling of such meeting if requested earlier
than five working days prior to the requested start of such work or during
emergency situations. Prior to the start of construction operations, the
contractor shall assign a supervisory-level employee to serve as the Traffic
Control Coordinator. The Holmdel Township Police Department shall be
notified as to the name of this individual, along with a method of contacting
the individual on a twenty-four-hour, seven-day-a-week basis, before or at
the preconstruction meeting. Any contractor that fails to comply with this
section prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not submitted to
and reviewed by the Police Department of the Township of Holmdel is in
violation of this section.
§ 7-22.4. Emergency Contact Telephone Numbers. [Ord. No. 98-8
§ I; Ord. No. 2006-20 § I]
The person, contractor or utility shall provide the Police Department with
at least two emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case of
emergency problems at the construction or maintenance site prior to the
start of any work. If for any reason emergency contact must be made, or
if the emergency contact person does not respond to the call from the
Police Department to correct such hazardous condition, the Township may
respond to correct such hazardous condition(s). The reasonable fees for
such emergency services by the Township of Holmdel shall be charged to
the person, contractor or utility responsible for such condition.
§ 7-22.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-22.5
1:289
§ 7-22.5. Hours. [Ord. No. 2006-20 § I]
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or utility work on
any roadway in the Township before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m.
The officer in charge of the Township Police Department may adjust this
time limit to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. If the officer
in charge determines that the construction or maintenance operations prior
to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay traffic or cause a
safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted only between 9:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
§ 7-22.6. Road Closings and Detours. [Ord. No. 2006-20 § I;
amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-22]
§ 7-22.7. Traffic Control Coordinators. [Ord. No. 2006-20 § I;
amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-22]
Traffic control coordinators shall be certified by the American Traffic Safety
Services Association (ATSSA) or equivalent. Certification shall be provided
to the Holmdel Township Police Department prior to start of any
a. The Holmdel Township Police Department and/or the Township
Engineer is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the
establishment of a work zone, including but not limited to the detour
and/or closing of any street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic,
whenever they find that such closing is necessary for the preservation
of public safety, health or welfare.
b. All street closings shall be discontinued and the area under
construction reopened to traffic at the conclusion of a work day until
work begins the following work day. This shall include the contractor
ensuring that all of his or her equipment and materials are removed
from the roadway, the road clear of debris and all raised manholes,
inlets, and other appurtenances have traffic control devices (i.e.,
drums) placed over them. In the event that the manhole, inlet or other
appurtenance is in the middle of a travel way and the placement of a
traffic device would impede the flow of traffic, the manhole, inlet or
other appurtenance shall be ramped with fresh bituminous material
(either cold or hot mix), and the use of millings to perform this
operation shall not be permitted.
c. The foregoing provisions shall not apply to a contractor that obtains
approval to maintain a street closing on a twenty-four-hour basis, which
shall be subject to regulations set forth by the Holmdel Township Police
Department and/or Township Engineer.
d. The Township shall not be liable for any actions or omissions by a
contractor relating to performance of requirements set forth under this
section, and the Township shall retain all immunities it possesses under
all applicable laws, including but not limited to the New Jersey Tort
Claims Act, N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.
§ 7-22.5 HOLMDEL § 7-22.7
1:290
construction when working at a construction or utility site. Township Police,
or their designee, shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
on Township roadways when determined by the Holmdel Township Police
Department that it is necessary to provide for the safety and expeditious
movement of traffic. All costs connected with such traffic controls shall be
at the cost of the applicant/independent contractor.
§ 7-22.8. Stop Work. [Ord. No. 2006-20 § I]
The Township Police Department shall have the authority to stop work,
including the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material within the
street right-of-way, back filling of open excavations and/or related work, in
order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any violation of this
section.
§ 7-22.9. Site Preparation. [Ord. No. 2006-20 § I; amended
9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-22]
a. It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicles or
equipment are to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk until all
construction signs, light devices and pavement markings are installed.
b. The contractor shall be responsible for maintaining driveway access for
all adjacent property owners. In the event that driveway access must be
temporarily denied, the contractor shall provide written notice to the
Holmdel Township Police Department and affected property owner(s) at
least five working days in advance of the driveway closing.
c. The contractor shall present to the Holmdel Township Police
Department's Traffic Safety Unit all traffic control devices and
materials necessary to execute proper maintenance and protection of
traffic operations for the project, as well as the number and type of
traffic control devices deemed necessary by the Holmdel Township
Police Department's Traffic Safety Unit. The contractor shall have all
traffic control devices and materials present for examination at least
five working days prior to the start of work.
d. All traffic control devices supplied are to be new or in satisfactory
condition. Traffic control devices damaged under the work contract as a
result of carelessness or mishandling by the contractor (i.e., running
over cones or barrels with his equipment or splashing tar on traffic
control devices, etc.) shall be replaced by the contractor within five
working days.
e. The Holmdel Township Police Department's Traffic Safety Unit reserves
the right to reject any traffic control device which, in its sole discretion,
does not satisfy the criteria of M.U.T.C.D. specifications, is damaged, or
is otherwise incapable of providing the function for which it was
intended. In such case, the contractor shall replace the deficient traffic
control devices and/or materials within two working days.
§ 7-22.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-22.9
1:291
§ 7-22.10. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-20 § I]
Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof for a first offense, pay a fine of not less than
$100, nor more than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the County jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days; for a second offense, upon conviction thereof, pay a
fine of not less than $250 and/or be imprisoned in the County jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which violation occurs or continues.
§ 7-23. through §7-29. (RESERVED)
f. If the contractor completes work pursuant to a public contract with the
Township of Holmdel, and the contract provides for the Township
gaining possession of traffic control devices, all traffic control devices
and materials used therein shall become the property of the Township
at the conclusion of the contract term.
§ 7-22.9 HOLMDEL § 7-23
1:292
PART II
Parking for the Handicapped on Public or Private Property
§ 7-30. PARKING FOR THE HANDICAPPED ON PUBLIC OR
PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 7-30.1. Definitions. [1976 Code § 74-43; Ord. No. 7-79]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PHYSICAL HANDICAP — Shall mean a physical impairment which confines
a person to a wheelchair, causes a person to walk with difficulty or
insecurity, affects the sight or hearing to the extent that a person
functioning in public areas is insecure or exposed to danger, causes faulty
coordination or reduces mobility, flexibility, coordination and perception to
the extent that facilities are needed to provide for the safety of that person.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Shall mean any building, structure, facility or
complex used by the general public or to which the general public is invited,
including but not limited to theaters, concert halls, auditoriums, museums,
schools, libraries, recreation facilities, public transportation terminals and
stations, factories, office buildings, businesses, shopping centers, hotels
or motels and public eating places, whether privately or publicly owned,
except that this term shall not include private family residences, warehouse
storage areas and all buildings conducting hazardous occupancies that
involve highly combustible, highly flammable or explosive material.
§ 7-30.2. Notice to Comply. [1976 Code § 74-44]
The owners of all public buildings which provide parking spaces adjacent
to or used in conjunction with the public building shall, within 180 days
of notice thereof, provide for parking spaces for handicapped persons in
accordance with the guidelines herein set forth and in a location and
manner as determined by the Construction Official. Any parking facility with
less than 16 existing spaces shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section.
§ 7-30.3. Construction Standards. [1976 Code § 74-45]
Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be constructed
according to the following guidelines:
a. A minimum of 1% of the total number of parking spaces in the parking
facility shall be used for handicapped parking, but these shall be not
less than two parking spaces in each such facility.
b. The location of the spaces for the physically handicapped shall be in an
area of the parking facility which is most accessible and approximate to
the building or buildings which the facility serves. The determination of
the location shall be made by the Construction Official in conjunction
and consultation with the owner. In shopping centers and other
§ 7-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-30.3
1:293
§ 7-30.4. Parking of Vehicles. [1976 Code § 74-46; Ord. No. 7-79]
No person shall park a vehicle in any parking space designated and marked
as being set aside for the physically handicapped in any parking facility
unless the vehicle shall have affixed thereto an identification certificate or
marker issued either by the New Jersey Director of the Division of Motor
Vehicles and/or a local certificate. Parking in a space for the handicapped
without the aforesaid vehicle identification shall create a rebuttable
presumption that use of the space was not for the physically handicapped.
§ 7-30.5. Issuance of Local Permit. [1976 Code § 74-47]
The Police Department shall issue free of charge a Township special vehicle
identification card to any physically disabled person (resident or
nonresident) who may not qualify for such identification under N.J.S.
39:4-204 but does qualify under the definition of "physical handicap" in
subsection 7-30.1 of this section. A physician's certificate shall be necessary
to establish the qualifying status of each applicant.
multistore facilities, the spaces for the handicapped shall be as near to
the flagship store as possible and/or at such other locations as may be
agreeable between the Construction Official and the owner.
c. Each space or group of spaces shall be identified with a clearly visible
sign displaying the international symbol of access along with the
following words: "These Spaces Reserved for Physically Handicapped
Only. Special Vehicle Identification Required." The lines designating the
area shall be painted in fluorescent yellow paint, and the center of the
space shall have painted thereon the capital letter H.
d. Each space shall be 12 feet wide to allow room for persons in
wheelchairs or on braces or crutches to get in or out of either side of the
automobile on a level, paved surface suitable for wheeling and walking.
e. Where possible, such spaces shall be located so that persons in
wheelchairs or using braces or crutches are not compelled to wheel or
walk behind parked cars.
f. Where applicable, curb ramps shall be provided to permit handicapped
people access from the parking area to the sidewalk.
§ 7-30.3 HOLMDEL § 7-30.5
1:294
PART III
Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Municipal Property and Board of Education Property
§ 7-31. HOLMDEL MUNICIPAL BUILDING. [1976 Code § 74-63; Ord.
No. 91-33; Ord. No. 94-6; Ord. No. 94-32; New; Ord. No. 2000-13 § I]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
municipal and Board of Education property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
a. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
b. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
site plan31 and signed with R7-8 (Reserved Parking with penalty plate),
in the designated parking areas for persons who have been issued the
handicapped parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
c. Stop Intersection. The following described intersection is hereby
designated as a stop intersection:
Intersection Stop On
Memorial Circle and Municipal
Drive
Memorial Circle
d. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 miles per hour.
2. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads
are:
Road MPH Limits
Municipal Drive 15 Entire length
Memorial Circle 15 Entire length
3. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
e. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zone, oil
fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's
or operator's expense.
31.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-33.
§ 7-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-31
1:295
§ 7-32. PHILLIPS PARK. [1976 Code § 74-60; New; Ord. No. 2000-13
§ I]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
municipal and Board of Education property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
f. Reserved Parking. The parking lot has reserved parking for various type
vehicles which must be properly identified as per site plan.32
g. Lane Use Reservation. Traffic shall move only as indicated below:
Memorial Circle: As indicated on site plan.33
h. One-Way Street. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Memorial Circle Westbound Entire length
Road in Lot B Westbound Entire length
i. Restricted Parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the following described roadways or parts of roadways:
Name of Street Side Location
Municipal Drive West side Entire length
Memorial Circle West side Entire length
Road in Lot B Both Entire length
a. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
b. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan34 and signed with R7-8 (Reserved Parking with
penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who have
been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
c. Stop Intersection. The following intersection is hereby designated as a
stop intersection:
Intersection Stop On
Main Drive and Private Drive Main Drive
32.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-33.
33.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-33.
34.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-30.
§ 7-31 HOLMDEL § 7-32
1:296
§ 7-33. ALLOCCO PARK. [1976 Code § 74-69; Ord. No. 91-39; New;
Ord. No. 2000-13 § I]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
municipal and Board of Education property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
d. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zone, oil
fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's
or operator's expense.
e. Restricted Parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the following described roadways or parts of roadways:
Name of Street Side Location
Main Drive Both Entire length
a. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
b. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan35 and signed with R7-8 (Reserved Parking with
penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who have
been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
c. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 miles per hour.
2. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads
are:
Road MPH Limits
Main Drive 15 Entire length
3. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
d. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zone, oil
fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's
or operator's expense.
35.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-39.
§ 7-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-33
1:297
§ 7-34. HOLMDEL TOWNSHIP SWIM AND TENNIS CENTER. [1976
Code § 74-70; Ord. No. 91-40; New; Ord. No. 2000-13 § I]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
municipal and Board of Education property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate or park a vehicle in violation of the regulation indicated.
e. Restricted Parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the following described roadways or parts of roadways:
Name of Street Side Location
Main Drive Both Entire length
a. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
b. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan36 and signed with R7-8 (Reserved Parking with
penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who have
been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
c. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 miles per hour.
2. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads
are:
Road MPH Limits
Main Drive 15 Entire length
3. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
d. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zone, oil
fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's
or operator's expense.
e. Loading Zones. As designated as per site plan.37
36.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-40.
37.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-40.
§ 7-33 HOLMDEL § 7-34
1:298
§ 7-35. through §7-38. (RESERVED)
§ 7-39. INDIAN HILL SCHOOL. [Ord. No. 74-61; Ord. No. 97-15 § I;
New; Ord. No. 2000-13 § I]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
municipal and Board of Education property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate or park a vehicle in violation of the regulation indicated.
f. Restricted Parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the following described roadways or parts of roadways:
Name of Street Side Location
Main Drive Both Entire length from where it
intersects with Bailey Lane
g. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours. No person shall park a
vehicle between the hours specified on any day (except Sundays and
public holidays).
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Holmdel Swim
and Tennis Club
Both 11:30 p.m. to
8:00 a.m.
All parking areas
h. One-Way Street. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of
Street
Side Limits
Main Drive Eastbound From Bailey Lane to prolongation of
north tip of divider as per site plan.38
Main Drive Eastbound From the prolongation of south edge of
Lot A parking stalls to the prolongation
of the east edge of Lot A parking stalls
as indicated in the site plan.39
a. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
b. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan40 and signed with R7-8 (Reserved Parking with
penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who have
38.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-31.
39.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-31.
40.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-31.
§ 7-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-39
1:299
been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
c. Stop Intersection. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections.
Intersection Stop On
Main Drive and West Drive West Drive
North Drive and West Drive North Drive
d. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 miles per hour.
2. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads
are:
Road MPH Limits
Main Drive 15 Entire length
North Drive 15 Entire length
West Drive 15 Entire length
3. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
e. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zone, oil
fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's
or operator's expense.
f. Reserved Parking. The parking lot has reserved parking for various type
vehicles which must be properly identified as per site plan.41
g. Bus Stop.
North Drive: (North Side) Entire front of school, as indicated on site
plan.42
h. Lane Use Reservation. Traffic shall move only as indicated below:
Roads in Lot A: as indicated on site plan.43
41.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-31.
42.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-31.
43.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-31.
§ 7-39 HOLMDEL § 7-39
1:300
§ 7-40. VILLAGE SCHOOL. [1976 Code § 74-66; Ord. No. 91-36;
New; Ord. No. 2000-13 § I]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
municipal and Board of Education property shall have movement of traffic
controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall operate or
park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
i. One-Way Street. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
South Drive Eastbound From Holmdel Road
North Drive Westbound To Holmdel Road
j. Restricted Parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the following described roadways or parts of roadways:
Name of
Street
Side Location
Lot A Center and East As indicated on site plan.44
Main Drive Both Entire length
North Drive South Entire length
West Drive West and North Entire length
a. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
b. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan45 and signed with R7-8 (Reserved Parking with
penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who have
been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
c. Stop Intersection. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop On
Lot A (south exit) and Main Drive Lot A (south exit)
Lot A (north exit) and Main Drive Lot A (north exit)
d. Speed Limits.
44.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-35.
45.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-36.
§ 7-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-40
1:301
§ 7-41. HOLMDEL HIGH SCHOOL AND WILLIAM SATZ SCHOOL.
[1976 Code § 74-68; Ord. No. 91-38; New; Ord. No. 2000-13 § I]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
municipal and Board of Education property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate or park a vehicle in violation of the regulation indicated.
1. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 miles per hour.
2. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads
are:
Road MPH Limits
Main Drive 15 Entire length
3. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
e. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zone, oil
fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's
or operator's expense.
f. Bus Stop.
Main Drive (South side: Entire front of school)
g. Restricted Parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the following described roadways or parts of roadways:
Name of Street Side Location
Main Drive Both Entire length
h. One-Way Street. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Main Drive Southbound Entire length
Road in Lot A Eastbound Entire length
a. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
b. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan.46
§ 7-40 HOLMDEL § 7-41
1:302
c. Through Streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street:
1. Outer Road: Entire length from Crawfords Corner Road east
intersection to Crawfords Corner Road west intersection.
d. Stop Intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop On
South Drive and West Drive West Drive
Visitor Drive and West Drive Visitor Drive
e. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 miles per hour.
2. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads
are:
Road MPH Limits
Bus Road 15 Entire length
East Drive 15 Entire length
Outer Road 15 Entire length
South Drive 15 Entire length
Visitor Drive 15 Entire length
West Drive 15 Entire length
3. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
f. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zone, oil
fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's
or operator's expense.
g. Reserved Parking. The parking lot has reserved parking for various type
vehicles which must be properly identified, as per site plan.47
h. Loading Zones. As designated, as per site plan.48
46.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-38.
47.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-38.
§ 7-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41
1:303
§ 7-42. through §7-48. (RESERVED)
i. Restricted Parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the following described roadways or parts of roadways:
Name of Street Side Location
Bus Drive Both Entire length
East Drive Both Entire length
Outer Drive Both Entire length
South Drive Both Entire length
Visitor Drive Both Entire length
West Drive Both Entire length
j. Bus Stop. South Drive (north side) entire length.
k. One-Way Street. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of
Street
Direction Limits
Bus Road Westbound Entire length
East Drive Southbound Entire length
Outer Road Southbound From the prolongation of the south
curb of Visitor Drive to Crawfords
Corner Road
South Drive Westbound Entire length
West Drive Northbound Entire length
48.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-38.
§ 7-41 HOLMDEL § 7-42
1:304
PART IV
Traffic Regulations on Private Property to Which the Public Is
Invited (Subtitle One, Title 39)
§ 7-49. HOLMDEL PLAZA. [1976 Code § 74-59; Ord. No. 91-29]
The provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey are made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Holmdel Plaza located in the Township of Holmdel, County
of Monmouth and the following regulations shall be enforceable:
a. All vehicles shall park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
b. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan49 and signed with R7-8 (Reserved Parking with
penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who have
been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
c. Through Streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street:
Through Street
Main Drive: Entire length
From N.J. Route 35 to Perimeter Road
Perimeter Road: Entire length
From Union Avenue to Main Drive
Road T: Entire length
From prolongation of south curb of Road A to prolongation of north
curb of Road C.
d. Stop Intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop On
Bank Drive and Road S Bank Drive
Main Drive (north intersect) and
Perimeter Road
Main Drive
Main Drive (south intersect) and
Perimeter Road
Perimeter Road
Road O and Road N Road O
49.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-29.
§ 7-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-49
1:305
Intersection Stop On
Road P and Road S Road P
Road Q and Road S Road Q
Road R and Road S Road R
Road S and East Drive Road S
e. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limits for both directions in the parking lots shall be 15
miles per hour.
2. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads
are:
Road MPH Limits
Bank Drive 15 Entire length
East Drive 15 Entire length
Main Drive 15 Entire length
Perimeter Road 15 Entire length
Road A, B, C, D, E, F,
G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N,
O, P, Q, R, S, T
15 Entire length
South Drive 15 Entire length
3. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
f. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zone, oil
fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's
or operator's expense.
g. Loading Zones. As designated as per site plan.50
h. Restricted Parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the following described roadways or parts of roadways:
Name of Street Side Location
Bank Drive Both Entire length
East Drive Both Entire length
Main Drive Both Entire length
50.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-29.
§ 7-49 HOLMDEL § 7-49
1:306
§ 7-50. THE HOLMDEL TOWNE CENTER.
§ 7-50.1. Filing of Written Consent. [Ord. No. 94-35, Preamble]
The Sigma Management Company has filed a written consent with the
Township of Holmdel that the provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semi-public
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at the Holmdel Towne Center
located in the Township of Holmdel, County of Monmouth and the following
regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 7-50.2. Parking. [Ord. No. 94-35 § I]
All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
§ 7-50.3. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. No. 94-35 § 2; Ord. No. 95-14
§ II; Ord. No. 2000-13 § I]
All stalls shall be shown on the attached site plan and signed with R7-8
(Reserved Parking sign and penalty plate), in the designated parking areas
for persons who have been issued the Handicapped Parking permits by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 7-50.4. Through Street. [Ord. No. 94-35 § 3; Ord. No. 95-14 § III;
New; Ord. No. 2000-13 § I; Ord. No. 2000-17 § I]
Name of Street Side Location
Perimeter Road Both Entire length
Roads A thru and
including Road T
Both Entire length
South Drive Both Entire length
i. One-Way Streets. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Location
Bank Drive Eastbound From Road S to the
prolongation of the north
edge of the sidewalk of Bank
building
South Drive Northbound From N.J. Route 35 to
Perimeter Road.
j. Weight Limitations. Trucks over four tons gross weight are hereby
excluded from the main parking area, except for pick up and delivery of
materials in the area.
§ 7-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-50.4
1:307
§ 7-50.5. Stop Intersection. [Ord. No. 94-35 § 3; Ord. No. 95-14 § III;
New; Ord. No. 2000-13 § I]
The following described intersections are hereby designated as Stop
Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein:
Intersection Stop Signs On
Wiz Road and Loading Loading Zone
Road "C" and Wiz Road Wiz Road
Road "C" and Bank Drive Bank Drive (each side)
§ 7-50.6. Crosswalk Restrictions. [Ord. No. 95-14 § III; New; Ord.
No. 2000-13 § I]
The following described locations are hereby designated as mid-block
crosswalks:
a. Restrictions. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as Through Streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the Through Streets, except where
Yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Center Drive Between Main Drive and Highway 35
Main Drive Between Laurel Avenue and Center
Drive
Main Drive Between Center Drive and Highway 35
1. Main Drive.
a. At a point 390 feet west of the westerly curbline of Laurel Avenue
and extending 10 feet westerly therefrom.
b. At a point 570 feet west of the westerly curbline of Laurel Avenue
and extending eight feet westerly therefrom.
c. At a point 685 feet west of the westerly curbline of Laurel Avenue
and extending 38 feet westerly therefrom.
d. At a point 890 feet west of the westerly curbline of Laurel Avenue
and extending 40 feet westerly therefrom.
e. At a point 1,200 feet west of the westerly curbline of Laurel Avenue
and extending 10 feet westerly therefrom.
f. At a point 1,490 feet west of the westerly curbline of Laurel Avenue
and extending 10 feet westerly therefrom.
2. Intersection.
§ 7-50.4 HOLMDEL § 7-50.6
1:308
§ 7-50.7. Speed Limits. [Ord. No. 94-35 § IV]
§ 7-50.8. Tow-Away. [Ord. No. 94-35 § V]
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area,
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 7-50.9. Restricted Parking. [Ord. No. 94-35 § VI]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
All Roads and
Drives
Both All Entire length
§ 7-50.10. One-Way Streets. [Ord. No. 94-35 § VII]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
One-Way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Bank Drive North Entire length
§ 7-50.10.1. Turn Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2000-17 § II]
No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the manner
described:
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Main Drive and Road A Left Northbound from Main Drive
onto Westbound Road A
Wiz Road.
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots shall be
15 miles per hour.
b. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads are:
Road MPH Limits
All Roads 15 Entire length
c. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 7-50.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-50.11
1:309
§ 7-50.11. Loading Zones. [Ord. No. 94-35 § VIII]
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones. No
persons shall park a vehicle in the location during the times indicated other
than for the loading and unloading of goods and materials.
Names of
Street Time Sides Location
Loading Zone
Drive
All Both As indicated on site plan
Service Drive All South As indicated on site plan
§ 7-50.12. Lane Use Reservations. [Ord. No. 94-35 § IX]
The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use Reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated:
Intersection Movement
a. Eastbound left lane of Main Drive reserved for
Left Turn Only
Main Drive and Laurel
Avenue (CR. 516)
b. Eastbound right lane of Main Drive reserved
for Right Turn Only
§ 7-50.13. Installation of Signs. [Ord. No. 94-35 § X]
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police Department to
insure installations meet State and Federal specifications and all signing
shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
§ 7-50.14. Penalty. [Ord. No. 94-35 § XI]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute every
person convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to the penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 7-51. THE COMMONS AT HOLMDEL.
§ 7-51.1. Filing of Written Consent. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
The management of The Commons at Holmdel has filed a written consent
with the Township of Holmdel that provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of
the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semi-public
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at The Commons at Holmdel
located in the Township of Holmdel, County of Monmouth, and the following
Regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 7-50.11 HOLMDEL § 7-51.2
1:310
§ 7-51.2. Parking in Designated Areas. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
§ 7-51.3. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
All stalls shall be shown on the attached site plan51 and signed with R7-8
(Reserved Parking sign and penalty plate), in the designated parking areas
for persons who have been issued the Handicapped Parking permits by the
New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission.
§ 7-51.4. Restricted Parking. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described:
Streets Sides Hours Limits
All roads and
drives
Both All Entire length
§ 7-51.5. Speed Limits. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
§ 7-51.6. Loading Zones.
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in the locations during the times indicated other than
for the loading and unloading of goods and materials.
Streets Time Sides Location
Loading Zone
Drive
All Both As indicated on site plan52
Service Drive All Both As indicated on site plan53
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots shall be
15 miles per hour.
b. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads are:
Streets MPH Limits
All roads and drives 15 Entire length
c. Regulatory and Warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
51.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
52.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 7-51.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-51.7
1:311
§ 7-51.7. Lane Use Reservation. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use Reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated:
Intersection Movement
Northbound left lane of Drive E reserved
for left turn only
Circle Drive and Drive E
Northbound right lane of Drive E reserved
for right turn only
Westbound left lane of Circle Drive
reserved for left turn only
Circle Drive and Commons
Way
Westbound right lane of Circle Drive
reserved for right turn only
Westbound left lane of Drive C reserved for
left turn only
Circle Drive and Drive C
Westbound right lane of Drive C reserved
for right turn only
§ 7-51.8. Stop Intersections. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
The following described intersections are hereby designated as Stop
Intersections. A Stop sign shall be installed as provided below:
Intersection Stop Sign On
Drive A (North) and Commons Way Drive A
Drive A (South) and Circle Drive Drive A
Circle Drive and Drive B Drive B
Circle Drive and Drive B Circle Drive
Drive G and Circle Drive Drive G
Drive H and Circle Drive Drive H
Drive I and Circle Drive Drive I
Drive B and Lane 21 (North) Lane 21
Lane 22 (North) and Drive B Lane 22
Lane 22 (South) and Drive B Lane 22
Lane 21 (South) and Drive B Lane 21
Drive G and Lane 22 Drive G
Drive H and Lane 22 Drive H
Circle Drive and Drive C Circle Drive
53.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 7-51.7 HOLMDEL § 7-51.8
1:312
Intersection Stop Sign On
Circle Drive and Drive D Circle Drive
Drive D and Highway 35 Drive D
Circle Drive and Lane 27 Lane 27
Circle Drive and Lane 28 (West) Lane 28
Lane 28 (East) and Lane 26 Lane 28
Circle Drive and Lane 29 Lane 29
Lane 26 and Lane 29 Lane 29
Circle Drive and Lane 30 Lane 30
Lane 30 and Lane 26 Lane 30
Circle Drive and Lane 31 Lane 31
Circle Drive and Drive E Circle Drive
Circle Drive and Drive F Circle Drive
Drive F and Laurel Avenue Drive F
Circle Drive and Commons Way Circle Drive
Circle Drive (South) at Circle Drive Circle Drive (South)
Circle Drive and Lane 1 (West) Lane 1
Lane 1 (East) and Circle Drive Lane 1
Circle Drive and Lane 2 (West) Lane 2
Lane 2 (East) and Circle Drive Lane 2
Circle Drive and Lane 3 (West) Lane 3
Lane 3 (East) and Circle Drive Lane 3
Circle Drive and Lane 4 (West) Lane 4
Lane 4 (East) and Circle Drive Lane 4
Circle Drive and Lane 5 (West) Lane 5
Lane 5 (East) and Circle Drive Lane 5
Circle Drive and Lane 6 (West) Lane 6
Lane 6 (East) and Circle Drive Lane 6
Circle Drive and Lane 8 Lane 8
Lane 6 and Lane 7 Lane 7
Lane 8 and Lane 7 Lane 8
Circle Drive and Lane 9 Lane 9
Lane 7 and Lane 9 Lane 9
Circle Drive and Lane 10 Lane 10
Lane 7 and Lane 10 Lane 10
§ 7-51.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-51.8
1:313
Intersection Stop Sign On
Circle Drive and Lane 11 Lane 11
Lane 11 and Lane 7 Lane 11
Circle Drive (South) and Lane 12 Circle Drive
Circle Drive and Lane 12 (West) Lane 12
Circle Drive (North) and Lane 12 Circle Drive
Lane 12 and Lane 7 Lane 7
Land 12 (East) and Circle Drive Lane 12
Lane 13 (East) and Circle Drive Lane 13
Lane 14 (East) and Circle Drive Lane 14
Lane 15 (East) and Circle Drive Lane 15
Lane 16 (East) and Circle Drive Lane 16
Lane 17 (East) and Circle Drive Lane 17
Lane 18 (East) and Circle Drive Lane 18
Lane 19 (East) and Circle Drive Lane 19
Lane 32 (East) and Circle Drive Lane 32
Lane 32 (West) and Circle Drive Lane 32
§ 7-51.9. Crosswalks. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
The following described locations are hereby designated as mid-block
crosswalks:
a. Circle Drive.
1. At the intersection of Drive A.
2. At the intersection of Drive B.
3. At the intersection of Drive G.
4. At the intersection of Lane 31.
5. At the intersection of Drive E.
6. At the intersection of Circle Drive (South).
7. At the intersection of Lane 1.
8. At the intersection of Lane 4.
9. At the intersection of Lane 8.
10. At the intersection of Lane 9.
11. At the intersection of Lane 12.
§ 7-51.8 HOLMDEL § 7-51.9
1:314
§ 7-51.10. Tow-Away. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area,
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 7-51.11. Signs. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police Department to
insure installations meet State and Federal specifications and all signing
shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
§ 7-51.12. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days or both.
12. At the intersection of Lane 13.
13. At the intersection of Lane 15.
14. At the intersection of Lane 18.
15. At the intersection of Lane 19.
16. At the intersection of Lane 32 (East).
17. At the intersection of Lane 32 (West).
b. At the intersection of Lane 12 and Lane 7.
c. At the intersection of Drive B (East) and Lane 22.
d. At the intersection of Drive B (West) and Lane 21.
e. At the intersection of Drive A and Commons Way.
f. At the intersection of Circle Drive and Commons Way.
g. At the intersection of Drive C and Highway 35.
h. At the intersection of Drive D and Highway 35.
i. At the intersection of Circle Drive and Drive C.
j. At the intersection of Lane 26 and Lane 30.
k. At the intersection of Drive E and Laurel Avenue.
l. At the intersection of Drive F and Laurel Avenue.
§ 7-51.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-52
1:315
§ 7-52. HOLMDEL SHOPPING CENTER.
§ 7-52.1. Filing of Written Consent. [Ord. No. 2010-23 § I]
The owner of Holmdel Shopping Center ("Center") has filed a written
consent with the Township of Holmdel that provisions of Subtitle One, Title
39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at the Holmdel Shopping
Center located in the Township of Holmdel, County of Monmouth, and the
following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 7-52.2. Parking in Designated Areas. [Ord. No. 2010-23 § I]
All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
§ 7-52.3. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. No. 2010-23 § I]
All stalls shall be shown on the attached site plan54 and signed with R7-8
(Reserved Parking sign and penalty plate), in the designated parking areas
for persons who have been issued the Handicapped Parking permits by the
New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission.
§ 7-52.4. Restricted Parking. [Ord. No. 2010-23 § I]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described:
Streets Sides Hours Limits
All roads and
drives
Both All Entire length
§ 7-52.5. Speed Limits. [Ord. No. 2010-23 § I]
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots shall be
15 miles per hour.
b. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads are:
Streets MPH Limits
All roads and drives 15 Entire length
c. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
54.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 2010-23.
§ 7-52 HOLMDEL § 7-52.6
1:316
§ 7-52.6. Loading Zones. [Ord. No. 2010-23 § I]
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in the locations during the times indicated other than
for the loading and unloading of goods and materials:
Streets Times Sides Location
East side of
structures
All West side of
travel way along
back of Center
6 feet wide from curbing
from Spring Valley Drive
entrance, southbound to
driveway for ATM
§ 7-52.7. Lane Use Reservation. [Ord. No. 2010-23 § I]
The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use Reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated:
Intersection Movement
One-way traffic shall travel in a northbound
direction only from Holmdel Road entrance and
continuing to the Spring Valley Drive exit
Holmdel Road entrance/
exit
From the Holmdel Road entrance eastbound
toward the back of the Center and traveling
behind the Center shall be two-way
Spring Valley Drive
entrance/exit
Two-way traffic traveling southbound from
Spring Valley Drive entrance and continuing to
the Holmdel Road exit
§ 7-52.8. Stop Intersections. [Ord. No. 2010-23 § I]
The following described intersections are hereby designated as Stop
Intersections. A Stop sign shall be installed as provided below:
Intersection Stop Sign On
Holmdel Road Holmdel Road exit
Spring Valley Drive Spring Valley Drive exit
Internal to Center Stop signs will be located where all one-way traffic
intersects with two-way traffic
Internal to Center A Stop sign will be located at the south side
intersection of the two-way traffic at the back of
the Center
§ 7-52.9. Crosswalks. [Ord. No. 2010-23 § 1]
The following described locations are hereby designated as mid-block
crosswalks:
§ 7-52.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-52.9
1:317
§ 7-52.10. One-Way Streets. [Ord. No. 2010-23 § I]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
One-Way streets in the direction indicated. One-way signs shall be located
at all intersections with two-way streets:
Street Direction
Holmdel Road entrance/
exit
Northbound from the Holmdel Road entrance
and continuing eastbound to the Spring Valley
Drive exit
§ 7-52.11. Do No Enter Signs. [Ord. No. 2010-23 § I]
Do Not Enter signs shall be located at all intersections with two-way streets.
§ 7-52.12. Turn Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2010-23 § I]
No person shall make a right turn at the Spring Valley Drive exit, unless
local traffic. A No Right Turn, Local Traffic Only sign shall be located at the
Spring Valley Drive exit.
§ 7-52.13. Fire Zone. [Ord. No. 2010-23 § I]
The locations described are hereby designated as Fire Zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in the locations listed:
Streets Times Sides Location
West side of
structures
All East side of
travel way along
front of Center
6 feet wide from
curbing from ATM
entrance northbound to
ADA ramp
§ 7-52.14. Tow-Away. [Ord. No. 2010-23 § I]
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area,
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 7-52.15. Signs. [Ord. No. 2010-23 § I]
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police Department to
a. Located and marked on the southwest of structure.
b. Located and marked on the northwest of structure.
c. Located and marked on the northeast of structure.
d. Located and marked on the southeast of structure.
§ 7-52.9 HOLMDEL § 7-52.15
1:318
insure installations meet State and Federal specifications and all signing
shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
§ 7-52.16. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2010-23 § I]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 7-53. through §7-58. (RESERVED)
§ 7-59. COMMUNITY OF ST. BENEDICT. [1976 Code § 74-62; Ord.
No. 91-32]
The provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey are made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways
and parking lots of the Community of St. Benedict located in the Township
of Holmdel, County of Monmouth and the following regulations shall be
enforceable:
a. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
b. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan55 and signed with R7-8 (Reserved Parking with
penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who have
been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
c. Through Streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street:
Through Street
Perimeter Road: Entire length
From the prolongation of the west curb of North Drive to its terminus
at Main Drive.
d. Stop Intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop On
Main Drive and Perimeter Drive Perimeter Drive
e. Speed Limits.
55.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-32.
§ 7-52.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-59
1:319
1. The speed limits for both directions in the parking lots shall be 15
miles per hour.
2. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads
are:
Road MPH Limits
Main Road 15 Entire length
North Drive 15 Entire length
Perimeter Drive 15 Entire length
South Drive 15 Entire length
3. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
f. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zone, oil
fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's
or operator's expense.
g. Pedestrian Crosswalk. As indicated, per site plan.56
h. Bus Stop.
Bus Stop
Perimeter Road (West side)
Entire length of front of school, as indicated on site plan.57
i. One-Way Street. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Perimeter Road Eastbound From the prolongation of the east
curb of North Drive to Lot B, as
indicated in the site plan.58
j. Restricted Parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the following described roadways or parts of roadways:
56.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-32.
57.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-32.
58.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-32.
§ 7-59 HOLMDEL § 7-59
1:320
§ 7-60. ST. JOHN VIANNEY HIGH SCHOOL. [1976 Code § 74-64;
Ord. No. 91-34]
The provisions of Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
are made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets and driveways and
parking lots at St. John Vianney High School located in the Township
of Holmdel, County of Monmouth and the following regulations shall be
enforceable:
Name of Street Side Location
Main Drive Both Entire length
North Drive Both Entire length
Perimeter Road Both Entire length
South Drive Both Entire length
k. Lane Use Reservation. Traffic shall move only as indicated below:
Roads in Lot A: As per site plan.59
Roads in Lot B: As per site plan.60
a. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
b. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan61 and signed with R7-8 (Reserved parking with
penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for persons who have
been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
c. Stop Intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop On
East Drive and Lot A East Drive
d. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 miles per hour.
2. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads
are:
59.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-33.
60.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-33.
61.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-34.
§ 7-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-60
1:321
Road MPH Limits
East Drive 15 Entire length
Main Drive 15 Entire length
North Drive 15 Entire length
3. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
e. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zone, oil
fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's
or operator's expense.
f. Reserved Parking. The parking lot has reserved parking for various type
vehicles which must be properly identified as per site plan.62
g. Loading Zone. As designated, per site plan.63
h. Bus Stop.
Bus Stop
Main Drive. Both sides for entire length.
i. Lane Use Reservation. Traffic shall move only as indicated below:
Roads in Lot A: As indicated on site plan.64
j. One-Way Street. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Main Drive Northbound Entire length
k. Restricted Parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the following described roadways or parts of roadways.
Name of Street Side Location
East Drive Both Entire length
Lot A Roads West and
South
As indicated on site plan65
62.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-34.
63.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-34
64.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-34.
§ 7-60 HOLMDEL § 7-60
1:322
§ 7-61. BAYSHORE COMMUNITY HOSPITAL. [1976 Code § 74-65;
Ord. No. 91-35; New]
The provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey are made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways
and parking lots at Bayshore Community Hospital located in the Township
of Holmdel, County of Monmouth and the following regulations shall be
enforceable:
Name of Street Side Location
North Drive Both Entire length
a. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
b. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan66 and signed with R7-8 (Reserved Parking with
penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who have
been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
c. Through Streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street:
1. Main Drive: Entire length. From North Beers Street (south
intersect) to North Beers Street (north intersect).
2. South Drive: Entire length. From Main Drive to its terminus in Lot
A.
3. Southeast Drive: Entire length. From South Drive to its terminus in
Lot C at Road F.
d. Stop Intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop On
Court Drive East and West Drive Court Drive East
Court Drive West and West Drive Court Drive West
Road D and West Drive Road D
Road G and West Drive Road G
South Drive at its terminus in Lot A
with South Drive
South Drive Terminus
65.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-34.
66.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-35.
§ 7-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-61
1:323
Intersection Stop On
Southeast Drive and South Drive Southeast Drive
Southeast Drive and Road F Southeast Drive
e. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 miles per hour.
2. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads
are:
Road MPH Limits
Court Drive East 15 Entire length
Court Drive West 15 Entire length
Court Drive South 15 Entire length
Main Drive 15 Entire length
Roads A, B, C, D, E,
F, G
15 Entire length
South Drive 15 Entire length
Southeast Drive 15 Entire length
West Drive 15 Entire length
3. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
f. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances, or exit ways, loading zone, oil
fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's
or operator's expense.
g. Reserved Parking. The parking lot has reserved parking for various type
vehicles which must be properly identified.
h. Loading Zones. As designated as per site plan.67
i. Restricted Parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time
upon any of the following described roadways or parts of roadways:
Name of Street Side Location
Court Drive East Both Entire length
Court Drive South Both Entire length
67.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-35.
§ 7-61 HOLMDEL § 7-61
1:324
§ 7-62. BAYSHORE HEALTH CARE CENTER. [Ord. No. 91-37]
The provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey are made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways
and parking lots at Bayshore Health Care Center located in the Township
of Holmdel, County of Monmouth and the following regulations shall be
enforceable:
Name of Street Side Location
Court Drive West Both Entire length
Heliport Area North/East/
West
Entire length
Main Drive Both Entire length
Roads A through and
including G
Both Entire length
South Drive Both Entire length
Southeast Drive Both Entire length
West Drive Both Entire length
j. Lane Use Reservation. Traffic shall move only as indicated below:
Roads in Lots A and C: As indicated on site plan.68
k. One-Way Street. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limit
South Drive Eastbound From the prolongation of the
west curb line in Lot A to its
terminus in Lot A
Southeast Drive Northbound From the prolongation of
east curb line of Court Drive
South to its terminus at Road
F.
l. Pedestrian Crossing.
Main Drive: As indicated per site plan.
a. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
b. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan69 and signed with R7-8 (Reserved Parking with
penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who have
68.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-35.
§ 7-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-62
1:325
been issued handicapped parking permits by the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
c. Through Streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street:
Through Street
Main Drive: Entire length
From North Beers Street (north intersect) to south intersect of North
Beers Street.
d. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 miles per hour.
2. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads
are:
Road MPH Limits
Court Drive North 15 Entire length
East Drive 15 Entire length
Main Drive 15 Entire length
3. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
e. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zone, oil
fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's
or operator's expense.
f. Loading Zones. As designated, per site plan.70
g. Restricted Parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the following described roadways or parts of roadways.
Name of Street Side Location
East Drive Both Entire length
Main Drive Both Entire length
69.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-37.
70.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 91-37.
§ 7-62 HOLMDEL § 7-62
1:326
§ 7-63. CROSS FARM PARK. [Ord. No. 2000-13 § I]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
municipal and Board of Education property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate, or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
h. One-Way Street. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
East Drive Eastbound From east intersect with Main
Drive to west intersect with Main
Drive
a. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
b. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan71 and signed with R7-8 (Reserved Parking with
penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who have
been issued the Handicapped Parking permits by the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
c. Speed Limits.
1. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 miles per hour.
2. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads
are:
Road MPH Limits
Main Drive 15 Entire length
3. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
d. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil
fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's
or operator's expense.
e. Restricted Parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time
upon any of the following roadways or parts of roadways:
71.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 7-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-63
1:327
§ 7-64. through §7-67. (RESERVED)
§ 7-68. THE ORCHARDS AT HOLMDEL CONDOMINIUMS.
§ 7-68.1. Filing of Written Consent. [Ord. No. 95-9]
Now therefore be it ordained that A. Christopher Florio, Esquire, acting as
the agent for the Orchards At Holmdel Condominium Association has filed
a written consent with the Township of Holmdel that provisions of Subtitle
One, Title 39 of the revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to
the semi-public roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at The Orchards
At Holmdel Condominiums located in the Township of Holmdel, County of
Monmouth and the following Regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 7-68.2. Parking in Designated Areas. [Ord. No. 95-9 § 1]
All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
§ 7-68.3. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. No. 95-9 § 2]
All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the attached site plan and
signed with R7-8 and R7-8(P) (Reserved Parking sign and penalty plate),
in the designated parking areas for persons who have been issued the
Handicapped Parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 7-68.4. Through Street.
The following street or parts of streets are hereby designated as Through
Streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the Through Streets, except where Yield signs are provided for
in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Hylan Road [Ord. No. 95-9 § 3] Entire length
§ 7-68.5. Stop Intersection. [Ord. No. 95-9 § 3]
The following described intersections are hereby designated as Stop
Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein:
Intersection Stop Signs On
Beacon Court and Painted Wagon Road Beacon Court
Bristol Road and Alpine Road Bristol Road
Name of Street Side Location
Main Drive Both Entire length
§ 7-63 HOLMDEL § 7-68.5
1:328
Intersection Stop Signs On
Durant Avenue and Durant Avenue
Extension
Durant Avenue Extension
Durant Avenue and Oxford Road Oxford Road
Painted Wagon Road and Plum Lane Painted Wagon Road
Painted Wagon Road (West Leg) and
Painted Wagon Road
Painted Wagon Road (West Leg)
§ 7-68.6. Speed Limits. [Ord. No. 95-9 § 4]
§ 7-68.7. Tow-Away. [Ord. No. 95-9 § 5]
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area,
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 7-68.8. Restricted Parking. [Ord. No. 95-9 § 6]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
All Streets Both All Entire length
§ 7-68.9. Lane Use Reservations. [Ord. No. 95-9 § 7]
The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use Reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated:
Intersection Movement
a. Eastbound left lane of Hylan Road
reserved for left turn only
Hylan Road and Laurel
Avenue (CR. 516) (North
intersect) b. Eastbound right lane of Hylan Road
reserved for right turn only
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots shall be
15 miles per hour.
b. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads are:
Streets MPH Limits
All Streets 15 Entire length
c. Regulatory and Warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 7-68.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-68.9
1:329
Intersection Movement
a. Eastbound left lane of Hylan Road
reserved for left turn only
Hylan Road and Laurel
Avenue (CR. 516) (South
intersect) b. Eastbound right lane of Hylan Road
reserved for right turn only
§ 7-68.10. Signs. [Ord. No. 95-9 § 8]
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid for
by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S. 39:4-198 and N.J.S. 39:4-183.27.
§ 7-68.11. Penalty. [Ord. No. 95-9 § 9]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 7-69. HIDDEN WOODS AT HOLMDEL CONDOMINIUMS.
§ 7-69.1. Filing of Written Consent. [Ord. No. 98-13 § I]
Now therefore to be it ordained that Hidden Woods at Holmdel
Condominium Association has filed a written consent with the Township of
Holmdel that provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the revised Statutes of
New Jersey be made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways
and parking lots at Hidden Woods at Holmdel Condominiums located in the
Township of Holmdel, County of Monmouth and the following Regulations
shall be enforceable.
§ 7-69.2. Parking in Designated Areas. [Ord. No. 98-13 § I]
All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
§ 7-69.3. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. No. 98-13 § I]
All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the attached site plan72 and
signed with R7-8 and R7-8(P) (Reserved Parking sign and penalty plate),
in the designated parking; areas for persons who have been issued the
Handicapped Parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
72.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 98-13.
§ 7-68.9 HOLMDEL § 7-69.4
1:330
§ 7-69.4. Through Street. [Ord. No. 98-13 § I]
The entire length of Lexington Court is hereby designated as a Through
Street. A Stop sign shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the Through Street.
§ 7-69.5. Stop Intersection. [Ord. No. 98-13 § I; Ord. No. 2000-13
§ III]
The following described intersections are hereby designated as Stop
Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein:
Intersection Stop Signs On
Lexington Court Northwest Corner of Lexington Court
and Lexington Court
§ 7-69.6. Speed Limits. [Ord. No. 98-13 § I]
§ 7-69.7. Tow-Away. [Ord. No. 98-13 § I]
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area,
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 7-69.8. Restricted Parking. [Ord. No. 98-13 § I]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon both sides of the
entire length of Lexington Court.
§ 7-69.9. Signs. [Ord. No. 98-13 § I]
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid for
by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S. 39:4-198 and N.J.S. 39:4-183.27.
§ 7-69.10. Penalty. [Ord. No. 98-13 § I]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement thereto
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots shall be
15 miles per hour.
b. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the entire length of
Lexington Court shall be 15 miles per hour.
c. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 7-69.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-69.10
1:331
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 7-70. GRACEWOOD GLEN CONDOMINIUMS.
§ 7-70.1. Filing of Written Consent. [Ord. No. 98-24 § I]
Now therefore be it ordained that Gracewood Glen Condominium
Association, Inc. has filed a written consent with the Township of Holmdel
that provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey be made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Gracewood Glen Condominiums located in the Township
of Holmdel, County of Monmouth and the following regulations shall be
enforceable.
§ 7-70.2. Parking in Designated Areas. [Ord. No. 98-24 § I]
All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
§ 7-70.3. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. No. 98-24 § I]
All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the attached site plan73 and
signed with R7-8 And R7-8(P) (Reserved Parking sign and penalty plate),
in the designated parking areas for persons who have been issued the
Handicapped Parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 7-70.4. Stop Intersection. [Ord. No. 98-24 § I; Ord. No. 2000-13
§ III]
The following described intersection is hereby designated as a Stop
Intersection. A Stop sign shall be installed as provided below:
Intersection Stop Sign On
Maria Court and Maria Court 260 feet from the intersection of
Middle Road, a stop sign shall be
installed on the southwest side of
the roadway
Maria Court and Middle Road Maria Court
§ 7-70.5. Speed Limits. [Ord. No. 98-24 § I]
a. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the entire length of
Maria Court shall be 15 miles per hour.
73.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 98-24.
§ 7-69.10 HOLMDEL § 7-70.5
1:332
§ 7-70.6. Tow-Away. [Ord. No. 98-24 § I]
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area,
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 7-70.7. Restricted Parking. [Ord. No. 98-24 § I]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon either side of the
entire length of Maria Court, unless parking in the nonrestricted designated
areas.
§ 7-70.8. Signs. [Ord. No. 98-24 § I]
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid for
by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S. 39:4-198 and N.J.S. 39:4-183.27.
§ 7-70.9. Penalty. [Ord. No. 98-24 § I]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 7-71. PALMER SQUARE CONDOMINIUMS.
§ 7-71.1. Filing of Written Consent. [Ord. No. 98-25 § I]
Now therefore be it ordained that Palmer Square Condominium Association
has filed a written consent with the Township of Holmdel that provisions
of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made
applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at
Palmer Square Condominiums located in the Township of Holmdel, County
of Monmouth and the following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 7-71.2. Parking in Designated Areas. [Ord. No. 98-25 § I]
All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
§ 7-71.3. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. No. 98-25 § I]
All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the attached site plan74 and
signed with R7-8 and R7-8(P) (Reserved Parking sign and penalty plate),
b. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limit authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 7-70.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-71.3
1:333
in the designated parking areas for persons who have been issued the
Handicapped Parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 7-71.4. Through Street. [Ord. No. 98-25 § I]
The entire length of Billingsgate Drive is hereby designated as a Through
Street. A Stop sign shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the Through Street.
§ 7-71.5. Stop Intersection. [Ord. No. 98-25 § I; Ord. No. 2000-13
§ III]
The following described intersections are hereby designated as Stop
Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein:
Intersection Stop Sign On
Ambrose Court and Ambrose
Court
Ambrose Court 60 feet in advance of the
northerly approach of Tanners Landing
Way
Ambrose Court and Ambrose
Court
The northeast corner of the easterly
approach of Ambrose Court and Ambrose
Court
Arlington Court and Tanners
Landing Way
Arlington Court at both intersections with
Tanners Landing Way
§ 7-71.6. Speed Limits. [Ord. No. 98-25 § I]
§ 7-71.7. Tow-Away. [Ord. No. 98-25 § I]
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area,
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots shall be
15 miles per hour.
b. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the entire length of all
of the roadways within the condominium complex shall be 15 miles per
hour.
c. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
74.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 98-25.
§ 7-71.3 HOLMDEL § 7-71.8
1:334
§ 7-71.8. Restricted Parking. [Ord. No. 98-25 § I]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon both sides of
the entire length of any roadways within the condominium complex, unless
parking in the nonrestricted designated areas.
§ 7-71.9. Signs. [Ord. No. 98-25 § I]
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid for
by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S. 39:4-198 and N.J.S. 39:4-183.27.
§ 7-71.10. Penalty. [Ord. No. 98-25 § I]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 7-72. THE WOODS AT HOLMDEL.
§ 7-72.1. Filing of Written Consent. [Ord. No. 2003-07 § I]
Now therefore be it ordained that The Woods at Holmdel Condominium
Association has filed a written consent with the Township of Holmdel that
provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
be made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways and parking
lots at The Woods at Holmdel located in the Township of Holmdel, County of
Monmouth and the following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 7-72.2. Parking in Designated Areas. [Ord. No. 2003-07 § I]
All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
§ 7-72.3. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. No. 2003-07 § I]
All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the attached site plan75 and
signed with R7-8(P) (Reserved Parking sign and penalty plate), in the
designated parking areas for persons who have been issued the
Handicapped Parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 7-72.4. Through Street. [Ord. No. 2003-07 § I]
The entire length of Banyan Boulevard is hereby designated as a Through
Street. A stop sign shall be installed on the near right side of each of the
following intersecting streets:
a. Persimmon Lane.
75.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 7-71.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-72.4
1:335
§ 7-72.5. Stop Intersections. [Ord. No. 2003-07 § 1]
The intersection of Banyan Boulevard and Nutmeg Lane is designated a
Stop Intersection with the stop sign being installed on the rear right hand
side of Banyan Boulevard.
§ 7-72.6. Speed Limits. [Ord. No. 2003-07 § I]
§ 7-72.7. Tow-Away. [Ord. No. 2003-07 § I]
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area,
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 7-72.8. Restricted Parking. [Ord. No. 2003-07 § I]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon both sides of
the entire length of Banyan Boulevard, Persimmon Lane, Dogwood Court,
Poplar Lane, Nutmeg Lane and Pine Tree Terrace.
b. Dogwood Court - both intersections with Banyan Boulevard.
c. Poplar Lane.
d. Nutmeg Lane.
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots shall be
15 miles per hour.
b. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the entire length of
Banyan Boulevard shall be 15 miles per hour.
c. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the entire length of
Persimmon Lane shall be 15 miles per hour.
d. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the entire length of
Poplar Lane shall be 15 miles per hour.
e. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the entire length of
Dogwood Court shall be 15 miles per hour.
f. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the entire length of
Nutmeg Lane shall be 15 miles per hour.
g. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the entire length of Pine
Tree Terrace shall be 15 miles per hour.
h. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 7-72.4 HOLMDEL § 7-72.9
1:336
§ 7-72.9. Signs. [Ord. No. 2003-07 § I]
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid for
by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S. 39:4-198 and N.J.S. 39:4-183.27.
§ 7-72.10. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2003-07 § I]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 7-73. CEDAR VILLAGE.
§ 7-73.1. Filing of Written Consent. [Ord. No. 2009-06 § I]
Cedar Village Homeowners Association has filed a written consent with
the Township of Holmdel that provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the semi-public roads,
streets, driveways and parking lots at Cedar Village located in the Township
of Holmdel, County of Monmouth, and the following regulations shall be
enforceable.
§ 7-73.2. Parking in Designated Areas. [Ord. No. 2009-06 § I]
All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
§ 7-73.3. Handicapped Parking. [Ord. No. 2009-06 § I]
All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the attached site plan76 and
signed with R7-8(P) (Reserved Parking sign and penalty plate), in the
designated parking areas for persons who have been issued the
Handicapped Parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicle Commission.
§ 7-73.4. Stop Intersections. [Ord. No. 2009-06 § I]
The following described intersections are hereby designated as Stop
Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein:
Intersection Stop Sign On
Avon Drive and Laurel Avenue Avon Drive
Avon Drive and Londonberry Drive Avon Drive
All exits from Clubhouse Place onto
Londonberry Drive
All exits from Clubhouse Place onto
Londonberry Drive
76.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 7-72.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-73.4
1:337
Intersection Stop Sign On
Elsworth Place and Londonberry
Drive
Elsworth Place
Elsworth Place and Chesapeake
Drive
Elsworth Place
Kensington Court (South) and
Chesapeake Drive
Kensington Court
Kensington Court (North) and
Chesapeake Drive
Kensington Court
Chesapeake Drive and Londonberry
Drive
Chesapeake Drive
Wellington Street (West) and
Londonberry Drive
Wellington Street (West)
Londonberry Drive and Wellington
Street (East)
Londonberry Drive
Chesapeake Drive and Commons
Way
Chesapeake Drive
§ 7-73.5. Speed Limits. [Ord. No. 2009-06 § I]
§ 7-73.6. Tow-Away. [Ord. No. 2009-06 § I]
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area,
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 7-73.7. Restricted Parking. [Ord. No. 2009-06 § I]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon both sides of
the entire length of any roadways within the Cedar Village complex, unless
parking in the non-restricted designated areas.
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots shall be
15 miles per hour.
b. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads are:
Streets MPH Limits
All streets 15 Entire length
c. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 7-73.4 HOLMDEL § 7-73.8
1:338
§ 7-73.8. Signs. [Ord. No. 2009-06 § I]
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid for
by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S. 39:4-198 and N.J.S. 39:4-183.27.
§ 7-73.9. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2009-06 § I]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 7-74. through §7.75. (RESERVED)
§ 7-73.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-74
1:339

PART V
Traffic Regulations on Private Property
§ 7-76. REGULATION FOR THE MOVEMENT AND THE PARKING OF
TRAFFIC ON PRIVATE PROPERTY OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S. 40:48-2.46, the following private
property that is open to the public and to which the public is invited, shall
be the movement of traffic controlled by the type of regulations indicated.
No person shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations.
Property Regulation Movement
(Reserved)
§ 7-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-76
1:341
Chapter 8
PUBLIC AND QUASI-PUBLIC PARKING LOTS
§ 8-1. PROHIBITION OF UNREGISTERED VEHICLES IN PARKING
YARDS AND PARKING PLACES. [Ord. No. 2013-09; Ord. No.
2013-14]
§ 8-2. EXEMPTIONS. [Ord. No. 2013-09]
This Section shall not apply to:
§ 8-3. REMOVAL. [Ord. No. 2013-09]
Any Police Officer is authorized to order the removal of any unregistered
vehicle in violation of this chapter to a storage space or garage, and the
expense involved in such a removal and storage of the vehicle shall be borne
by the owner of the vehicle, except that the expense shall be borne by the
lessee of a leased vehicle.
§ 8-4. PENALTY. [Ord. No. 2013-09]
The violation of this chapter shall subject the person so convicted or
pleading guilty to a fine of $100 for an unregistered vehicle and $175 for a
vehicle which has a suspended registration.
a. No person shall operate, park, leave or be in possession of a motor
vehicle which is unregistered or has a suspended registration in any
parking yards (lots) and parking places, which are open to the public or
to which the public is invited whether owned or maintained by a
governmental entity or in conjunction with any business or enterprise
whether public, quasi-public or private.
b. No person shall operate, park, leave or be in possession of a motor
vehicle which has a suspended registration in any parking yards (lots)
and parking places, which are open to the public or to which the public
is invited whether owned or maintained by a governmental entity or in
conjunction with any business or enterprise whether public, quasipublic
or private.
a. Private property to which the public is not invited, such as residential
lots.
b. Motor vehicles which are exempt from registration under Title 39 of the
New Jersey Statutes, such as car dealer inventory.
§ 7-76 HOLMDEL § 8-4
1:342
Chapter 9
PERSONNEL POLICIES
Editor's Note: The adoption for the Township of Holmdel of the
provisions of the Civil Service Act of the State of New Jersey was
approved by the voters at an election held November 6, 1962.
§ 9-0. PREAMBLE.
Schedule 1: A list of employees in the Township of Holmdel with their
dates of appointment, salary and title; and their proposed status, title and
divisional classification.
Schedule 2: Class specifications in alphabetical order, including definitions,
examples of work, educational and experience requirements, and
knowledge and abilities.
Schedule 3:
§ 9-1. CIVIL SERVICE.
§ 9-1.1. Classes of Positions Created. [1976 Code § 3-1]
The following classes of positions, duties of which are set forth as part
of this section by reference to the three separate and distinct schedules
prepared by the New Jersey Civil Service Commission, are hereby created.
§ 9-1.2. Salary Ranges Adopted. [1976 Code § 3-2]
The salary ranges setting forth annual increments specified in the attached
schedules are hereby adopted as and for each and every class of position
mentioned in the schedules, and the increment payments contained therein
are contingent on the availability of funds.
1. Alphabetical list of titles of lull-time positions in the classified service
with proposed salary ranges and divisional classifications.
2. An alphabetical list of titles of part-time positions in the classified
service with divisional classifications.
3. A schematic list of titles of full-time positions in the classified service
with proposed salary ranges.
4. A descending list of titles by proposed salary ranges divided into salary
increments of full-time positions in the classified service.
5. An alphabetical list of titles in the unclassified service with the
statutory or other provisions placing the position in the unclassified
service.
§ 8-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-1.3
1:343
§ 9-1.3. Salaries for New Employees. [1976 Code § 3-3]
The Township Committee does reserve the right to pay a salary to any new
employee at any figure given in the schedules affecting the new employee
and not necessarily the first figure of the schedules.
§ 9-1.4. Prerequisite for Salary Increments. [1976 Code § 3-5]
The adoption of this section shall operate to provide increments only to
those employees who have satisfactorily performed the duties of their
positions.
§ 9-2. SALARIES.
§ 9-2.1. Adoption of Annual Ordinance. [1976 Code § 20-1]
Pursuant to N.J.S. 40:46-23, the Township Committee shall, by annual
ordinance, fix and determine the salaries, wages or compensation to be paid
to each officer and employee of the Township.
§ 9-2.2. Copy of Ordinance on File for Examination. [1976 Code
§ 20-2]
A copy of the current Salary Ordinance and any amendments thereto shall
be filed and be available for examination in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 9-2.3. Direct Deposit. [Ord. No. 2017-23]
§ 9-3. (RESERVED)77
§ 9-4. INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICIALS, EMPLOYEES AND
APPOINTEES.78
a. Effective January 1, 2018, all full-time and part-time Township
employees shall be paid only by direct deposit, in conformance with
N.J.S.A. 52:14-15f(b).
b. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:14-15f(b), all information concerning net pay,
any accompanying information approved for distribution with net pay
such as a pay stubs, and W-2 forms in accordance with applicable
Federal laws, shall be made available to all employees only on the
internet via restricted access accounts provided by the Township or an
authorized third-party payroll provider.
77.Editor's Note: Former Section 9-3, Background Checks of Applicants for Employment,
previously codified herein was replaced by Ordinance No. 2013-26, codified as Section
9-11, Criminal History Background Checks.
78.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 96-32 and
98-18.
§ 9-1.3 HOLMDEL § 9-4.1
1:344
§ 9-4.1. Indemnification Against Civil Actions. [Ord. No. 2004-3 § 1]
Except as hereinafter provided, the Township of Holmdel, hereinafter
known as "the Township" shall, upon the request of any present or former
official, employee or appointee of the Township provide for indemnification
and legal defense of any civil action brought against said person or persons
arising from an act or omission falling within the scope of their public duties
and where such indemnification and legal defense is within the authority of
the Township under State law.
§ 9-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2004-3 § 2]
The terms of this section and the definition of official, employee and
appointee are to be construed liberally in order to effectuate the purposes
of this section except that these terms shall not mean a) any person who
is not a natural person; b) any person while providing goods or services
of any kind under any contract with the Township except an employment
contract; c) any person while providing legal or engineering services for
compensation unless said person is a full-time employee of the Township;
and d) any person who as a condition of his or her appointment or contract
is required to indemnify and defend the Township and/or secure insurance.
§ 9-4.3. Criteria for Indemnification.
The Township shall provide for defense of and indemnify any present or
former official, employee or appointee of the Township who becomes a
defendant in a civil action if the person or persons involved a) acted or failed
to act in a manner in which the Township has or had an interest; b) acted or
failed to act in the discharge of a duty imposed or authorized by law; and c)
acted or failed to take action in good faith. For purposes of this section, the
duty and authority of the Township to defend and indemnify shall extend to
a cross-claim or counterclaim against said person.
§ 9-4.4. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2004-3 § 4]
The Township shall not indemnify any person against the payment of
punitive damages, penalties, or fines, but may provide for the legal defense
of such claims in accord with the standards set forth herein. The Township
may refuse to provide for the defense and indemnification of any civil action
referred to herein if the Holmdel Township Committee determines that a)
the act or omission did not occur within the scope of a duty authorized or
imposed by law; b) the act or failure to act was the result of actual fraud,
willful misconduct or actual malice of the person requesting defense and
indemnification; c) the defense of the action or proceeding by the Township
would create a conflict of interest between the Township and the person or
persons involved; or d) where the legal action or proceeding is initiated by
the person seeking defense and indemnification.
§ 9-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-4.5
1:345
§ 9-4.5. Actions or Proceedings Other Than Civil Actions. [Ord. No.
2004-3 § 5]
In any other action or proceeding, including criminal proceedings, the
Township may provide for the defense of a present or former official,
employee or appointee, if the Holmdel Township Committee concludes that
such representation is in the best interest of the Township and that the
person to be defended acted or failed to act in accord with the standards set
forth in this section. The Township shall have the right to set conditions and
limitations on any decision to provide for such defense.
§ 9-4.6. Conditions Required. [Ord. No. 2004-3 § 6]
Whenever the Township provides for the defense of any action set forth
herein and as a condition of such defense, the Township may assume
exclusive control over the representation of such persons defended and
such person shall cooperate fully with the Township.
§ 9-4.7. Township to Appoint Counsel. [Ord. No. 2004-3 § 7]
The Township may provide for the defense pursuant to this section by
authorizing its attorney to act in behalf of the person being defended or by
employing other counsel for this purpose or by asserting the right of the
Township under any appropriate insurance policy that requires the insurer
to provide defense.
§ 9-4.8. Time Limitation to Request Indemnification. [Ord. No.
2004-3 § 8]
No person shall be entitled to indemnification or defense pursuant to this
section unless within 15 calendar days of his or her receipt of the summons,
complaint, notice, demand or other pleading, the individual provides the
original or a copy thereof to the Township Clerk.
§ 9-5. PROCEDURES TO ADOPT PERSONNEL PRACTICES.
§ 9-5.1. Establishment of Titles and Salaries. [Ord. No. 2004-02 § 1]
The Township Committee shall by ordinance establish titles for public
employment by the Township of Holmdel and salary ranges for Township
employees. (Said titles shall conform to the New Jersey Civil Service Act and
regulations promulgated by the New Jersey State Department of Personnel.)
§ 9-5.2. Adoption and Amendment of Policies and Procedures. [Ord.
No. 2004-02 § 2]
The Township Committee shall by resolution adopt and amend from time
to time personnel policies and procedures including rules concerning the
hiring and termination of employees, terms and conditions of employment,
and regulations required to comply with applicable Federal and State
employment related law. The personnel policies and procedures adopted
§ 9-4.5 HOLMDEL § 9-5.2
1:346
pursuant to said resolution(s) shall be applicable to all officials, appointees,
employees, and prospective employees of the Township. Where specifically
noted these policies and procedures will also apply to volunteers and
independent contractors.
§ 9-5.3. Township Administrator to Implement and Enforce. [Ord.
No. 2004-02 § 3]
The Township Administrator shall be responsible to implement and enforce
the personnel practices adopted by ordinance or resolution authorized
pursuant to this section. If there is a conflict between said personnel
practices and any duly adopted and lawful collective bargaining agreement,
personnel services contract or Federal or State law, the terms and
conditions of that contract or law shall prevail. In all other cases, the
practices adopted pursuant to this section shall prevail.
§ 9-6. RETIREMENT PLAN ELIGIBILITY POSITIONS. [Ord. No.
2009-09 § I]
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to comply with N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2
and the guidelines promulgated by the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs, Division of Local Government Services, as set forth
in Local Finance Notice 2008-10 requiring that local governing bodies
adopt an ordinance identifying positions eligible for membership in the
Defined Contribution Retirement Program (DCRP) as established by
N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq. and those positions which are eligible for
membership in the Public Employees Retirement System (PERS).
b. Pension Certifying Official. The Township's Chief Financial Officer,
functioning as the Pension Certifying Official is responsible for making
determinations concerning enrollment in PERS and DCRP, subject to
review by the New Jersey Department of the Treasury, Division of
Pensions and Benefits.
c. Positions Eligible for Membership in PERS. The following are positions
or descriptions of circumstances under which a person holding a
position is eligible for membership in PERS:
1. Positions that are a "routine" appointment by the Governing Body
as set forth and explained in N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2(a)(3). For example,
administrative support staff and public works rank and file staff.
2. Individuals holding a professional license or certificate and serving
in any of the following capacities:
(a) Certified Health Officer.
(b) Tax Collector.
(c) Chief Financial Officer.
(d) Construction Code Official.
§ 9-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-6
1:347
(e) Qualified Purchasing Agent.
(f) Tax Assessor.
(g) Municipal Planner.
(h) Registered Municipal Clerk.
(i) Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspectors.
(j) Person holding the certification for "Certified Public Works
Manager," commonly known as "Principal Public Works
Manager."
3. A person appointed to a temporary or interim "acting" position
requiring a professional license or certification for the positions set
forth in paragraph 2 above.
4. A person employed by the Township who is already enrolled in a
PERS position, but thereafter promoted through a valid promotion
to a position which would otherwise require DCRP enrollment.
5. An individual who was a member of PERS on or before June 30,
2007 even though appointed to a DCRP position, if such person has
"continuously" been a member of PERS since that time.
"Continuously" as used herein shall mean that a period of no more
than two years has elapsed from the time the individual left
employment in a PERS position until the time that the person was
reemployed.
d. Positions Requiring Enrollment In DCRP. Except as otherwise described
in paragraph c above, the following positions are only eligible for DCRP
enrollment:
1. Positions that involve executive decision-making or are senior
management whose hiring or appointment requires approval of the
Governing Body as based on statute or ordinance. The following
positions, providing they are not filled pursuant to a professional
services resolution or professional services agreement and
provided the employee holding such position is salaried:
(a) Township Administrator.
(b) Any Department Head.
(c) Municipal Attorney.
(d) Municipal Engineer.
(e) Municipal Prosecutor.
(f) Municipal Court Judge.
§ 9-6 HOLMDEL § 9-6
1:348
§ 9-7. through §9-10. (RESERVED)
§ 9-11. CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS.
§ 9-11.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2013-26]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — Shall mean a
determination of whether a person has a criminal record by crossreferencing
that person's name and fingerprints with those on file with the
Federal Bureau of Investigation Identification Division and the State Bureau
of Identification in the Division of State Police as well as other data bases
deemed appropriate.
REVIEW COMMITTEE — Shall mean a three-member committee consisting
of the Mayor or designee, Township Administrator or designee and Chief
of Police or designee. The Committee shall be charged with the review
of all appeals of any Township employee applicant or firefighter applicant
whose criminal history background check reveals a disqualifying criminal
conviction.
STATE BUREAU OF IDENTIFICATION — Shall mean the entity located
within the New Jersey State Police responsible for retrieving criminal
background information on individuals as requested by State, local or
private entities.
§ 9-11.2. Requests for Criminal Background Checks; Costs. [Ord.
No. 2013-26]
e. No person employed pursuant to a professional services resolution or a
professional services agreement shall be eligible for enrollment in
either the DCRP or PERS.
f. All PERS membership appointments are subject to review and approval
of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury, Division of Pensions and
Benefits and of the PERS Board of Trustees.
g. Interpretation of the Section. All interpretations of this section and
application of its provisions shall be guided by and in accordance with
Local Finance Notice 2008-10 and any amendments or supplements
thereto.
a. The Township of Holmdel requires that all applicants for Township
employment and to serve as a Township firefighter have State Bureau of
Identification ("SBI") and the Federal Bureau of Investigation ("FBI")
criminal history record background checks in accordance with N.J.A.C.
13:59-1.1 et seq. as well as other data bases deemed appropriate. No
person will have his/her application approved until the results of the
background checks have been received and reviewed by the Township's
Chief of Police or designee.
§ 9-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-11.2
1:349
§ 9-11.3. Disqualification of a Person from Service. [Ord. No.
2013-26]
A person may be disqualified from serving as an employee or firefighter
depending upon what that person's criminal history record background
check reveals as it may relate to the position sought.
§ 9-11.4. Submission and Exchange of Background Information
Pertaining to Employees or Firefighters. [Ord. No. 2013-26]
§ 9-11.5. Limitations on Access and Use of Criminal History Record
Information.
b. The Township shall conduct a criminal history record background check
only upon receipt of the written consent for such check from the
prospective employee or firefighter.
c. Any prospective employee or firefighter who refuses to consent to this
procedure shall not progress further in the application process for
becoming an employee or firefighter.
d. The Township shall bear the costs associated with conducting criminal
history record background checks.
e. The SBI shall advise the Township Chief of Police of the background
check results. Any information received by the Township Chief of Police
shall be confidential, except for the purposes intended.
a. Prospective employees or firefighters shall submit their names,
addresses, fingerprints, written consent, and any other necessary
information to the Township Administrator or designee for the criminal
history record background check to be performed. The Township
Administrator shall submit this documentation to the Township Chief of
Police, who shall coordinate the background check and refer the
information to the Federal Bureau of Investigation and State Bureau of
Identification and any other data bases deemed appropriate for the
background check. The Township Chief of Police or designee shall be
responsible for obtaining the above information for all prospective
employees or firefighters. Thereafter, all information required for
subsequent background checks shall be submitted to the Township
Chief of Police who may coordinate criminal background checks every
24 to 36 months after the date of the initial check, at the Township or
Chief of Police's discretion.
b. The Township Chief of Police shall act as a clearinghouse for the
collection and dissemination of information obtained as a result of
conducting criminal history record background checks pursuant to this
section.
a. Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal justice
purposes is restricted to the members of the Review Committee, as
§ 9-11.2 HOLMDEL § 9-11.5
1:350
§ 9-11.6. Determination by Review Committee; Appeal Process.
[Ord. No. 2013-26]
authorized by Federal and State Statute, rule or regulations, executive
order, administrative code, local ordinance and resolution regarding
obtaining and disseminating of criminal history record information
obtained under this section.
b. The Review Committee shall limit its use of criminal history record
information solely to the authorized person for which it was obtained,
and criminal history record information furnished shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the
records for authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited
solely to the authorized purpose for which it was given. Any person
violating Federal or State regulations governing access to criminal
history record information may be subject to criminal and/or civil
penalties.
a. The Township Chief of Police shall make a recommendation as to
whether the prospective employee or firefighter is being recommended.
b. The Township Chief of Police shall promptly notify a prospective
employee or firefighter who is not recommended for the position
sought. Such individuals may obtain a copy of their criminal history
record by contacting the Township Chief of Police in writing. The
individuals shall then have five days from the receipt of notification
from the Township Chief of Police to petition the Review Committee for
a review and to cite reasons substantiating the review.
c. Individuals who receive a letter of nonrecommendation may be
permitted to serve as an employee or firefighter if they affirmatively
demonstrate rehabilitation to the Review Committee. In determining
whether a person has affirmatively demonstrated clear and convincing
evidence of rehabilitation, the Review Committee may consider the
following factors:
1. The nature and responsibility of the position which the convicted
person would hold;
2. The nature and seriousness of the offense;
3. The circumstance under which the offense occurred;
4. The date of the offense;
5. The age of the person when the offense was committed;
6. Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated incident;
7. Any social conditions which may have contributed to the offense;
and
§ 9-11.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-11.6
1:351
Chapter 10
BUILDING AND HOUSING
§ 10-1. LOCAL ENFORCEMENT OF THE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION
CODE.
§ 10-1.1. Enforcing Agency. [1976 Code § 35B-1; Ord. No. 25-76;
Ord. No. 2010-19]
8. Any evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in prison or
the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment received,
acquisition of additional academic or vocational schooling,
successful participation in correctional work release programs or
the recommendation of those who have had the person under their
supervision.
d. In all instances, the final determination of whether an individual will be
permitted to proceed with the employment or firefighter process will lie
in the sole discretion of the Review Committee.
e. The Review Committee shall promptly advise the prospective employee
or firefighter whether he or she is qualified to proceed with the
employment or firefighter process.
f. The Holmdel Township Police Department shall keep the written
notification on file for three years from the date it was issued.
g. No person or entity shall be held liable in any civil or criminal action
brought by any party based on any written notification on file with the
Holmdel Township Police Department pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
a. There is hereby established in the Township, of Holmdel a State
Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency consisting of a
Construction Official, Building Subcode Official and such other subcode
officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter
adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction
Official shall be the chief administrator of the Enforcing Agency.
b. Each official position created in paragraph a hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23., More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217 and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
§ 9-11.6 HOLMDEL § 10-1.1
1:352
§ 10-1.1A. Interlocal Services Agreement for Uniform Construction
Code Shared Services. [Ord. No. 2009-09; Ord. No. 2010-19]
§ 10-1.2. Board of Appeals. [1976 Code § 35B-2; Ord. No. 25-76;
Ord. No. 13-77; Ord. No. 2010-19]
All appeals from decisions by the Enforcing Agency shall be to the
Monmouth County Construction Board of Appeals.
§ 10-1.3. Fees. [1976 Code § 35B-3; Ord. No. 7-77; Ord. No. 23-77;
Ord. No. 2-80; Ord. No. 15-80; Ord. No. 11-81; Ord. No. 26B-82;
Ord. No. 85-6; Ord. No. 86-12; Ord. No. 86-16; Ord. No. 89-32; Ord.
No. 98-19 § I; Ord. No. 2003-29 § I; Ord. No. 2010-19]
c. The public shall have the right to do business with the Enforcing
Agency at one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances. The offices of the Enforcing Agency
established herein shall be located at the Holmdel Township Hall,
Everett-Crawford's Corner Road, Holmdel, New Jersey 07733.
a. Preamble. The Township of Holmdel desires to contract with the
Township of Hazlet for Uniform Construction Code Shared Services.
The Township of Hazlet has agreed to provide such services to the
Township of Holmdel for a fee.
The Interlocal Services Act, N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq. allows for such an
agreement.
A proposed form of agreement is on file in the Township Clerk's office
and is available for public inspection.
Said agreement shall have a duration of four years.
b. Execution of Agreement. The Mayor and Township Clerk are hereby
authorized to execute the proposed Interlocal Services Agreement for
Uniform Construction Code Shared Services with the Township of
Hazlet.
a. New Jersey State Permit Surcharge Fees. Amount: This fee shall be in
the amount of $0.00334 per cubic foot volume of new buildings and
additions. Volume shall be computed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:232.28. The fee for all other construction shall be $1.70 per $1,000 of
value of construction. Minimum fee $1. The above fee is subject to
periodic change and exemptions established by the Department of
Community Affairs and will be calculated in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.19 hereafter and as applicable with the regulations.
b. General Fees. The fee for plan review shall become due upon
completion of subcode review. The fee to be charged for a construction
permit will be the sum of the basic construction fee plus all applicable
special fees. This fee shall be paid before a permit is issued and
§ 10-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1.3
1:353
proposed work commencing as contained within the regulations. The
fee to be charged for a certificate of occupancy shall be paid before
a certificate is issued. This fee shall be in addition to the construction
permit. All fees shall be rounded to the nearest dollar.
Fees shall be as follows:
1. Plan Review Fee: The fee for plan review shall be 25% of the
amount to be charged for a construction permit. When prototype
plans have been released a plan review fee shall not be collected
for permits issued therefrom and the total permit fee shall be
reduced by 25%. There shall be an additional plan review fee of $55
per hour or part thereof for review of an amendment or change to
any plan that has already been released per subcode having
assigned plan review responsibility to perform such a review in
conjunction with the regulations and actual submittal. This fee may
be waived at the discretion of the Construction Official in the event
the work and review is of a minor nature.
2. The basic construction permit fee shall be the sum of the parts
computed on the basis of the volume or cost of construction, the
number of plumbing fixtures and pieces of equipment, the number
of electrical fixtures and rating of electrical devices, the number of
sprinklers, standpipes and detectors (smoke and heat) at the unit
rates and/or the applicable flat fees as provided herein plus any
special fees. The minimum fee for a basic construction permit shall
be $75 for a single subcode permit. The minimum fee for multiple
subcodes per construction permit shall be $55 per subcode.
3. Flat Fees: When the term "flat fee" is used, the fee for that work
shall be as noted in that section regardless of the number of
subcodes involved or the minimum permit fees established. Any
additional work performed in conjunction with a component that
has a flat fee designation shall also be charged the additional fee as
noted herein for that particular item in addition to the initial flat
fee. Permits issued that include flat fees are subject to the State
permit surcharges as noted above.
4. Individual Tenant Space Fit-Up: When plans and specifications for
individual tenant spaces in multi-tenant spaces or buildings have
been submitted and were not part of the original permit
application, the fee for permit updates shall be based upon the cost
of the work. For electric, fire and plumbing, the fees shall be based
upon the equipment installed.
c. Building Volume or Cost. The fees for new construction or alteration are
as follows:
1. Fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume of the
structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.28. The new construction fee shall be in the amount of
$0.035 per cubic foot of volume for buildings and structures of Use
§ 10-1.3 HOLMDEL § 10-1.3
1:354
Group R5 and $0.040 per cubic foot of volume for all other use
groups and buildings. The fee shall be $0.0008 per cubic foot for
structures on farms, including commercial farm building under
N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2 (d), with the maximum fee for such structures on
farms not to exceed $1,145.
2. Fees for renovations, alterations and repairs or site construction
associated with pre-engineered systems of commercial farm
buildings, pre-manufactured construction, and the external utility
connection for pre-manufactured construction shall be based upon
the estimated cost of work. The fee for Use Group R-5 shall be in
the amount of $30 per $1,000. From $50,001 to and including
$100,000, the additional fee shall be in the amount of $25 per
$1,000 of estimated cost above $50,000. Above $100,000, the
additional fee shall be in the amount of $20 per $1,000 of estimated
cost above $100,000. The fee for all other use groups shall be in the
amount of $35 per $1,000. From $50,001 to and including
$100,000, the additional fee shall be in the amount of $31 per
$1,000 of estimated cost above $50,000. Above $100,000, the
additional fee shall be in the amount of $29 per $1,000 of estimated
cost above $100,000. For the purpose of determining estimated
cost, the applicant shall submit to the Agency such cost data as may
be available and produced by the architect or engineer of record, or
by a recognized estimating firm, or by the contractor. A bonafide
contractor's bid, or contract if available, shall be submitted upon
request. Fee for additions shall be computed on the same basis as
for new construction for the added portion. Fees for combination of
renovations and additions shall be computed as the sum of the fees
computed separately in accordance with the above stated
provision. The flat fee for replacement type roof coverings shall be
$125 for R-5 type use group. The fee for all use groups other than
R-5 shall be $35 per $1,000 of the estimated cost. In the event the
work is of a minor nature and not a total replacement, the fee for
R-5 type use groups may be calculated at the rate of $30 per $1,000
and a minimum fee of $95.
3. The flat fee for replacement type vinyl siding and other exterior
wall coverings shall be $225 for R-5 type use groups. The fee for all
use groups other than R-5 shall be $35 per $1,000 of the estimated
cost. In the event the work is of a minor nature and not a total
replacement, the fee for R-5 type use groups may be calculated at
the rate of $30 per $1,000 and a minimum fee of $95.
4. The fee charged for a private aboveground swimming pool as
defined in the building subcode, in Use Group R-5 shall be $125.
The fee charged for a private inground swimming pool as defined in
the building subcode, in Use Group R-5 shall be $225. The
construction fee for public swimming pools as defined in the
building subcode in all other use groups shall be computed and
§ 10-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1.3
1:355
based upon the cubic volume of the structure. The minimum permit
fee shall be $250 per unit.
5. The flat fee for replacement barriers surrounding and enclosing
public or private swimming pools shall be $75.
6. The fee for storage sheds and similar structures exceeding 200
square feet in area shall be calculated in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.28. The minimum fee for sheds and similar structures that
are 200 feet or less in floor area and less than 10 feet in height shall
be charged a flat fee of $65 per unit. No permit fee shall be
collected for such structures 100 square feet in area or less.
7. Temporary Structures: The fee shall be $75 per structure that is
subject to and regulated by the U.C.C.
8. Tents: The building subcode fee for regulated tents subject to
construction permit and inspection shall be $100 per tent.
9. The fees for retaining walls shall be as follows:
(a) The fee for new or replacement retaining walls with a surface
area greater than 550 square feet that is associated with a
Class 3 residential structure shall be $125 and $75 for
regulated retaining walls not exceeding 550 square feet.
(b) The fee for retaining walls of any size other than a Class 3
residential structure shall be based upon the estimated market
value in the amount of $30 per $1,000.
d. Plumbing Fixtures and Equipment: The fees shall be as follows:
1. The fee shall be in the amount of $25 per fixture, piece of
equipment or appliance connected to the plumbing system, and for
each appliance connected to the gas piping, propane or oil piping
system, except as indicated in paragraph 2 below.
2. The fee shall be $75 per special device and for the following: gas
piping, oil piping, chimney liners, grease traps, oil separators,
refrigeration units, water services for each 100 feet or part thereof,
sewer services for each 100 feet or part thereof, active solar
systems, septic system abandonment's, sewer pumps and
interceptors. The fee for a water heater installed in new
construction shall be $50 for R-5 and $125 for all other use groups
per unit. There shall be no inspection fee charged for gas service
entrances.
3. The fee for backflow preventers up to 3/4 inches shall be $20 per
device. The fee for backflow preventers over 3/4 inches installed in
Use Group R-5 shall be $75 and $125 for all other use groups per
device. The annual fee for backflow preventers subject to testing
shall be $75 per device/test.
§ 10-1.3 HOLMDEL § 10-1.3
1:356
4. The flat fee for replacement domestic water heaters (natural gas,
oil or propane) installed in Use Group R-5 shall be $95 per unit, $50
per unit for multiple units and $125 per unit for all other use
groups.
5. The flat fee for electric replacement domestic water heaters
installed in Use Group R-5 shall be $95 per unit, $50 per unit for
multiple units and $155 per unit for all other use groups.
6. The flat fee for replacement warm air furnaces installed in Use
Group R-5 shall be $155 per unit, $80 per unit for multiple units
and $175 per unit for all other use groups. The fee for new warm
air furnaces installed in Use Group R-5 shall be $50 per unit and
$75 per unit in all other use groups.
7. The flat fee for replacement water boilers installed in Use Group
R-5 shall be $95 per unit, $50 per unit for multiple units and $125
per unit for all other use groups. The fee for a new water boiler
shall be $50 for R-5 and $75 for all other use groups per unit. There
shall be no inspection fee charged for gas service entrances.
8. When new gas piping is installed in conjunction with the
replacement of water heaters, boilers, furnaces and similar devices
the fee for the new gas piping shall be as noted above in paragraph
2 and in addition to the flat fee for the device installed. At the
discretion of the Plumbing Subcode Official this fee may be waived
in the case of minor gas pipe type alterations.
9. The fee for replacement AC units installed in Use Group R-5 shall
be $45 per unit, $25 per unit for multiple units and $65 per unit for
all other use groups. The fee for new AC units installed in Use
Group R-5 shall be $25 per unit and $45 per unit for all other use
groups.
10. The fee for replacement or new RTU Heating/Cooling units
installed in all use groups other than R-5 shall be $175 per unit for
the first five units. The fee for additional units above five units
installed per project shall be $150 per unit.
11. The flat fee for swimming pool bottom drain outlets and or
atmospheric safety vacuum release systems and similar devices in
Use Group R-5 shall be $55 and $125 for all other use groups.
e. Electrical Fixtures and Devices: The fee shall be as follows:
1. For the first block consisting of one to 50 receptacles, fixtures or
devices, the fee shall be $75; for each additional block consisting of
up to 25 receptacles, fixtures or devices, the fee shall be $35. For
the purpose of computing this fee, receptacles, fixtures or devices
shall include lighting fixtures, wall switches, convenience
receptacles, sensors, dimmers, alarm devices, smoke and heat
detectors, communications outlets, light-standards eight feet or
§ 10-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1.3
1:357
less in height including luminaries, emergency lights, electric
signs, exit lights or electric fixtures and devices rated 20 amperes
or less including motors or equipment rated less than one
horsepower (hp) or one kilowatt (kW).
2. For each motor or electrical device rated in horsepower (hp), the
fee shall be:
(a) From one hp up to and including 10 hp $25.
(b) Greater than 10 hp up to and including 50 hp $75.
(c) Greater than 50 hp up to and including 100 hp $125.
(d) Greater than 100 hp $455.
3. For each generator, transformer, and all other items measured in
kW not specified in this fee schedule, the fee shall be:
(a) From one kW up to and including 10 kW $25.
(b) Greater than 10 kW up to and including 45 kW $75.
(c) Greater than 45 kW up to and including 112.5 kW $125.
(d) Greater than 112.5 kW $475.
4. For each piece of equipment or unit installed in Use Group R-5 for
air conditioning measured in tonnage, the fee shall be $12 per ton.
For each piece of equipment or unit installed in all use groups other
then R-5 used for air conditioning, refrigeration, measured in
tonnage, the fee shall be $25 per ton.
5. The fee charged for electrical work for each permanently installed
above-ground, or inground swimming pool as defined in the
building subcode, spa, hot tub or fountain shall be charged as
follows: The fee for a private residential swimming pool in Use
Group R-5 shall be $75 and only includes a filter/pump/motor,
receptacle, timer and bonding. Any other equipment or fixtures
installed shall be charged on the basis of number of electrical
fixtures and rating of electrical devices involved in accordance with
paragraph 1 above. The fee for all other recreational type
swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, fountains, etc. in all other use
groups shall be $175 and only includes a filter/pump/motor,
receptacle, timer and bonding. Any other equipment or fixtures
installed shall be charged on the basis of number of electrical
fixtures and rating of electrical devices involved in accordance with
paragraph (1) above.
6. The fee charged in conjunction with the annual electrical
inspection of swimming pools, spas or hot tubs shall be $175 per
application. The flat fee for a photovolatic (PV) system installed in
Use Group R-5 shall be $125 and $175 for all other use groups. The
§ 10-1.3 HOLMDEL § 10-1.3
1:358
fee for other use groups shall be calculated in accordance with
the number of arrays "communication points," devices, switches
and subpanels. Stand-alone systems shall be charged as a "service"
in addition to the above fees. For installations consisting of
multimeter stacks, the fee shall be based on the ampere rating
of the main bus and not upon the number of meters or rating of
disconnects on the meter stack. Individual loadside panel boards
shall be charged in accordance with the fees established above.
There shall be no additional fee charged for the concurrent
installation of individual feeder conductors.
7. For motors or similar devices requiring concurrent installation of
individual controls, relays and switches, the fee shall be based only
upon the rating of the motor or device. There shall be no additional
fee charged for the concurrent installation of individual circuit
components, for example, controllers, starters, and disconnecting
means. For each service equipment, panel board, load center,
overhead service entrance conductor, motor starter, motor control
center, automatic transfer switch, disconnecting means, and future
electric, such as circuits installed for future use or intermittent
needs (all bonding and grounding for the above items are
included), the fee shall be:
(a) Up to and including 200 amps $110.
(b) Up to and including 400 amps $155.
(c) Up to and including 800 amps $325.
(d) Up to and including 1,200 amps $575.
(e) For each additional 400 amps above 1,200 amps add $135.
8. The flat fee for service reconnect inspections in response to
emergencies or utility request shall be $75 in Use Group R-5 and
$125 in all other use groups.
9. The fee charged for process equipment shall be based on the
ampere rating of the overcurrent device protecting the conductor
feeding the process equipment or the cutoff device.
10. For the purpose of computing these fees, all electrical and
communications devices, utilization equipment and motors, which
are part of premises wiring, except those, which are portable plugin
type, shall be counted.
11. For light standards above 8-0 feet in height (includes first 150
lineal feet of trench), the fee shall be $17 per fixture. Trenches over
150 lineal feet shall be $40 for each additional 150 lineal feet.
12. The flat fee for hard wired signage mounted on a wall shall be $75
for the first sign and $25 for each additional sign installed on the
same site. The fee for pylon type signage and similar freestanding
§ 10-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1.3
1:359
structures shall be $95 each and includes the first 150 lineal feet
of trenching. Trenches over 150 lineal feet shall be $40 for each
additional 150 lineal feet.
13. The fee for each regulated satellite dish installed in use groups
other than R-5 shall be $35 each unit.
f. For Fire Protection and Hazardous Equipment, Sprinklers, Standpipes,
Detectors (Smoke/Heat/Carbon Monoxide), Pre-Engineered
Suppression System, Gas and Oil Fired Appliances Not Connected to
the Plumbing System, Kitchen Exhaust Systems, Incinerators and
Crematoriums. The fee shall be as follows:
1. The fee for 20 or fewer sprinkler heads shall be $75. The fee for 21
to and including 50 heads shall be $150. The fee for each additional
group of 50 or part thereof shall be $75.
2. The fee for underground fire suppression water mains shall be
$200 per 100 feet.
3. The fee for each individual standpipe shall be $150.
4. The fee for each fire pump shall be $250.
5. The fee for each dry pipe valve and compressor shall be $250.
6. The fee for residential fire sprinklers, installed in a new singlefamily
dwelling, shall be $225.
7. The fee for 15 or fewer smoke detectors, heat detectors, CO
detectors, manual alarm devices, supervisory devices and visual/
audible devices shall be $75. The fee for 16 to 50 devices shall be
$150. The fee for each additional group of 50 or part thereof shall
be $75.
8. The fee for residential smoke, heat and CO detectors, installed in a
single family dwelling, shall be $125.
9. The fee for monitored residential smoke, heat and CO detectors,
when required and installed in a single-family dwelling, shall be
$175. The fee for fire alarm panels, in other than single-family
dwellings, shall be $150.
10. The fee for pre-engineered suppression system shall be $175.
11. The fee for Clean Agent suppression systems shall be $350.
12. The fee for commercial exhaust hoods shall be $175.
13. The fee for smoke removal systems shall be $250.
14. The fee for incinerators and crematoriums shall be $500.
15. The fee for any suppression, detection and notification special
device shall be $175.
§ 10-1.3 HOLMDEL § 10-1.3
1:360
16. The fee for gas appliances, such as stoves, ovens, dryers and
fireplaces, installed in Use Group R-5 shall be $25 per appliance
and $40 per appliance in all other use groups. Oil fired and solid
fuel burning appliances, other than furnaces, installed in all use
groups shall be $75 per appliance. Pool heaters, gas or oil fired,
installed in all use groups shall be $75 per appliance.
17. The fee for furnaces, other than replacements, installed in Use
Group R-5 shall be $50 per unit and $75 per unit in all other use
groups.
18. The fee for gas or oil fired generators installed in Use Group R-5
shall be $75 per unit and $150 per unit in all other use groups.
19. Flat Fee: A storage tank for a gasoline station or similar use, new or
replacement, with a maximum of six fuel pumps and all associated
piping shall be $500. Each additional fuel tank or fuel pump and all
associated piping, installed at the same time, shall be $200 per
unit. Individual tanks or pumps, new or replacement, with all
associated piping shall be $200 per unit. Fuel pump suppression
systems shall be $75 per pump.
20. The fee for storage tank installations for flammable or combustible
liquids shall be:
Tanks up to 500 gallons $75
501 to 1,000 gallons $150
1,001 to 5,000 gallons $225
Over 5,000 gallons $500
g. Fees for Certificates and Other Permits. The fees are as follows:
1. The fee for a demolition permit shall be $125 for any single
structure.
2. The fee for an underground or aboveground tank abandonment or
removal permit shall be $75 for a single tank. Each additional
structure or tank demolished abandoned or removed shall be $25
for each additional unit located on the same block and lot.
3. Signage: The fee to construct a pylon sign shall be in the amount of
$4 per square foot. The minimum fee shall be $75 per structure.
The fee to construct a ground or wall sign shall in the amount of $3
per square foot of surface area of the computed on one side only for
double-faced signs and the minimum fee per sign shall be $75 per
unit. Exception; no fees shall be collected for signage that is
exempt from permitting in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.14(b)6.
4. The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be in the amount of 10%
of the total construction permit fee. The minimum fee shall be $75
for R-5 type use groups and the minimum fee for all other use
§ 10-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1.3
1:361
groups shall be $125 per building. Buildings with multiple
certificates of occupancy (such as a shopping center or similar
conditions) the fee shall be an additional $75 fee per unit, tenant
space or area.
5. The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy renewal issued in
accordance with the regulations shall be $30.
6. The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a change
of use group shall be $175.
7. The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy issued under
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.23(c) shall be $175. The fee for a certificate of
continued occupancy issued in response to work performed without
construction permits pursuant to and described in DC A Bulletin
06-1 shall be $125 per subcode having jurisdiction over the work
performed.
8. The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $594 for Class I structures and $120 for
Class II and Class III structures. The fee for resubmission of an
application for a variation shall be $229 for Class I structures and
$65 for Class II and Class III structures.
9. The fee for a permit for lead hazard abatement work shall be $140.
The fee for a lead abatement clearance certificate shall be $28.
10. The fee to reinstate suspended or abandoned permits described in
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.16(b) shall be 10% of the cost of the original permit
per outstanding subcode and not less than $25 per outstanding
subcode. This fee may be waived at the discretion of the
Construction Official. For clarification, an "outstanding subcode" is
one in which final inspection and subcode approval has not been
obtained and/or documented.
h. Elevator Devices. The Elevator Unit at the Department of Community
Affairs performs all plan review and inspection services of elevator
devices and equipment for the Township. The fees established, effective
and published by DCA for plan review, inspections, variations, etc. shall
be in the amount as noted in N.J.A.C. 5:23-4 and N.J.A.C. 5:23-12
respectively. A copy of the current DCA fee schedule is available upon
request and adopted herein.
i. Annual Permits. Annual permit requirements are as follows:
1. The fee to be charged for an annual construction permit shall be
charged annually. This fee shall be a flat fee based upon the number
of maintenance workers who are employed by the facility, and who
are primarily engaged in work that is governed by a subcode.
Managers, engineers and clericals shall not be considered
maintenance workers for the purpose of establishing the annual
§ 10-1.3 HOLMDEL § 10-1.3
1:362
§ 10-1.4. (Reserved)79
§ 10-1.5. Plumbing License. [1976 Code § 35B-4.1]
No person shall engage in the business of or perform the work of a plumber
in the Township of Holmdel unless he/she shall have obtained a master
plumber's license under N.J.S. 45:14C-1 et seq.
§ 10-2. BUILDINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.
§ 10-2.1. Declaration of Unsafe Structures; Power to Repair, Close
or Demolish. [1976 Code § 35-1]
The existence or occupation of any building or buildings or parts thereof
in the Township which are so old, dilapidated or have become so out of
construction permit fee. Annual permits may be issued for building/
fire protection, electrical and plumbing.
2. Fees for annual permits shall be as follows:
(a) One to 25 workers (including foremen) $667/worker; each
additional worker over 25, $232/worker.
(b) Prior to the issuance of the annual permit, a training
registration fee of $140 per subcode and a list of not more than
three individuals to be trained per subcode shall be submitted
by the applicant to the Department of Community Affairs,
Bureau of Code Services, Education Unit along with a copy of
the construction permit (Form F170). Checks shall be made
payable to "Treasurer, State of New Jersey." The Department
shall register these individuals and notify them of the courses
being offered.
j. Hourly Charges: The fee for development wide inspection of homes
after the certificate of occupancy ordered pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.35
or otherwise shall be:
1. The hourly charge shall be an amount equal to twice the hourly
base salary paid to the licensed code official(s) performing the
work, or the hourly fees charged to the municipality by a consulting
professional contracted to provide such services;
2. The fees, charges, accounting procedures and limits shall be set in
accordance with and subjected to N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.17(d) 1 — 5.
k. Ordinary Maintenance and Repair: Any work that is deemed ordinary
maintenance or repair pursuant to the regulations and are not
subjected to a construction permit shall not be charged a fee.
79.Editor's Note: Former subsection 10-1.4, Fire Limits, previously codified herein and
containing portions of 1976 Code § 35B-4, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
97-16.
§ 10-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-2.1
1:363
repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use is inimical to the welfare and dangerous
and injurious to the health and safety of the people of the Township,
and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of
such building or buildings or part thereof. There exists in the Township
building or buildings which are unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents
or other calamities, lack of ventilation, lack of sanitary facilities, or due
to other conditions rendering such building or buildings or part thereof
unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the safety or otherwise
inimical to the welfare of the residents of the Township, and as to which the
Township has the power, pursuant to N.J.S. 40:48-2.3 et seq., to exercise its
police powers to repair, close or demolish, or cause or, require the repairing,
closing or demolition of, such building or buildings or part thereof in the
manner herein provided.
§ 10-2.2. Definitions. [1976 Code § 35-2; Ord. No. 2008-09 § 1]
As used in this section:
BUILDING — Shall mean any "building" or structure or part thereof,
whether used for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any
outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed
therewith.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean a "building" or portion thereof providing
living facilities for one or more persons.
OWNER — Shall mean the holder or holders of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — Shall mean all individuals, associations and
corporations who have interests of record in a "building" and any who are
in actual possession thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Shall mean any housing authority or any officer who
is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the Township
relating to health, fire, building regulations or to other activities concerning
"buildings," in the Township of Holmdel.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Shall mean the Township Committee of the Township
of Holmdel or designee.
§ 10-2.3. Substandard Housing Committee. [1976 Code § 35-3]
There is hereby created a committee to be known as Substandard Housing
Committee, to consult with and advise the Public Officer. Such Committee
shall consist of the Health Officer, Fire Chief, Welfare Director, Health
Inspector, Plumbing Subcode Official, Construction Official and one other
member to be selected by the Mayor.
§ 10-2.1 HOLMDEL § 10-2.4
1:364
§ 10-2.4. Filing of Complaint; Hearing. [1976 Code § 35-4]
Whenever a petition is filed with the Public Officer by a public authority
or by at least five residents of the Township charging that any building is
unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, or whenever it appears to
the Public Officer (on its own motion) that any building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use, the Public Officer shall, if its preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be
served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such building a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that
a hearing will be held before the Public Officer (or its designated agent)
at a place therein fixed, not less than seven days nor more than 30 days
after the serving of the complaint, and that the owner and parties in interest
shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in
person or otherwise and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the
complaint, and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not
be controlling in hearings before the Public Officer.
§ 10-2.5. Determination That Building is Unfit; Service of
Abatement Orders. [1976 Code § 35-5]
If the Public Officer shall determine, after such notice and hearing, that
the building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use, it shall state in writing its findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order as follows:
§ 10-2.6. Failure to Comply with Order to Repair, Alter or Improve.
[1976 Code § 35-6]
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve, or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the Public
Officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved or to
be vacated and closed; provided that the Public Officer shall not incur any
expense to repair, alter or improve any building without the approval, by
resolution, of the Township Committee. The Public Officer may cause to be
posted on the main entrance of any building so closed, a placard with the
following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use; the use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
a. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be
made by the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set
forth in the order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or have the
building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order, and;
b. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in the
order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish the
building within a reasonable time as specified in the order of removal.
§ 10-2.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-2.7
1:365
§ 10-2.7. Failure to Comply with Order to Remove or Demolish.
[1976 Code § 35-7]
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Public Officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished, subject to the approval, by resolution, of the Township
Committee.
§ 10-2.8. Cost of Repairs, Alterations, Removal, Demolition to
Become Lien Upon Real Property. [1976 Code § 35-8; New]
The amount of such cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or
vacating and closing, or removal or demolition shall be a municipal lien
against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. A detailed
statement of the aforesaid costs shall be filed with the Tax Assessor or other
custodian of the records of tax liens, and a copy of the detailed statement
shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by registered mail. If the building
is removed or demolished by the Public Officer, it shall sell the materials of
such building and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of
the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in
the Superior Court by the Public Officer, shall be secured in such manner
as may be directed by the Court and shall be disbursed according to the
order of judgment of the Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto
by final order of judgment of such Court; provided, however, that nothing
in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of
the Township of Holmdel to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or
party in interest may, within 30 days from the date of the filing of the lien
certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest
the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in
the municipal lien certificate.
§ 10-2.9. Conditions Warranting Determination of Unfitness. [1976
Code § 35-9]
a. The Public Officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if it finds that conditions exist in such
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or
other residents of the Township; such conditions may include the
following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing) defects
therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack
of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation;
disrepair, structural defects, uncleanliness.
b. Without in any way limiting the standards and conditions set forth in
paragraph a hereinabove, and without in any way requiring that any
one or all of the conditions hereinafter set forth be found in order to
declare a building unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use, the
following are additional standards to guide the Public Officer or its
§ 10-2.7 HOLMDEL § 10-2.9
1:366
agent in determining the fitness of a building for human habitation or
occupancy or use:
1. Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing
through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its
base.
2. Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more of
damage, disrepair or deterioration of the supporting member or
members, or 50% of damage, disrepair or deterioration of the
nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering.
3. Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or
roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have
insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
4. Those structures and every part thereof which are not maintained
in good repair by the owner or agent and fit for human habitation;
also, where the roof is not maintained so as not to leak and where
all rainwater is not properly drained and conveyed therefrom so as
not to cause dampness in the wall or ceilings on the interior or
exterior.
5. Those structures which are not maintained in proper repair so as to
give adequate protection from the elements and those structures
where the windows and doors do not fit properly and where all
exterior wood surfaces are not protected from the elements and
decay by painting or other protective covering.
6. Those dwelling units which lack the following facilities in good
working order: a sink, flush toilet and bathtub or stall shower
supplied by a sufficient supply of potable running water and
connected to the sanitary sewage disposal system of the Township
or to an approved individual sewage disposal system according to
Chapter 199, P.L. 1954 of New Jersey.
7. Those which lack permanent, safe and reasonably efficient kitchen
facilities within the dwelling unit, including a sink with running
water and provisions for a cooking stove which conform to the
existing Plumbing Code of the Township and the Fire Prevention
Code of the Township.
8. Those dwelling units and public hallways which do not have a safe
electric lighting system in accordance with the Fire Code of the
Township.
9. Those where every habitable room does not contain a window or
windows which open directly to the outside air and the total area of
such window or windows is less than 5% of the floor area of such
room. Also, where the window sash is not glazed and provided with
§ 10-2.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-2.9
1:367
suitable hardware and is not made to open to the extent of not less
than 2 1/2% of the floor area of such room.
10. Those dwelling units not having a separate access either to a
hallway or landing stairway leading to the street.
11. Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they
may fall and injure members of the public or property.
12. Those which are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe or unsanitary that
they are unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, or by
reason of structural deficiencies or of continuous dampness or
exposure brought about by neglect or dilapidation are likely to
cause sickness or disease or may reasonably be presumed to result
in injury to the health, safety and general welfare of those using the
premises.
13. Those dwelling units having rooms with less than 400 cubic feet of
airspace and 50 square feet of floor space for each adult and less
than 200 cubic feet of airspace and 30 square feet of floor space for
each child under the age of 12 years occupying such room. Any
room used for sleeping purposes having less than 60 square feet is
also deemed uninhabitable.
14. Those basement dwelling units having rooms with ceiling height of
less than six feet eight inches or whose walls and floors have not
been dampproofed and waterproofed by an approved method if in
contact with earth.
15. Those whose courts, yards or other areas on the premises are not
properly drained.
16. Those with fences in a dilapidated condition.
17. Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as
to have become dangerous to life, safety or the general health and
welfare of the occupants or the people of the Township.
18. Those whose yards, lawns, courtyards, terraces, porches, balconies
and accessory building are not kept clean and free of rodent and
vermin infection and ratproofed according to existing ordinances.
19. Stores or places of business converted to living purposes must
conform to the above standards and all show windows must be
replaced by conventional-type home windows which conform to the
requirements of paragraph b9 above.
20. Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the Building
Code of the Township or any provisions of the Fire Prevention Code
or other ordinances of the Township of Holmdel Board of Health.
21. Those dwelling units having an oil space heater as a source of heat.
§ 10-2.9 HOLMDEL § 10-2.10
1:368
§ 10-2.10. Methods of Service of Complaints or Orders. [1976 Code
§ 35-10]
Complaints or orders issued by the Public Officer pursuant to this section
shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail, but
if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the person making
such inquiry shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such
complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing the
same once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and
published in the Township of Holmdel or, in the absence of such newspaper,
in one printed and published in the County of Monmouth and circulating in
the Township of Holmdel. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted
in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. A
copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record
with the County Clerk of the County of Monmouth.
§ 10-2.11. Persons Aggrieved by Orders Issued: Action for
Injunctive Relief. [1976 Code § 35-11; New]
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Public Officer pursuant
to this section may, within 30 days after the posting and service of such
order, bring an action for injunctive relief to restrain the Public Officer from
carrying out the provisions of the order and for any other appropriate relief
pursuant to R.S. 40:48-2.8.
§ 10-2.12. Public Officer Authorized Certain Powers. [1976 Code
§ 35-12]
The Public Officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this section, including the following powers in addition to
others herein granted:
§ 10-2.13. Assistance of Substandard Housing Committee in
Determining Unfitness of Buildings. [1976 Code § 35-13]
The Public Officer may request the Substandard Housing Committee to
assist it in determining whether a building under this section shall be
demolished or repaired pursuant to the provisions of this section, but the
a. To investigate the building conditions in the Township of Holmdel in
order to determine which buildings therein are unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use.
b. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
c. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations:
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
§ 10-2.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-2.13
1:369
final order or determination in any case shall be deemed to be the order or
determination of the Public Officer.
§ 10-2.14. Public Officer to Delegate Duties of Officers, Agents and
Employees. [1976 Code § 35-14]
The Public Officer shall delegate and fix the duties of such officers, agents
and employees as it deems necessary to assist it in carrying out the
purposes of this section, and may delegate any of its functions and powers
under this section to such officers, agents and employees as it may
designate.
§ 10-2.15. Annual Expenses and Costs. [1976 Code § 35-15]
The Township Committee shall prepare an estimate of the annual expenses
or costs to provide the equipment, personnel and supplies necessary for
periodic examinations and investigations of the buildings in the Township
of Holmdel for the purpose of determining the fitness of such buildings
for human habitation or occupancy or use and for the enforcement and
administration of this section, and may make such appropriations from its
revenues as it may deem necessary for this purpose, and may accept and
apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this
section.
§ 10-2.16. Violations and Penalties. [1976 Code § 35-16]
Any person who shall violate subsection 35-2.6 or 35-2.7, or who shall
violate an order of the Public Officer after duly made and promulgated
pursuant to this section, or who interferes with the Public Officer or any
other person authorized to exercise the powers of the Public Officer, shall
be liable, upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5;
and such action in and penalties imposed by the Municipal Court may be in
addition to any other action or proceedings provided in this section. Each
day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 10-2.17. Nonapplicability. [1976 Code § 35-17]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers
of any department of the Township of Holmdel to enforce any provision of
its charter or its ordinance of regulations or to prevent or punish violation
thereof.
§ 10-3. (RESERVED)
§ 10-4. NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS.
§ 10-4.1. Purpose. [1976 Code § 55A-1; Ord. No. 9-78]
The purpose of this section is to require the clear display of authorized
and assigned house or building numbers on every building fronting on any
street in the Township in order to assist the general public and emergency
§ 10-2.13 HOLMDEL § 10-4.1
1:370
services, public and private, in identifying any property in case of
emergency or otherwise.
§ 10-4.2. Applicability. [1976 Code § 55A-2; Ord. No. 9-78]
All dwelling houses, stores or other principal buildings erected or to be
erected within the Township shall display house numbers assigned by the
Construction Code Official as provided for herein and in conformity with the
specifications provided for herein.
§ 10-4.3. Placing of Numbers Required. [1976 Code 55A-3; Ord. No.
9-78]
The owner, occupant or lessee of each and every house, store or other
building which now fronts or which may hereafter front upon any public
or private street within the Township shall, at his own expense, within
three months after the adoption and publication of this section cause the
authorized and assigned number of such house or building to be
permanently and conspicuously placed in accordance with the
specifications set forth herein.
§ 10-4.4. Specifications. [1976 Code § 55A-4; Ord. No. 9-78]
House or building numbers shall be:
§ 10-4.5. Visibility of Numbers on Buildings Which Are Set Back.
[1976 Code § 55A-5; Ord. No. 9-78]
If the house or building has such a setback location that the provisions of
subsection 10-4.4 cannot be complied with, then the owner, occupant or
lessee shall provide a post, rod or other type of fixture of a substantial
nature, including a mailbox with the number affixed thereon and so located
on the premises that the number shall be conspicuous and visible from the
street upon which the building fronts.
a. In Arabic numerals.
b. A minimum height of three inches.
c. Mounted in a secure fashion to the front wall or porch of the building or
other fixed appurtenance in the front of the building so as to be clearly
visible from the street.
d. Sufficiently legible as to contrasting background, arrangement, spacing
and uniformity so as to be clearly visible from the street.
e. At least 30 inches above ground level and so placed that trees, shrubs
and other obstructions do not block the line of sight of the numbers
from the street upon which the building fronts.
§ 10-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-4.6
1:371
§ 10-4.6. Application for Assignment of Numbers. [1976 Code
§ 55A-6; Ord. No. 9-78]
House numbers shall be assigned by the Construction Code Official. Every
owner, occupant or lessee of a building constructed or to be constructed in
the Township shall apply to the Construction Code Official for an authorized
number in accordance with this section and applicable provisions of the
Subdivision Ordinance of the Township of Holmdel.
§ 10-4.7. Affixing of Numbers by Township; Costs. [1976 Code
§ 55A-7; Ord. No. 9-78; New]
The Code Enforcement Office shall notify the owner, occupant or lessee
of any building which does not currently display an authorized number
that the owner/occupant has 14 days to comply with the provisions of
this section. Upon the failure of an owner, occupant or lessee to ascertain
and affix upon any building to which this section applies the assigned and
authorized number, it shall be lawful for the Township Committee to cause
to be affixed to such building or appurtenance provided for herein the
assigned and authorized number by an authorized agent of the Township.
Such agent shall execute a return to the Township Committee of the cost of
so affixing the number, and the Collector of Taxes, upon certification, shall
charge the same to the owner of the building and collect the cost in the
same manner as all taxes are collected, and such cost shall be a lien upon
the land.
§ 10-4.8. Violations and Penalties. [1976 Code § 55A-8; Ord. No.
9-78]
§ 10-5. CONTINUED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — MULTIPLE
DWELLINGS, MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNITS AND
COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS.
§ 10-5.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 96-12 § 37-1; Ord. No. 97-4 § I; Ord. No.
2000-23 § I; Ord. No. 2004-25 § I]
The purpose of this section is to assure proper maintenance of and
compliance with applicable codes and ordinances for multiple dwelling
units located within a single building, manufactured housing units and
commercial buildings in order to further protect the safety and welfare of
occupants of such units and commercial buildings. It is also intended to
insure continued adherence to the approved site plan.
a. Any person who violates the provisions of this section, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $200.
b. The imposition and collection of the penalty imposed by paragraph a of
this section shall not bar the right of the Township to collect the costs
described in subsection 10-4.7.
§ 10-4.6 HOLMDEL § 10-5.2
1:372
§ 10-5.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 96-12 § 37-2; Ord. No. 97-4 § I; Ord.
No. 2004-25 § I]
As used in this section:
COMMERCIAL BUILDING — Shall mean nonresidential building which is
visited by members of the public for the transaction of business.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNIT — As used in this section shall mean any
manufactured housing unit as defined in Section 1.2.14 of the National Fire
Protection Association Standard No. 501.
MULTIPLE DWELLING UNIT — As used in this section shall mean any
dwelling unit located in a building in which there are a total of two or more
residential dwelling units.
§ 10-5.3. Adoption of ICC International Property Maintenance Code
by Reference. [Ord. No. 96-12 § 37-3; Ord. No. 97-4 § I; Ord. No.
99-30 § I; Ord. No. 2004-25 § I]
In accordance with the provisions of statute, the ICC International Property
Maintenance Code/2003 (hereafter "Code"), and as may be amended from
time to time hereafter, is hereby adopted as a standard governing the
maintenance of premises within the Township.
The following provisions of the Code are amended and revised:
a. Section 101.1 (page 1, second line), Insert: Township of Holmdel.
b. Section 101.3 (page 1, last line), Change: "International Existing
Building Code" to Subchapter 6 of the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code.
c. Section 102.3 (page 1, third line), Change: "International Existing
Building Code" to Subchapter 6 of the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code.
d. Section 102.3 (page 1, last line), Change: "International Zoning Code"
to Holmdel Township Zoning Code.
e. Section 103.5 (page 2) is hereby deleted in its entirety.
f. Section 304.14 (page 10, first line), Insert: May 1 and November 1.
g. Section 602.3 (page 17, fifth line), Insert: October 1 and June 1.
h. Section 602.4 (page 17, third line), Insert: October 1 and June 1.
i. Section 604.2 (page 18, third line), Change: "ICC Electrical Code" to
National Fire Protection Association Standard No. 70 (National
Electrical Code).
§ 10-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-5.3
1:373
§ 10-5.4. Compliance with Property Maintenance Code. [Ord. No.
96-12 § 37-4; Ord. No. 97-4 § I; Ord. No. 99-30 § I; Ord. No. 2000-23
§ I; Ord. No. 2004-25 § I]
Three copies of the "ICC International Property Maintenance Code" have been
placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk and will remain there for the
use and examination of the public.
To the extent any provision of the Code is inconsistent with any other provision
of the Code of the Township of Holmdel, the more stringent provision shall be
applicable.
a. No person shall occupy as owner or occupant, or rent to another for
occupancy, any multiple dwelling unit or manufactured housing unit for
the purpose of living therein or any commercial building for the
purpose of any use or occupancy which does not conform to the
applicable provisions of the ICC International Property Maintenance
Code adopted in subsection 10-5.3 above. In addition, each
manufactured housing unit shall conform to the requirements of
Section 6.6 of the National Fire Protection Association Standard No.
501.
b. No agent of an owner, real estate broker or salesperson, company,
partnership, corporation or person shall rent, re-rent, lease, release,
sell, resell or suffer to allow any person or persons to live in or occupy
as a tenant or otherwise any multiple dwelling unit, manufactured
housing unit, or commercial building, where there shall be a change of
occupancy, unless a continued certificate of occupancy certifying that
said multiple dwelling unit, manufactured housing unit, or commercial
building is fit for human habitation and that said multiple dwelling unit,
manufactured housing unit or commercial building is in compliance
with the ordinances of the Township shall first be obtained from the
Code Enforcement Officer. Such a continued certificate of occupancy
shall be granted or denied within 15 days from the date of the
application for same. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
appropriate application forms for the continued certificate of
occupancy to be prepared and shall cause an appropriately licensed
official to conduct the inspections. The application forms shall be
available to the applicant at the office of the Code Enforcement Officer.
If, in addition to a change of occupancy, a change or alteration of use
will occur, a zoning permit, pursuant to Section 30-16 will be required.
c. Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.1(a), no certificate of occupancy for initial
occupancy of a low or moderate income unit created pursuant to the
Fair Housing Act shall be issued unless there is a written determination
by the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency as the
authority responsible for administering affordability controls within the
Township that the unit is to be controlled by a deed restriction and
mortgage lien as adopted by the Council on Affordable Housing.
§ 10-5.3 HOLMDEL § 10-5.4
1:374
§ 10-5.5. Additional Inspections. [Ord. No. 2000-23 § I]
d. Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.2(c), no continued certificate of occupancy
shall be issued for any occupancy of a low or moderate income unit
created pursuant to the Fair Housing Act unless there is a written
determination by the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance
Agency as the authority responsible for administering affordability
controls within the Township that the unit is to be controlled by a deed
restriction and mortgage lien as adopted by the Council on Affordable
Housing.
e. Charges to cover the cost of administration in connection with the
application shall be paid to the Code Enforcement Officer at the time
the application is filed and shall not be refundable.
The fees shall be:
Application and Initial Inspection Fee:
1. Dwelling Unit — $70.
2. Commercial building less than 5,000 square feet in area — $70.
3. Commercial building 5,000 square feet to 12,000 square feet in
area — $95.
4. Commercial building more than 12,000 square feet in area — $125.
Note: Area shall be defined as the exterior dimensions of the building and
shall include all accessible areas on all floors.
First Reinspection Required — No charge.
Second and Subsequent Reinspections (each) — $70.
f. As a condition of fitness for human habitation in any of the dwellings
referred to in paragraph a above, the Township Committee does hereby
deem that it shall be necessary that each such residence or dwelling
have installed therein and in operating order — smoke detectors and
carbon monoxide (CO) detectors to be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:70-2.3 (N.J. Uniform Fire Code).
Any such smoke or carbon monoxide detector installed shall bear a
seal, tested and listed by an approved rating organization such as
Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (U.L.), Factory Mutual Laboratories
(FM) or any nationally recognized agency.
g. A continued certificate of occupancy issued hereunder shall be valid for
a period not to exceed 60 days from the date of issuance or until there
occurs a change in occupancy.
a. Engineering Inspection. The request for a new or continued certificate
of occupancy for a commercial building which was the subject of a site
plan approval shall cause a reinspection of the site to insure the site's
§ 10-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-5.5
1:375
Chapter 11
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 11-1. REQUIRED MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
§ 11-1.1. Findings. [1976 Code § 60-1; Ord. No. 86-14]
It is hereby determined that the public health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Township of Holmdel should not be impaired by the
neglected maintenance of property and storage of unsightly equipment.
§ 11-1.2. Purpose. [1976 Code § 60-2; Ord. No. 86-14]
The purpose of this chapter is to:
§ 11-1.3. Policy. [1976 Code § 60-3; Ord. No. 86-14]
This chapter is hereby declared to be remedial, preventive and essential
for the public interest, and it is intended that it be construed liberally to
effectuate the purposes as stated herein.
§ 11-1.4. Applicability. [1976 Code § 60-4; Ord. No. 86-14]
It shall be the responsibility of every property owner, operator or occupant
to maintain in a safe and orderly condition all property in the Township of
Holmdel where they own, use, occupy or have maintenance responsibility
for in accordance with the standards and regulations established herein.
adherence to the original approved site plan and any subsequent
amendments. This inspection shall be done by the Township Engineer's
Office.
1. Items to be included in the inspection include but are not limited to
landscaping and turf areas, paving condition, curbs, sidewalks,
garbage enclosures, lighting, drainage structures, detention
basins, streams and creeks.
2. Said inspection and report shall be completed within 15 days of the
applicant's request.
3. The fee for said inspection and report shall be $750.
b. (Reserved)
a. Protect the public health, safety, and welfare and preserve property
values by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance and condition of residential and nonresidential properties.
b. Fix penalties for the violation of this chapter.
§ 10-5.5 HOLMDEL § 11-1.5
1:376
§ 11-1.5. Standards and Regulations. [1976 Code § 60-5; Ord. No.
86-14; Ord. No. 95-21 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-02 § I; Ord. No. 2005-40
§ I; Ord. No. 2017-17]
The following standards and regulations are hereby adopted by the
Township Committee:
a. Vacant Lots. All grass, weeds and similar growth shall be cut between
the sidewalk and the curb and for a minimum distance of six feet behind
the sidewalk. On properties where there are no sidewalks, then this
type of growth shall be cut a minimum of six feet behind the face of the
curb or the edge of the street pavement where no curbs exist. The
grass, weeds and similar growth shall be cut so as not to exceed six
inches in height.
b. Lots on Which Structures Exist. All grass, weeds and other similar
growth shall be cut from the curbline, or the edge of the pavement
when there is no curb, to the rear property line and from side property
line to side property line so that the grass, weeds or other similar
growth shall not exceed six inches in height.
c. Exceptions to Paragraphs a and b. Where land conditions prevent the
ready accessibility of an individual to cut grass, weeds and other similar
growth or where especially large properties are involved, the enforcing
officer(s) may allow a deviation from the provisions of paragraph a or b.
d. The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of the following:
1. Refuse or rubbish as herein defined except:
(a) Garbage and refuse stored for regular scheduled pickup
according to the Holmdel Township Code.
(b) Compost pile(s) which comply with the following standards:
(1) Each compost pile shall not exceed four feet each in
height, width and length. If a compost pile shall consist of
"bins" to facilitate turning of the compost material, it shall
be limited to two such bins, each of which shall not exceed
four feet each in height, width and length.
(2) Lots five acres or less in area shall be limited to one
compost pile. Lots more than five acres in area may have
one compost pile for each five acres in area or fraction
thereof.
(3) All compost piles must be at least 10 feet from all property
lines.
(4) All compost piles shall be maintained in such a manner as
not to create a nuisance or serve as harborage for insects
and rodents as defined in Section II, subsection 2.1,
paragraphs a, b, c, g, h and i of the Public Health Nuisance
§ 11-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1.5
1:377
Code of New Jersey (1953) as adopted by Chapter BH5 of
the Revised General Ordinances of the Board of Health of
the Township of Holmdel.
(5) Only vegetative yard waste (e.g. leaves, grass clippings,
vegetative garden debris) and vegetative kitchen waste
(e.g. fruit and vegetable scraps) shall be composted. No
animal wastes (e.g. meat, bones, fat, dairy, pet wastes)
shall be composted.
(6) None of the foregoing standards shall apply to compost
piles maintained for agricultural purposes on property
which is qualified pursuant to the Farmland Assessment
Act and is actively used for agricultural purposes.
2. Abandoned, uncovered or structurally unsound wells, shafts,
towers, cellar openings, foundations, excavations or holes.
3. Abandoned ice boxes, refrigerators, boilers, hot water heaters,
toilets, television sets and other similar appliances.
4. Stagnant surface or ponding ground water accumulation which is
not associated with natural occurrences or man-made lakes or
ponds used for recreation, fishing or aesthetic purposes.
5. Nuisances, as herein defined.
6. Vehicles or parts thereof, including boats and trailers, authorized
or not, licensed or unlicensed, registered or unregistered, which
vehicles or parts thereof are not located on an improved driveway
consisting of stone or pavement or have been junked, abandoned or
dismantled.
(a) Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, in a residential zone,
any currently unregistered motor vehicle shall not be parked
outside on any property for more than 30 days; and at no time
shall any vehicle be in any state of major disassembly, disrepair
or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Nothing
herein shall prevent ordinary repairs or maintenance of any
vehicle by the residents of the property.
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, in other than a
residential zone, any currently unregistered motor vehicle
shall not be permitted on any property in any business,
commercial or industrial zone for more than 30 days and at no
time shall any vehicle be in any state of major disassembly,
disrepair or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. At
no time shall any vehicle undergo major overhauling, including
body work, outside on any property in a business, commercial
or industrial zone, except at an approved automobile
establishment.
§ 11-1.5 HOLMDEL § 11-1.5
1:378
(c) The provision of paragraph (a) or (b) above shall not apply to
the premises of a business lawfully and regularly engaged in
the sale of new or used vehicles, nor to the storage of vehicles,
provided same are shielded from public view by a fence, living
fence or a tailored cover.
7. Any accumulation of unused articles whether named or unnamed
herein, for the purpose of salvage, refuse, sale or collection unless
same is enclosed in a structure with four sides and a roof. Any such
structure must comply with all Building and Zoning Codes of the
Township.
8. Trash or garbage containers in "public view," as that term is
defined in Chapter 30, Development Regulations, Section 30-3,
except for placement at the curbline of the property for collection
on the night prior to or upon the day that a collection will be made.
e. The accumulation of dirt, silt, branches, leaves or other debris
conveyed by ground water or surface run-off onto public or private
roads, highways or a neighbor's property shall be prohibited.
f. Exterior of Premises. The exterior of every structure or accessory
structure not inherently resistant to decay shall be maintained in good
repair and all surfaces shall be kept painted or otherwise provided with
a protective coating sufficient to prevent structural deterioration and to
maintain its appearance. They shall be maintained free from broken
glass, loose shingle, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint
or other condition indicative of deterioration or inadequate
maintenance so that the property may be preserved, safety and fire
hazards eliminated, adjoining properties and neighborhoods protected
from like conditions and property values preserved.
g. Safety From Fire. All owners of unoccupied or vacant buildings shall
comply with the applicable provisions of the New Jersey Fire Safety
Code N.J.A.C. 5:70 et seq. and any local ordinances and the following
additional standards for safety from fire:
1. No unoccupied or vacant building shall contain any space utilized
for the storage of flammable liquids and/or compressed flammable
gases.
2. No room within any vacant or unoccupied building shall be used for
storage of junk, rubbish or wastes, furniture or building materials
not intended to be used in the existing building.
3. In order to promote the early detection and containment of fire, the
boarding up of windows and doors shall not be permitted except
with the permission of the Township's Fire Official or Construction
Official in emergency situations. When the windows and doors are
allowed to be boarded up, they shall be covered with no less than 1/
2 inch thick exterior plywood or equivalent and be painted the
same color as the body of the building. In no case shall boarding up
§ 11-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1.5
1:379
§ 11-1.6. Definitions. [1976 Code § 60-6; Ord. No. 86-14]
As used in this chapter:
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Shall mean those portions of a building or
structure which are exposed to public view or are visible from adjoining or
adjacent lots, including all outside surfaces and appurtenances thereto, and
the open land space of any premises outside of any building or structure
erected thereon.
NUISANCE — Shall mean:
of windows or doors be permitted in excess of six months, except
pursuant to an extension granted as outlined below. Should an
owner find it necessary to board up windows and doors in excess
of six months, a written appeal seeking permission to do so must
be filed with the Township's Fire Official prior to the expiration
of the initial six-month period. At the time of such appeal, all
circumstances shall be set forth in a written affidavit supporting
the owner's request for an extension of the board-up. Based upon
the information set forth in the affidavit, such other circumstances
regarding the property as may be revealed from an inspection of it,
and any other relevant information or circumstances of which the
Township's Fire Official may be aware, bearing upon the request,
the Fire Official shall make a determination whether or not to
grant the extension request. Such determination shall set forth the
factors considered and the reasons for the decision. The written
determination shall be sent by regular mail or personal delivery to
the owner. The determination of the Township's Fire Official shall
be final unless reversed by a court of competent jurisdiction.
h. The owner of any land subject to a conservation easement, landscape
easement, or open space easement shall be responsible for the
easement area and for the health of the vegetation and the condition of
other natural features located therein, consistent with the provisions of
this chapter. The responsibility of the owner shall include the obligation
to inspect the premises on a regular basis and after storms for
hazardous conditions that may pose a threat to adjacent properties,
when necessary to obtain any required permission from the Township,
and to promptly correct such hazardous conditions. This obligation may
be reflected in the language of the easement itself, is applicable even if
not specified in the easement, and shall accompany any transfer of title
to the property.
Any public or private condition that would constitute a nuisance
according to the statutes, laws and regulations of the State of New
Jersey, its governmental agencies or the ordinances of the Township of
Holmdel.
a.
Any physical condition existing in or on the exterior of any premises
which is potentially dangerous, detrimental or hazardous to the life,
b.
§ 11-1.5 HOLMDEL § 11-1.6
1:380
REFUSE OR RUBBISH — Shall mean all discarded, useless, unusable,
combustible and noncombustible waste materials, including but not limited
to garbage, trash, ashes, paper, paper goods and products, wrappings,
cans, bottles, containers, yard clippings, garden waste, debris, junk, glass,
boxes, crockery, wood, mineral matter, plastic, rubber, leather, furniture,
household goods, appliances, bedding, scrap lumber, scrap metal,
construction materials, inoperable machinery or parts thereof, dead or
rotting vegetation, trees, abandoned, inoperative or unusable automobiles
and vehicles and solid commercial or industrial waste.
§ 11-1.7. Administrative Provisions. [1976 Code § 60-7; Ord. No.
86-14; Ord. No. 2017-17]
health or safety of persons on, near or passing within the proximity of
premises where the said conditions exist.
a. Enforcement Officer. This chapter may be enforced by any official or
office of the Township. Such officials shall in the performance of his or
her duties herein, be deemed the enforcement officer.
b. Enforcement Procedure. Whenever an enforcement officer determines
that there is a violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give
notice of such violation to the person, persons or entities responsible
thereof under this section. Such notice shall be in writing and shall
include a concise statement of the reasons for its issuance. Such notice
shall be deemed to be properly and sufficiently serviced if a copy
thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address
of the person or entity upon which the same is served, as shown by the
most recent tax records of the municipality, or a copy thereof handed to
the person or persons, or a copy thereof left at the usual place of abode
or office of the persons or entities. Notice shall be given as aforesaid
within or without the municipality. The notice shall also state that
unless the violation is abated, removed, cured, prevented or desisted
within 10 days of the date of service of such notice (exclusive of the date
of service), a summons shall be issued for such violation. The
enforcement officer may extend the period for compliance with the
requirements of this section in regard to the violation stated in the
notice for a period in excess of the aforesaid 10 days if in his judgment,
the abatement, removal, prevention, cessation or cure of the condition
violated cannot reasonably be effected within the ten-day period; and in
such cases, the enforcement officer shall state such reasonably
required extended period of the notice, which shall then be applicable
instead of the aforesaid 10 days. In the event the violation is not abated,
removed, cured, prevented or desisted from or otherwise fully
remedied within the ten-day period or within such extended period as
set forth in the notice, pursuant to the foregoing, a summons shall be
issued against the person, persons, entity or entities so notified. Any
extension beyond 60 days must be approved by the Mayor and
Township Committee. The enforcement officer shall not be required to
provide notice as outlined in this section prior to issuance of a summons
§ 11-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1.7
1:381
§ 11-1.8. Violations and Penalties. [1976 Code § 60-8; Ord. No.
86-14; Ord. No. 2006-07 § VII]
Any person or entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
or any order promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction, be punishable
by the penalties stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 11-2. REMOVAL OF GRASS, WEEDS, BRUSH AND OTHER
DEBRIS.
§ 11-2.1. Duties of Owners and Tenants. [Ord. No. 96-40 § I]
Except as otherwise provided by subsection 11-1.5c, it shall be the duty
of the owner, tenant or person in possession of any dwelling or lands in
the Township, except for dedicated conservation easements, to keep the
lands free of brush, weeds, grass of six inches or higher, heavily matted
cut grass, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth,
garbage, litter, trash and debris, and any solid waste stored in such a way
that is accessible to and likely to be strewn about by animals such as but
not limited to dogs, cats, raccoons, birds or rodents, where the same are
inimical to the preservation of public health, safety and general welfare of
the Township, or which may constitute a fire hazard.
§ 11-2.2. Notice to Owners and Tenants. [Ord. No. 96-40 § I]
If the reported conditions are found to exist, after an investigation of any
complaint of a resident, officer, or employee of the Township relative to a
violation of this section or upon his own initiative, the Code Enforcement
Officer or his/her designee shall direct that a notice be sent to the owner,
to any person, persons, entity, or entities previously afforded notice for
the same or similar violations in the past one-year period.
c. Emergency Conditions. Whenever the enforcement officer finds that an
emergency condition in violation of the chapter exists, which condition
requires immediate attention in order to protect the public health or
safety, he may issue an order by service of notice as set forth in
paragraph b above, reciting the existence of such an emergency
condition and requiring that such action be taken by the violator as
soon as is reasonably necessary to meet the emergency.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary,
such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an
order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, and upon
objection in writing to the enforcement officer, any such person shall be
afforded a hearing before the Governing Body of the Township as soon
as is reasonably possible. After such a hearing and decision by the
Governing Body as to the existence or nonexistence of the emergency
condition, the Governing Body may continue such order in effect, or
modify or withdraw it, subject to the issuance of a summons for
violation thereof if such order is continued.
§ 11-1.7 HOLMDEL § 11-2.2
1:382
tenant or person in possession of the dwelling or land complained of in
writing either personally or by registered or certified mail to remove such
brush, weeds, grass, dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth,
filth, garbage, trash or other debris within a period not less than 72 hours
nor more than 10 days. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it if shall appear to
the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee that a second or subsequent
violation of this section has occurred within a six-month period as to the
same property, the notice requirements of this section shall not be
applicable unless during that six-month period the legal title to the property
shall have changed or possession of same shall have been changed. In
such case involving an alleged second or subsequent violation, the Code
Enforcement Officer may issue a notification demanding immediate
abatement of the condition and/or issue a summons for the violation of this
section without any further notification.
§ 11-2.3. Removal by Township, Costs Established as a Lien. [Ord.
No. 96-40 § I]
If the owner, tenant or person in possession of the dwelling or lands in
question shall fail to abate the condition complained of within the time
period specified after receipt of notice, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
cause the condition complained of to be abated, either by action of the
Department of Public Works or by engagement of an outside contractor,
and shall certify the cost to the Township Committee, which shall examine
the certificate and, if it is correct, cause the cost as shown thereon to
be charged against the dwelling or lands. The amount so charged shall
forthwith become a lien upon the dwelling or lands and shall be added to
and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon
such dwelling and lands, shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and
shall be collected and enforced by the same officer and in the same manner
as taxes. Costs shall be in addition to any penalties imposed for any violation
of this section.
§ 11-2.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 96-40 § I; Ord. No.
2006-07 § VIII]
In addition to any costs established by subsection 11-2.3, any person
convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be punishable by
the penalties stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 11-3. MAINTENANCE OF VACANT AND ABANDONED
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES.
§ 11-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-16]
a. CREDITOR – Shall mean, consistent with section 3 of P.L. 2008, c. 86, a
State chartered bank, savings bank, savings and loan association or any
credit union, or any person required to be licensed under the provisions
of the "New Jersey Residential Mortgage Lending Act," and any entity
§ 11-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-3.1
1:383
acting on behalf of the Creditor named in the debt obligation, including
but not limited to, mortgage loan servicers.
b. PUBLIC OFFICER – Shall mean the Code Enforcement Officer or his/
her designee.
c. VACANT AND ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY – Shall mean,
consistent with section 1 of P.L. 2010, c.70 (C.2A:50-73), residential real
estate for which a notice of violation has been issued pursuant to
Section 11-3 of this chapter and subsection b of section 1 of P.L. 2014,
c.35 (C.40:48-2.12s). Where a notice of violation has not been issued
pursuant to Section 11-3.3 of this chapter and subsection b of section 1
of P.L. 2014, c.35 (C.40:48-2.12s), residential property shall be deemed
vacant and abandoned where a mortgaged property is not occupied by
a mortgagor or tenant as evidenced by a lease agreement entered into
prior to the service of a notice of intention to commence foreclosure
according to section 4 of the "Fair Foreclosure Act," P.L. 1995, c.244
(C.2A:50-56) and at least two of the following conditions exist:
1. Overgrown or neglected vegetation;
2. The accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail on the
property;
3. Disconnected gas, electric, or water utility services to the property;
4. The accumulation of hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances
or materials on the property;
5. The accumulation of junk, litter, trash or debris on the property;
6. The absence of window treatments such as blinds, curtains or
shutters;
7. The absence of furnishings and personal items;
8. Statements of neighbors, delivery persons, or government
employees indicating that the residence is vacant and abandoned;
9. Windows or entrances to the property that are boarded up or
closed off or multiple window panes that are damaged, broken and
unrepaired;
10. Doors to the property that are smashed through, broken off,
unhinged, or continuously unlocked;
11. A risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or any adjoining
or adjacent property owners, exists due to acts of vandalism,
loitering, criminal conduct, or the physical destruction or
deterioration of the property;
12. An uncorrected violation of a municipal building, housing, or
similar code during the preceding year, or an order by municipal
§ 11-3.1 HOLMDEL § 11-3.1
1:384
§ 11-3.2. Registration of Vacant and Abandoned Properties. [Ord.
No. 2017-16]
authorities declaring the property to be unfit for occupancy and to
remain vacant and unoccupied;
13. The mortgagee or other authorized party has secured or winterized
the property due to the property being deemed vacant and
unprotected or in danger of freezing;
14. A written statement issued by any mortgagor expressing the clear
intent of all mortgagors to abandon the property; and
15. Any other reasonable indicia of abandonment.
a. A Creditor filing a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a
vacant and abandoned property, or a Creditor who has previously filed a
summons and complaint to foreclose on a residential property which
subsequently becomes vacant and abandoned, shall within 30 calendar
days after the building becomes vacant and abandoned or within 30
calendar days after assuming ownership of the vacant and abandoned
property, whichever is later; or within 10 calendar days of receipt of
notice from the Township, and annually thereafter, file a registration
statement for such vacant and abandoned property with the municipal
clerk on forms provided by the Township for such purposes. Any failure
to receive notice from the Township shall not constitute grounds for
failing to register the vacant and abandoned property.
b. Each vacant and abandoned property having a separate block and lot
number as designated in the official tax maps of the Township shall be
registered separately.
c. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and email address (if applicable) of a person 21
years or older, designated by the Creditor as the authorized agent for
receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf
of such Creditor in connection with the enforcement of any applicable
code.
d. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and email address (if applicable) of the firm and the
actual name(s) of the firm's individual principal(s) responsible for
maintaining the abandoned and vacant property. The individual or
representative of the firm responsible for maintaining the abandoned
and vacant property shall be available by telephone or in person on a
twenty-four-hour per day, seven-day per week basis. The two entities
may be the same or different persons. Both entities shown on the
statement must maintain offices in the State of New Jersey or reside
within the State of New Jersey.
§ 11-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-3.2
1:385
§ 11-3.3. Creditor Responsibility for Vacant and Abandoned
Properties. [Ord. No. 2017-16]
e. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration except for the initial registration which shall be valid
through December 31st of the year in which it was filed. The Creditor
shall be required to renew the registration annually as long as the
building remains vacant and abandoned and shall pay a registration or
renewal fee in the amount prescribed in paragraph i of this section for
each vacant and abandoned property registered.
f. The annual renewal shall be completed by January 1st each year. The
initial registration fee shall be prorated for registration statements
received less than 10 months prior to that date.
g. The Creditor shall notify the Municipal Clerk within 30 calendar days of
any change in the registration information by filing an amended
registration statement on a form provided by the Municipal Clerk for
such purpose.
h. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Township against the
Creditor.
i. Fee Schedule. The initial registration fee for each vacant and
abandoned property under the provisions of this section shall be $500.
The fee for the first annual renewal shall be $1,500 and the fee for the
second annual renewal shall be $3,000. The fee for any subsequent
annual renewal beyond the second renewal shall be $5,000.
a. A Creditor filing a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a
residential property within the Township shall be immediately
responsible for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the
exterior of the property, after the property becomes vacant and
abandoned, as defined in this section. This responsibility shall, include,
but not be limited to the following:
1. Posting a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address,
and telephone number of the Creditor, consistent with subsection
11-3.1a, the Creditor's in-State authorized agent for the purpose of
service of process consistent with subsection 11-3.2c, and the
Creditor's agent responsible for the day-to-day supervision and
management of the building, consistent with subsection 11-3.2d.
The sign shall be in such a location so as to be legible from the
nearest public street or sidewalk, whichever is nearer, but shall be
no smaller than eight inches by 10 inches.
2. Enclosing and securing the building against unauthorized entry as
provided in the applicable provisions of the Township Code or as
set forth in the rules and regulations supplementing those codes.
§ 11-3.2 HOLMDEL § 11-3.3
1:386
§ 11-3.4. Notice. [Ord. No. 2017-16]
3. Securing the building from unauthorized entry and maintain the
sign until the building is again legally occupied or demolished or
until repair or rehabilitation of the building is complete.
4. Ensuring that the exterior grounds of the structure, including
yards, sidewalks, walkways, rights-of-way, alleys, retaining walls,
attached or unattached accessory structures, and driveways, are
well-maintained and free from trash, debris, loose litter, and grass
and weed growth, including provision for regular grass cutting as
required by Township Code.
5. Providing for winterization of the property by the cessation of
water service to the property and the draining of water lines, other
than buildings with a fire sprinkler system.
6. Providing for the cessation of electric or gas utility services to the
property, other than buildings with a fire safety system.
7. Providing for Township access to the property to conduct exterior
and interior inspections of the building to determine compliance
with municipal codes, upon reasonable notice to the property
owner or designated agent.
b. Where a Creditor is located out-of-State, the Creditor shall be
responsible for appointing an in-State representative or agent to act on
the Creditor's behalf for the purpose of satisfying the requirements of
paragraphs c and d of subsection 11-3.2. Notice of said representative
or agent shall be provided to the Township Clerk in a manner that is
consistent with subsection a of section 17 of P.L. 2008, c.127
(C.46:10B-51a) (the "Save New Jersey Homes Act of 2008"), and shall
further include the full name and contact information of the in-State
representative or agent.
a. Any public officer designated by the Township or authorized municipal
official responsible for the administration of any property maintenance
or public nuisance code shall be authorized to issue a notice to a
Creditor that has filed a summons and complaint in an action to
foreclose on a residential property within the Township, if an
Enforcement Officer pursuant to subsection 11-3.5 determines that the
Creditor has violated this section by failing to provide for the care,
maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior of the property,
consistent with subsection 11-3.3a. Where a Creditor is an out-of-State
Creditor, the notice shall be issued to the representative or agent that
has been identified by the Creditor pursuant to subsection 11-3.3b of
this chapter and the Save New Jersey Homes Act of 2008.
b. The notice referenced in paragraph a of this subsection shall require
the Creditor to correct the violation(s) within 30 days of receipt of the
§ 11-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-3.4
1:387
§ 11-3.5. Enforcement Officers. [Ord. No. 2017-16]
The duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of this section is
conferred upon the Municipal Clerk, Construction Official, Zoning Officer,
Township Police, and any other duly appointed representatives.
§ 11-3.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2017-16]
Chapter 12
notice, or within 10 days of receipt of the notice if the violation presents
an imminent threat to public health and safety.
c. The issuance of a notice pursuant to paragraph a of this subsection
shall constitute proof that a residential property is vacant and
abandoned for the purposes of this chapter.
a. A Creditor subject to this section that is found by the Municipal Court of
the Township, or by any other court of competent jurisdiction, to be in
violation of the requirement to correct a care, maintenance, security, or
upkeep violation cited in a notice issued pursuant to this section shall
be subject to a fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines
imposed pursuant to this subsection shall commence 31 days following
the Creditor's receipt of the notice, except where the violation is
deemed to present an imminent risk to the public health and safety, in
which case any fines shall commence 11 days following receipt of the
notice.
b. An out-of-State Creditor subject to this section that is found by the
Municipal Court of the Township, or by any other court of competent
jurisdiction, to be in violation of the requirement to appoint an in-State
representative or agent shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day
of the violation. Any fines imposed on an out-of-State Creditor for the
failure to appoint an in-State representative or agent shall commence
on the day after the ten-day period set forth in paragraph (1) of
subsection a of section 17 of P.L. 2008, c.127 (C.46:10B-51) for
providing notice to the municipal clerk that a summons and complaint
in an action to foreclose on a mortgage has been served.
c. A Creditor subject to this section that is found by the Municipal Court of
the Township, or by any other court of competent jurisdiction, to be in
violation of the requirement to register a vacant and abandoned
property pursuant to subsection 11-3.2 shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding $2,000. Any fines imposed on a Creditor under this
paragraph shall commence 11 days following receipt of notice from the
Township pursuant to subsection 11-3.2a.
d. No less than 20% of any money collected by the Township pursuant to
this section shall be utilized by the Township for municipal code
enforcement purposes, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12(s)(1)(d).
§ 11-3.4 HOLMDEL § 11-3.6
1:388
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
§ 12-1. ENFORCEMENT OF THE UNIFORM FIRE SAFETY ACT.
§ 12-1.1. Adoption of Standards. [1976 Code § 44-10; Ord. No.
87-22; Ord. No. 90-44; Ord. No. 95-8; Ord. No. 97-16 § II; Ord. No.
2005-35 § I; Ord. No. 2010-09 § I]
There is hereby adopted by the Township of Holmdel for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing hazards to life or property from fire or
explosion, a certain code known as the "ICC International Fire Code, 2006,
and the ICC International Building Code, New Jersey Edition, 2006 except,
such portions as are hereafter deleted, modified, changed or amended; and
the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length
herein; and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate
limits of the Township of Holmdel. Pursuant to N.J.S. 40:49-5.1 et seq., the
aforesaid codes, which are printed in book form, are adopted by reference
thereto, and a copy of the printed codes, so plainly marked as to indicate
deletions, modifications, changes, and amendments thereto as hereinafter
shown, is annexed to this section and shall be a part of it as fully as if set
forth herein at length. Three copies of the printed code have been placed
on file in the office of the Township Clerk for the use and examination of the
public so long as this section shall remain in effect.
§ 12-1.2. Short Title. [1976 Code § 44-12; Ord. No. 86-1]
This section shall hereinafter be cited and designated as the "Holmdel Fire
Prevention Code."
§ 12-1.3. Establishment and Duties of Fire Prevention Bureau.
[1976 Code § 44-13; Ord. No. 86-1; Ord. No. 97-16 § II; Ord. No.
2000-07 § I]
a. Local Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention in the Township of Holmdel which is hereby established
pursuant to this section and which is hereby designated as the Local
Enforcing Agency (LEA) pursuant to the New Jersey State Uniform Fire
Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et seq.
b. Composition. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall consist of the Senior
Fire Official of the Bureau who shall be appointed by the Township
Committee pursuant to Title 11, Civil Service, of the New Jersey
Statutes. It shall be maintained and operated under the immediate
supervision of the Township Administrator or his duly appointed
designee. The Township may hire such other inspectors and employees
as may be necessary for fulfilling the duties set forth herein and in the
Fire Prevention Code. Such personnel shall be hired by the Township,
after consultation with the Senior Fire Official and the Fire Chief.
§ 11-3.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.3
1:389
§ 12-1.4. Board of Appeals. [1976 Code § 44-14; Ord. No. 86-1; Ord.
No. 97-16 § II; Ord. No. 2000-07 § I]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127, any person aggrieved by any order of the
Bureau shall have the right of appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals
of Monmouth County.
§ 12-1.5. Permits Required. [1976 Code § 44-15; Ord. No. 86-1; Ord.
97-16 § II; Ord. No. 2000-07 § I]
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et seq. the following permits shall be required:
c. Duties. The Bureau shall be charged with the duties of the enforcement
of this section and such other ordinances, rules and regulations of the
Township that pertain to fire prevention, protection and control,
including but not limited to making periodic inspections of Life Hazard
Uses (LHU's) pursuant to the New Jersey State Uniform Fire Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et seq.; making other inspections as deemed necessary
and listed hereinafter in Section 12-1.7; reviewing plans and issuing
permits; aiding the fire chiefs in the investigation of fire; coordinating
fire safety activities with the Holmdel Fire and Police Departments;
establishing and conducting programs for the promotion of fire safety,
prevention and education; maintaining an appropriate record system
and performing such related duties as may be assigned by the Township
Committee.
d. Salary. The salary of the Senior Fire Official, Fire Inspectors and any
other personnel in the Bureau shall be established by the Township
Committee as required by law.
e. Reports. The Fire Prevention Bureau shall file an annual report with the
Township Committee and the Fire Chief, in addition to any reports
required under the Uniform Fire Code. It shall contain all proceedings
under this article with such statistics as will show the nature and extent
of the performance of the duties of the office during the year.
f. The Senior Fire Official, inspectors and other employees shall be
subject to removal by the Township Committee for good cause and
pursuant to Title 11, Civil Service, of the New Jersey Statutes, where
applicable.
a. General. It shall be unlawful to engage in any business activity
involving the handling, storage or use of hazardous substances,
materials or devices; or to maintain, store or handle such materials; to
conduct processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or
property; to install equipment used in connection with such activities;
or to establish a place of assembly without first obtaining a permit from
the Fire Official.
b. Permit Types. Permits shall be obtained from the Fire Official for any of
the activities or uses listed as Type 1, 2, 3 or 4 permits in N.J.A.C.
§ 12-1.3 HOLMDEL § 12-1.5
1:390
§ 12-1.6. Permit Fees. [1976 Code § 44-16; Ord. No. 86-1; Ord. No.
87-22; Ord. No. 90-44; Ord. No. 95-8; Ord. No. 97-16 § II; Ord. No.
2000-07 § I; Ord. No. 2001-14 § I; Ord. No. 2005-35 § I; Ord. No.
2010-09 § I]
5:70-2.7 or for any activities or uses listed in subsections 12-1.6 and
12-1.7 of this chapter.
c. Application for Permit. Application for a permit required by this section
shall be made to the Fire Official in such form and detail as the Fire
Official shall prescribe. Applications for permits shall be accompanied
by plans or drawings as required by the Fire Official for evaluation of
the application.
d. Action on Application. Before a permit is issued, the Fire Official or the
Fire Official's designated representative shall make or cause to be
made such inspections or tests as necessary to assure that the use and
activity for which application is made complies with the provisions of
this section.
e. Conditions of Permit. A permit shall constitute permission to maintain,
store or handle materials, or conduct processes which produce
conditions hazardous to life or property, or to install equipment used in
connection with such activities in accordance with provisions of this
section. Such permissions shall not be construed as authority to violate,
cancel or set aside any of the provisions of this section. The permit shall
remain in effect until revoked, or one year unless otherwise specified.
Permits are not transferable and any change in use, operation or
tenancy shall require a new permit.
f. Approved Plans. Plans approved by the Fire Official are approved with
the intent that they comply in all respects to this section. Any omission
or error on the plans does not relieve the applicant of complying with all
applicable requirements of this section.
g. Revocation of Permit. The Fire Official may revoke a permit for approval
issued under the provisions of this section if upon inspection any
violation of the section exists, or if conditions of a permit have been
violated, or if there has been any false statement regarding
representation as to material fact in the application, date or plans on
which the permit or approval was based.
h. Suspension of Permit. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the
authorized work or activity is not commenced within six months after
issuance of the permit, or if the authorized work or activity is
suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time of
commencement.
i. Payment of Fees. A permit shall not be issued until the designated fees
have been paid.
§ 12-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.6
1:391
§ 12-1.7. Additional Required Inspection and Fees. [1976 Code
§ 44-17; Ord. No. 86-1; Ord. No. 90-44; Ord. No. 95-8; Ord. No.
97-16 § II; Ord. No. 2000-07 § I; Ord. No. 2001-14 § I; Ord. No.
2005-35 § I; Ord. No. 2010-09 § I]
In addition to the inspections and fees required pursuant to the Act and
regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the following annual
inspections and fees shall be required:
a. For the issuance of the permits described in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.7, the
following fees shall be collected:
1. Type 1: $45.
2. Type 2: $150.
3. Type 3: $300.
4. Type 4: $450.
b. Commercial storage facilities available to the general public on a "per
unit" basis: $10 per unit.
(This fee is in addition to the "square footage" fee required by
subsection 12-1.7)
c. For the issuance of a Certificate of Smoke Detector and Carbon
Monoxide Alarm Compliance (CSDCMAC) per N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3 the fee
shall be based upon the amount of time remaining before the change of
occupant is expected, as follows:
1. Requests for a CSDCMAC received more than four business days
prior to the change of occupant: $40.
2. Requests for a CSDCMAC received four business days or less prior
to the change of occupant: $80.
d. For the registration and inspection of Emergency Electrical Generating
System per subsection 12-1.9b: $50.
a. All businesses, including service businesses and apartment house
multiple dwellings, shall be inspected yearly with a fee schedule of:
1. $50 for the first 1,000 square feet of area.
2. $11 for each additional 1,000 square feet of area.
(Measurements shall be the exterior of the building and shall include the
total of all occupiable areas on all floors.)
b. Factories, assembly plants, wood working shops and other operations
employing the use of machinery or processes and not registered as a
life hazard use shall pay a minimum fee of $85. Any second or additional
buildings on the same property shall be a separate fee.
§ 12-1.6 HOLMDEL § 12-1.8
1:392
§ 12-1.8. Collection of Fees. [1976 Code § 44-18; Ord. No. 86-1; Ord.
No. 95-8; Ord. No. 97-16 § II; Ord. No. 2000-07 § I]
§ 12-1.9. Nursing Homes, Boarding Homes for Sheltered Care,
Rooming Houses and Boarding Houses. [1976 Code § 44-19; Ord.
No. 86-1; Ord. No. 95-8; Ord. No. 93-10; Ord. No. 97-16 § II; Ord.
No. 2005-35 § I]
a. The Division of Fire Safety in the Department of Community Affairs of
the State of New Jersey is hereby designated as the agency for the
collection of the annual registration fees associated with Life Hazard
Uses as set forth in the New Jersey State Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C.
5:70-1 et seq.
b. The Holmdel Fire Prevention Bureau is hereby designated as the
agency for the collection of the annual inspection and registration fees
for all other activities and uses set forth in subsections 12-1.6 and
12-1.7.
c. Collection of and accounting for the fees and penalties established
herein which are the obligation of the Holmdel Township Fire
Prevention Bureau shall be in accordance with the procedures set forth
in N.J.A.C. 5:71-2.6(b).
a. All nursing homes, boarding homes for sheltered care, rooming houses
and boarding houses licensed by the State, or otherwise operating in
the Township shall have automatic fire detection systems installed in
accordance with specifications as set forth in the New Jersey State
Uniform Fire Code. The system shall be connected to an approved
Central Station, which shall notify the Holmdel Police Department
simultaneously with the sounding of an audio-visual alarm in the facility.
There shall also be a monitoring device at each nursing station which
shall indicate when an alarm has been sounded. All systems shall have a
service contract, with a fire alarm service company, inspected and
tested semiannually and a copy of the contract along with the test
results report shall be forwarded to the Holmdel Township Fire
Prevention Bureau for their file.
b. Nursing homes and extended care facilities as defined by N.J.S.A.
30:13-1 et seq. are hereby required to install and maintain emergency
electrical generators having sufficient capacity to insure the provision
of basic essential services such as emergency lighting, life support
equipment, heat, fire alarm and suppression equipment, elevators, air
conditioning to supply 10% of resident population, sump pumps and
food preservation equipment. Said generators shall also be capable of
furnishing electrical power to heating systems in the event of public
utility power failures. The generating system required to be installed by
this subsection shall meet the basic intent and requirements of the
National Fire Protection Association (Standard #99), Section 4.4.1.1.
There shall be sufficient fuel capacity on hand for forty-eight-hour
operation of the generators.
§ 12-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.9
1:393
§ 12-1.10. Storage Facilities. [Ord. No. 2001-14 § I]
At least annually, the Fire Official, or his designated representative, shall
conduct inspections of all commercial structures used for the storage of
property. The purpose of the inspection is to ensure that any fire protection
systems are not blocked or otherwise inhibited from serving the purpose
for which they were designed and installed. The Fire Official may increase
the frequency of the inspections provided for in this section if violations
are noted, in order to assure that the violations are corrected and do not
proliferate.
§ 12-1.11. Violation and Penalties. [1976 Code § 44-20; Ord. No.
86-1; Ord. No. 2000-07 § I; Ord. No. 2001-14 § I]
Any person or persons, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this section, other than for violation of fire zone regulations
as hereinafter set forth, shall be liable to the penalties and other relief set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12 of the New Jersey State Uniform Fire Code and
Section 1-5 of the Township of Holmdel Code.
§ 12-2. FIRE ZONES. [1976 Code § 44-21; Ord. No. 86-1; Ord. No.
95-8; Ord. No. 2005-35 § I; Ord. No. 2010-09 § I]
A certificate signifying compliance with the terms and provisions of
this shall be supplied by nursing homes and extended care facilities
to the Township. Existing emergency generating systems meeting the
requirements of NFPA Standard #99 shall be deemed as meeting the
requirements of this subsection.
The owners or operators of covered facilities shall inspect and test the
emergency generating system installed in their facilities at least once
per month and keep a log of said inspections and tests. This log shall
indicate whether or not the system was fully functional on the date
of the test and shall be available, during regular business hours, for
inspection by Township officials.
The Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Official or Electrical Subcode
Official of the Township of Holmdel shall be responsible for performing
an annual inspection to insure compliance with the terms and
provisions of this subsection. The cost of said annual inspection shall
be $50 and shall be paid to the Township of Holmdel by the owner
or operator of the subject property. The annual inspection shall be for
the purpose of insuring that an emergency generating, system is in
place and fully functional. Records relating to these inspections shall be
kept in the office of the Construction Code Official of the Township of
Holmdel.80
80.Historical Note: These provisions were originally adopted as Ordinance No. 93-10 for the
reasons set forth in the preamble to Ordinance 93-10. Inadvertently these provisions were
not included in either the current codification or its predecessor codification, and are
hereby readopted because of this oversight.
§ 12-1.9 HOLMDEL § 12-2
1:394
a. Definitions. As used in this section:
FIRE LANE — Shall mean a paved area designated in accordance
with the provisions of this section which does typically bear vehicular
traffic as part of the traffic circulation system on the premises where
a building to which the public is invited has been located, but which
is intended to provide an immediate and unobstructed route for fire
fighting equipment and personnel on site.
FIRE ZONES — Shall mean a paved area adjacent to a building to
which the public is invited which does not typically accommodate the
flow of vehicular traffic and which has been designated as a fire zone
in accordance with the provisions of this section intended to provide
unobstructed and immediate access to any such building by fire fighting
equipment and personnel.
b. Designation of Zones. The Fire Official shall designate fire zones and
fire lanes pursuant to this section under the provisions of the New
Jersey State Uniform Fire Code.
c. Ingress/Egress. The fire zone fire lanes shall be established to insure
fire equipment and other emergency vehicles unobstructed means of
ingress and egress to such properties and the buildings, persons,
vehicles, fire hydrants and standpipes thereon in case of fire or other
emergency.
d. Striping and Lettering. Fire lanes shall be striped and lettered in yellow
on a paved surface which lettering shall remain legible. Lettering shall
read "Fire Lane No Parking." Approved "No Parking Fire Lane" signs
shall be provided, erected and maintained at the discretion of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention by the owner, owners or operators of
premises upon which a fire lane is established. Fire zones shall be
striped in yellow on a paved surface. Lettering on such paved surface
may not be required at the discretion of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
e. Signs. "No Parking — Fire Zone" signs shall be provided, erected and
maintained at the discretion of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, by the
owner, owners or operators of premises upon which a fire zone is
established.
f. Specifications. The number, location, length and width of fire zones
shall be determined by the Bureau of Fire Prevention. Such
determination and approval shall be based upon the size, type and
location of the buildings, the use to which the property is put, the
number of motor vehicles operated and parked upon the property, the
number of persons using and occupying the premises, the existing
means of ingress and egress, the total area of the property and all other
factors relevant to insuring speedy and safe ingress and egress of fire
fighting equipment.
§ 12-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2
1:395
§ 12-3. COMBUSTIBLE AND/OR FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS STORAGE.
[1976 Code § 44-22; Ord. No. 86-1; Ord. No. 2010-09 § I]
All businesses storing more than 24,999 gallons of combustible and/or
flammable liquid or gas shall be required to have on site not less than 20
five-gallon containers of approved High-Expansion (AR Type) Aqueous Film-
Forming (AFFF) concentrate This fire-fighting foam concentrate shall be
kept in a secure area of the premises where fire personnel can obtain access
with ease.
§ 12-4. EFFECTIVE DATE. [1976 Code § 44-25; Ord. No. 95-8; Ord.
No. 2010-09 § I]
This chapter shall become effective upon passage and publication according
to law and filing of a copy of the chapter with the Division of Fire Safety,
Department of Community Affairs.
§ 12-5. KEY BOX SYSTEM.
§ 12-5.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2010-09 § I]
The Governing Body of the Township finds that in order to better protect
the property and welfare of certain businesses, business patrons and Fire
Company members, a uniform system for rapid entry into certain buildings
in the event of a report of a fire emergency is required.
§ 12-5.2. Key Box Required, Type, Location. [Ord. No. 2010-09 § I]
g. Prohibited Acts. No person shall at any time park a motor vehicle in, or
otherwise obstruct in any way, any fire zone or fire lane established in
accordance with the terms of this section.
h. Jurisdiction. The Bureau of Fire Prevention and the Police Department
shall have concurrent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this
section. The Bureau of Fire Prevention is hereby authorized and
empowered to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient
to effectuate the purpose of the provisions of this section.
i. Violations. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section dealing with fire lanes and fire zones shall,
upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5 of the Township of Holmdel
Code. Each violation of any of the provisions of this section, and each
day the same is violated shall be determined and taken to be a separate
offense at the discretion of the court.
a. All nonresidential occupancies served by an internal automatic fire
detection system connected to a Central Station monitoring facility, or
having an external audible fire alarm, shall be provided with a key lock
box (Knox-Box®).
§ 12-2 HOLMDEL § 12-5.2
1:396
§ 12-5.3. Box Contents. [Ord. No. 2010-09 § I]
§ 12-5.4. Key Box Maintenance. [Ord. No. 2010-09 § I]
The operator of the building shall immediately notify the Fire Official and
provide the new key(s) when a lock or locks is changed or rekeyed. The new
key(s) will then be secured in the lock box by the Fire Official.
§ 12-6. through §12-10. (RESERVED)
§ 12-11. PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES AND
WORKPLACES.81
§ 12-11.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2005-25 § I]
When used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meaning:
BUSINESS — Shall mean any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint
venture, corporation or other business entities including retail
b. The key box shall be "UL Listed," of a manufacture, size, and type as
approved by the Holmdel Fire Prevention Bureau.
c. The key box shall be installed adjacent to an entrance to the structure
that provides ready access to the main fire alarm panel or to a remote
fire alarm annunciator panel.
d. The key box shall be connected to the building Fire Alarm Control Panel
via a switch and wiring conforming to NFPA 72. Opening or tampering
of the box shall send a supervisory signal to the Central Station as
defined in NFPA 72.
e. The key box shall be installed between six and eight feet above ground
level unless approved to be at a different height by the Holmdel Fire
Official.
a. Key or access card or access code for the door adjacent to the key box.
b. Key to Fire Alarm Control Room and Fire Sprinkler Control Room.
c. Key(s) to all mechanical rooms, including elevator machine room.
d. Key(s) to tenant spaces within the building, with the permission of the
tenant.
e. Key or other device required to reset any manual pull fire alarm boxes.
f. Card with emergency contact(s), name(s) and phone numbers.
g. All keys are to be provided with an identification tag.
81.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of prior Code §§ 44-1 — 44-5 and
Ordinance Nos. 17-78, 97-16 and 2000-07.
§ 12-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-11.1
1:397
establishments where goods and services are sold, as well as professional
corporations, offices of health providers and other entities under which
professional services are delivered.
EMPLOYEE — Shall mean a person who is employed by any employer for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profits, including those employed fulltime,
part-time, temporarily, contracted or from a third-party. Employee also
means any volunteer for a business or nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER — Shall mean any person, business or nonprofit entity which
employs the services of one or more persons.
ENCLOSED — Shall mean covered by a roof or enclosed by four or more
connected floor to ceiling walls with appropriate openings for ingress and
egress.
MALL — Shall mean any enclosed public walkway or hall area which serves
to connect retail or professional establishments.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT — Shall mean any enclosed area under the
control of an employer which employees frequent during the course of
employment.
PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC AREA — Shall mean any enclosed area to which
the public is invited or to which the public is permitted.
SMOKING — Shall mean inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted
cigarette, cigar, pipe, weed, plant or other combustible substances in any
manner or any form.
WORK AREA OR WORKPLACE — Shall mean any area of a place of
employment enclosed by floor to ceiling walls in which two or more
employees are assigned to perform work for an employer.
§ 12-11.2. General Restrictions. [Ord. No. 2005-25 § I; Ord. No.
2010-09 § I]
a. Regulation of Smoking in Places Accessible to the General Public.
1. All enclosed public and work areas available to and generally used
by the general public, including but not limited to:
(a) Retail stores;
(b) Banks;
(c) More theaters;
(d) All businesses and nonprofit entities;
(e) Laundromats;
(f) Museums;
(g) Galleries and libraries;
(h) Auditorium stages;
§ 12-11.1 HOLMDEL § 12-11.2
1:398
(i) Performance halls;
(j) Recital halls or any venue wherein performances or
demonstrations occur;
(k) Sports arenas or gymnasiums;
(l) All areas of healthcare facilities;
(m) All lobbies, hallways or common areas of multi-unit commercial
buildings;
(n) All lobbies, hallways or common areas of multi-unit residential
buildings;
(o) Polling places; and
(p) Private residences that are used as childcare or healthcare
facilities.
2. Any owner or operator of any establishment not specifically
covered in the above list may declare the entire establishment
SMOKE-FREE by posting notices as per the provisions of this
section and by notifying the Holmdel Township Health Department,
Fire Official or Code Enforcement Officer that the establishment
shall be covered under all provisions of this law.
b. Regulations of Smoking in Places of Employment (Including Places of
Employment with Fewer than 50 Employees). All employers within the
boundaries of Holmdel Township shall provide a smoke-free workplace
for all employees. Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed work
areas within the workplace without exception, including but not limited
to all common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, meeting rooms,
private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias,
employee lounges, stairs, restrooms and all other enclosed areas. The
entranceways to buildings used by the public, all outdoor entranceways
of buildings used by the public shall also be smoke-free.
c. Smoking Prohibited in Municipal Buildings. Smoking is prohibited in all
buildings and vehicles owned by the Township of Holmdel. There shall
be a conspicuously posted sign or signs indicating "SMOKING
PROHIBITED" or the appropriate "SMOKING PROHIBITED"
international symbol shall be posted. Smoking is also prohibited at the
entrances of the municipal buildings. The Township Administrator may
designate a smoking area outside of each building.
d. Smoking Regulation in Parks and Recreation Areas, Posting. Smoking
shall be prohibited in all Township parks and recreation areas except
where designated. All Township parks and recreation areas shall be
posted with a sign or signs indicating "SMOKING PROHIBITED - NO
SMOKING" or the international symbol for smoking prohibited. It shall
not be a defense to a charge under this paragraph that the accused did
not see such posting. The principal that all are deemed to know the law
§ 12-11.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-11.2
1:399
§ 12-11.3. Posting Notices. [Ord. No. 2005-25 § I]
NO SMOKING signs or the international no smoking symbol shall be clearly,
sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every building where smoking is
regulated by this section, by owner, operator, manager or other person
having control of such building or such place. Every building area regulated
by this section shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign
clearly stated that smoking is not allowed.
§ 12-11.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2005-25 § I]
The enforcement of this section will be implemented by the Holmdel
Township Health Department or its designee. Any citizen may initiate
enforcement by registering a complaint with the Holmdel Township Fire
Official, the Board of Health or the Code Enforcement Officer or Police
Department.
§ 12-11.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2005-25 § I]
It shall be a violation of this section for any owner, operator, manager or
controller of any premises subject to this section to fail to comply with any
of its provisions. It shall be unlawful to smoke where smoking is prohibited.
Any person who willfully violates any provision of this section shall be guilty
of an infraction punishable by a. a fine not exceeding $100 for the first
violation, b. a fine not exceeding $200 for the second violation, c. a fine not
exceeding $500 for any further violations.
§ 12-11.6. Nonretaliation. [Ord. No. 2005-25 § I]
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner
retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such
employee or applicant exercises any right to a smoke-free environment
afforded by this section.
§ 12-11.7. Applicable Laws. [Ord. No. 2005-25 § I]
No provision of this section will be construed or interpreted to allow
smoking areas otherwise restricted by other laws.
Chapter 13
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
§ 13-1. PARKS.
shall control. The Township Administrator shall designate and delineate
areas where smoking is permitted. Such areas shall be posted with
signs stating "Smoking Permitted" or the appropriate international
symbol for "Smoking Permitted" shall be posted.
§ 12-11.2 HOLMDEL § 13-1.1
1:400
§ 13-1.1. Purpose. [1976 Code § 55B-1; Ord. No. 25-77]
The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted for the protection,
regulation and control of parks owned and operated by the Township,
including driveways, sidewalks, paths, parking lots, buildings and all
facilities located within and upon public parks.
§ 13-1.2. Supervision of Operation and Maintenance. [1976 Code
§ 55B-2; Ord. No. 25-77; Ord. No. 2008-08 § I]
All parks in this municipality shall be operated and maintained under the
supervision of the Township Committee. The Township Committee may, by
resolution from time to time, delegate all or any aspects of such supervision
to the Director of Parks and Recreation or any other designated agency of
the Township.
§ 13-1.3. Hours of Operation. [1976 Code § 55B-3; Ord. No. 25-77;
Ord. No. 2008-08 § I]
Public parks shall be open during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to sunset each
day, except that the closing time of a public park may be changed by prior
permission and authorization issued by the Governing Body or the Director
of Parks and Recreation. No person shall, without permission, enter into or
remain in a public park except during the hours the park is open to the
general public.
§ 13-1.4. Township Facilities Limited Alcoholic Beverages. [1976
Code § 55B-4; Ord. No. 25-77; Ord. No. 16-79; Ord. No. 2005-11 § I;
Ord. No. 2005-28 § I; Ord. No. 2012-14]
No person shall be permitted to possess or consume alcoholic beverages
at any time within a public park or Township recreational facility without a
permit from the State of New Jersey, Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control,
and the Township of Holmdel subject to the following conditions:
a. The alcoholic beverages would be served at a special event or
celebration for which a Township facility has been specifically rented by
the group or organization seeking permission to serve alcoholic
beverages.
b. The special event or celebration would take place pursuant to a permit
issued in accordance with subsection 13-1.6. However, such application
must be filed with the Township Clerk at least three weeks prior to the
anticipated event.
c. The application filed pursuant to paragraph b above shall be
accompanied by a security deposit in the amount of $500. Regulations
relating to the refund of the security deposit shall be as established, in
writing, from time to time by the Township Administrator.
d. The permit issued pursuant to subsection 13-1.6 must state that
alcoholic beverages are permitted pursuant to this section.
§ 13-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1.4
1:401
§ 13-1.5. Refuse, Litter and Pollution. [1976 Code § 55B-5; Ord. No.
25-77]
No person shall leave or throw bottles, broken glass, ashes, wastepaper or
other rubbish or litter in any public park, except in a receptacle designated
for that purpose. No person shall throw or place any dirt, stone, rock, debris
or foreign or waste substance in any portion of a public park, and no person
shall cause any portion of a public park to become polluted or otherwise
unfit or unsafe for use by the public.
§ 13-1.6. Group Use; Permit Required. [1976 Code § 55B-6; Ord. No.
25-77]
No group or organization of 20 or more persons shall use or occupy a public
park without first having obtained a group use permit. Such permit shall be
obtained from the recreation agency of the municipality not later than seven
days before the proposed date of use. The granting or denial of such permit
shall be based upon the rules, regulations and standards promulgated by
the Governing Body. Group use shall be limited to designated areas. Adult
supervision of children's groups shall be required at all times.
§ 13-1.7. Picnics and Fires Restricted. [1976 Code § 55B-7; Ord. No.
25-77; Ord. No. 88-36]
No person in a park shall picnic or lunch in a place other than those
designated for that purpose. No person shall build, light or maintain a
fire within a public park except in a camp stove or fireplace in an area
designated for that purpose. All fires shall be extinguished immediately
upon completion of use of the camp stove or fireplace.
In the cases of prolonged scarcity of water from any cause; or upon
direction by the State of New Jersey; or in the event any local water
company servicing the Township of Holmdel advises that it is instituting
water usage restrictions, the Mayor of the Township of Holmdel shall have
the right to declare a fire emergency. Upon issuance of a declaration, fires
of any kind within the parks shall be prohibited.
e. At least one week prior to the event, the applicant(s) must file with the
Township Clerk, certificate of insurance evidencing liability insurance
of at least $1,000,000 coverage and naming the Township as an
additional insured. Such certificate must also include evidence of liquor
liability.
f. At least one week prior to the event, the applicant(s) must file with the
Township Clerk, a duly executed Hold harmless Agreement. Such form
of Agreement is available from the Township Clerk's Office.
g. Serving of alcohol shall be subject to rules and regulations set forth by
the Township Administrator.
§ 13-1.4 HOLMDEL § 13-1.8
1:402
§ 13-1.8. Fireworks Prohibited. [1976 Code § 55B-8; Ord. No. 25-77;
Ord. No. 2007-26 § I]
§ 13-1.9. Commercial Enterprises Restricted. [1976 Code § 55B-9;
Ord. No. 25-77]
No person shall engage in any commercial use or enterprise in a public
park, except that duly licensed vendors may sell items to individuals from
motor vehicles temporarily parked in the vicinity or parking area of a public
park.
§ 13-1.10. Gambling Prohibited. [1976 Code § 55B-10; Ord. No.
25-77]
No person shall gamble or play at games of chance or use any gambling
device in any public park.
§ 13-1.11. Use of Vehicles; Parking. [1976 Code § 55B-11; Ord. No.
88-36; Ord. No. 2008-08 § I]
No person shall use any portion of a public park, except those areas
designated for that purpose, for the purpose of travel with or parking of
vehicles, including mopeds. Footpaths and walks established for pedestrian
use shall not be used for vehicle travel. The use of any unregistered motor
vehicle, including but not limited to, snowmobile, trail bike, ATV, or minibike
is prohibited in any public park, with the exception of vehicles used in
conformance with the American with Disabilities Act.
§ 13-1.12. Interference with Others. [1976 Code § 55B-12; Ord. No.
88-36]
No person shall harass, obstruct, molest, assault or interfere with any
person lawfully within a public park; nor shall any person resist, obstruct,
molest, assault or interfere with any law enforcement officer or public
official in any public park.
§ 13-1.13. Prohibited Language; Nuisances. [1976 Code § 55B-13;
Ord. No. 88-36]
No person shall use abusive, threatening, boisterous, insulting or indecent
language in a public park; nor shall any action by any person constituting a
nuisance be allowed.
a. No person shall discharge or set off any fireworks, firecrackers,
torpedoes, rockets or noise makers of any kind in a public park unless
sponsored by a government entity.
b. Such permit shall be obtained from the Department of Parks and
Recreation after review by the Township Police Department, Township
Fire Official, and Township Committee.
§ 13-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1.14
1:403
§ 13-1.14. Sign Authorization and Restrictions. [1976 Code
§ 55B-14; Ord. No. 88-36]
The Governing Body hereby authorizes the installation of appropriate signs,
to be located within public parks, giving notice of the various rules and
regulations or portions thereof set forth in this chapter. No person shall
damage or deface any such sign.
§ 13-1.15. Permitted Uses in Cross Farm. [1976 Code § 55B-14A;
Ord. No. 88-24; Ord. No. 88-33]
As part of its authority to administer, maintain, operate and protect lands
for public parking, recreation and conservation purposes, the Township
shall include and allow the composting of leaves as a permitted use in Cross
Farm subject to the following conditions:
a. Leaf composting shall be a permitted use only in Cross Farm,
designated as Block 3, Lot 9, on the municipal tax map for a period not
to exceed five years.
b. The operation of a leaf compost facility shall be in accordance with
applicable State, county or local permits, conditions, and land use
regulations affecting park, recreation and conservation areas.
c. Lands which are regulated in whole or in part by the New Jersey Green
Acres Statutes and Rules and Regulations promulgated thereunder
shall fall under such statutes, rules and regulations which must be
enforced by the municipality.
d. The operation and maintenance of a leaf compost facility shall not
permanently nor completely alter or divert from a use other than public
recreation or conservation lands dedicated, owned or operated by the
Township.
e. The humus produced from a leaf compost facility shall be made
available to the general public of Holmdel or other government
agencies at designated times and places as may be prescribed and/or
used by the municipality for natural resource purposes.
f. Any sales proceeds derived from paragraph e above shall be dedicated
in a special account for park, recreation and conservation purposes in
the municipality.
g. No person shall dump or cause to be dumped any leaves or other
material at the compost facility or in any part of any park, recreation or
conservation area except as may be prescribed by the Township and
with the approval of the New Jersey Green Acres Program.
§ 13-1.14 HOLMDEL § 13-1.16
1:404
§ 13-1.16. Violations and Penalties. [1976 Code § 55B-15; Ord. No.
88-36]
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of a
violation of the terms of this section shall be liable to the penalty in Chapter
1, Section 1-5.
Except as otherwise provided each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this section exists, shall constitute a separate violation.
In addition, each violation of this section shall be considered a separate
offense upon each and every day in which a violation exists.
§ 13-1.17. Fossil Removal. [Ord. No. 2006-14 § I]
§ 13-1.18. Bayonet Farm — Limited Alcoholic Beverages. [Ord. No.
2008-26 § 1]
Alcoholic beverages may be permitted at Bayonet Farm subject to the
following conditions:
a. In order to protect the streambeds and public areas the following
restrictions shall apply:
1. Fossil collection may take place from dawn to dusk.
2. The collection of fossils is restricted to those found within the
streambed. This excludes the stream banks. Fossil extraction is
prohibited from the walls of the streambed above the stream water
line.
3. The use of equipment to remove fossils is restricted to trowels with
a maximum blade width of six inches and small screens with 144
square inch maximum screen area.
4. No person may harvest more than five fossils per day.
5. A group permit is required for the purpose of fossil collection by
groups of 15 or more.
b. Fees. Permits are obtained by contacting Holmdel Recreation
Department, in writing.
c. Penalty. Any person violating these rules shall, upon conviction, be
subject to the replacement, repair, and restoration of the damaged
property, and subject to one or more of the following: imprisonment in
the County Jail or in any place provided by the Township for the
detention of prisoners, for any term not exceeding 90 days; or by a fine
not exceeding $2,000; or by a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days.
a. The alcoholic beverages would be served at a special event or
celebration for which Bayonet Farms has been specifically rented by the
group or organization seeking permission to serve alcoholic beverages.
§ 13-1.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1.18
1:405
§ 13-2. FACILITY USAGE AND PROGRAM FEES.82
§ 13-2.1. Application for Use of Township Facilities. [Ord. No.
2014-07; Ord. No. 2018-12]
b. The food and alcoholic beverages would be prepared and served by a
caterer regularly engaged in the catering of special events or
celebrations.
c. The special event or celebration would take place pursuant to a permit
issued in accordance with subsection 13-1.6. However, such application
must be filed with the Township Clerk at least three weeks prior to the
anticipated event.
d. The application filed pursuant to paragraph c above shall be
accompanied by a security deposit in the amount of $500. Regulations
relating to the refund of the security deposit shall be as established, in
writing, from time to time by the Township Administrator.
e. The permit issued pursuant to subsection 13-1.6 must state that
alcoholic beverages are permitted pursuant to this section.
f. At least one week prior to the event, the applicant(s) must file with the
Township Clerk, certificate of insurance evidencing liability insurance
of at least $1,000,000 coverage and naming the Township as an
additional insured. Such certificate must also include evidence of liquor
liability.
g. At least one week prior to the event, the applicant(s) must file with the
Township Clerk, a duly executed Hold Harmless Agreement. Such form
of Agreement is available from the Township Clerk's Office.
h. Serving of alcohol shall be subject to rules and regulations set forth by
the Township Administrator.
a. The Township of Holmdel desires to establish regulations for the use of
all applicable facilities owned and operated by the Township of Holmdel
as set forth in this section.
b. For purposes of this Section 13-2, user group shall be defined to include
any individual or group representing an organization or group of
individuals that seek to use Township facilities for an organized activity.
c. All uses of Township Facilities by user groups governed by Section 13-2
shall require the issuance of a facility use permit. Applications for
facility use permits must be made through a facility use request in
writing and on the forms supplied by the Township. Forms may be
obtained from the Township's Recreation Department or on the
Township's website.
82.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance No. 2005-02, Ordinance No. 2006-26,
Ordinance No. 2008-23, Ordinance No. 2010-04, Ordinance No. 2011-06, Ordinance No.
2014-07, Ordinance No. 2016-05.
§ 13-1.18 HOLMDEL § 13-2.1
1:406
§ 13-2.2. Indoor Facilities. [Ord. No. 2014-07 § 32.1a; Ord. No.
2018-12]
d. The following terms shall govern all facility use requests by user
groups, and all issuances of facility use permits shall be conditioned
upon the following:
1. Applications must be submitted to the Township's Recreation Office
no less than 14 calendar days before the date of requested use.
2. The application shall be signed by an adult representative of the
user group requesting the facility use permit who shall be
considered the organization's authorized agent. The user group
must have the authorized agent or at least one other adult in
attendance while the facility is being used pursuant to the facility
use permit.
3. Applicants must agree that they shall assume responsibility for the
orderly and careful use of the facility for which they are seeking
approval.
4. Applicants must agree to indemnify and hold the Township
harmless from any and all claims, injuries and/or damages arising
out of the permitted use of the facility and must furnish evidence of
adequate liability insurance coverage of a minimum of $1,000,000
per person, incident and for property damage with such Certificate
of Insurance clearly naming the Township of Holmdel as
additionally insured for the period of time which the permit is being
issued.
5. Applicants agree they will not sublet or assign any permitted
facility. Only the individuals or organizations making reservations
for the fields or facilities may use them for the stated time on their
permit. Any unauthorized subletting or assignment will result in
the immediate forfeiture of the individual or organizations permit.
6. The Township shall not discriminate in making any of its facilities
available on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, sex,
sexual orientation, age, physical limitation, or any other protected
class under applicable law.
7. The issuance of a facility use permit to a user group shall not
constitute or imply in any way an endorsement by the Township of
the user group's aims, policies, or activities, and a user group
hereby agrees to not imply such Township endorsement in any of its
advertisements or announcements.
8. The Township Administrator, Governing Body and Recreation
Director shall deny any permit application if they determine that
the applicant fails to satisfy any of the applicable requirements
contained in Section 13-2 or if a user group has not paid permit
fees imposed by Section 13-2 in a timely fashion.
§ 13-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-2.2
1:407
a. The fees for the Senior/Community Center shall be:
1. Resident Fee (entire building) $125/hour.
2. Nonresident Fee (entire building) $250/hour.
3. Resident Fee (per section) $50/hour.
4. Nonresident Fee (per section) $100/hour.
5. Security Deposit (refundable) $250.
Minimum rental time is one hour — Maximum rental time is five hours.
Changes to the minimum and maximum rental time can be made at the
discretion of the Recreation Director or the Recreation Advisory
Committee.
b. Holmdel Township Bell Works Meeting Room.
1. This section shall govern the use of the Holmdel Township Bell
Works Meeting Room, located adjacent to the Holmdel Township
Library and Learning Center, in the Bell Works building at 101
Crawfords Corner Road in Holmdel (the "Meeting Room").
2. The Meeting Room facility consists of a meeting room that can
accommodate up to 200 people seated, and may be subdivided into
two smaller meeting rooms, each roughly one-half of the size of the
larger room. The room setup consists of tables and chairs. All other
audio visual equipment must be provided by the user group.
3. The Meeting Room may only be used for activities that are
customarily associated with a public library. Accordingly, the
Meeting Room shall not be used by user groups for any of the
following activities:
(a) Programs involving the sale, advertising or promotion of
products or services.
(b) Business firms and other for-profit organizations soliciting or
selling products or services, regardless of purpose.
(c) Private social functions, such as showers, birthday parties,
dances, recitals, and the like.
(d) Programs that would interfere with the Library or Bell Works
building operation by causing excessive noise, a safety hazard,
security risk, etc.
4. The following terms shall govern facility use requests by user
groups for the Meeting Room:
(a) Reservation requests will be accommodated as space is
available and by priority as determined by the Holmdel
Township. Reservations will be taken up to 30 days in advance.
§ 13-2.2 HOLMDEL § 13-2.2
1:408
Unless otherwise authorized by the Recreation Director,
Township Administrator or Township Committee, user groups
will be limited to one reservation per month.
(b) The Township reserves the right based upon the nature of the
reservation request to determine whether the entire Meeting
Room or only a subdivision thereof may be used by the user
group.
(c) Meeting Room reservations shall be made through the
Recreation Office during the hours of 8:30 a.m. — 4:30 p.m.,
Monday — Friday. Applications for Meeting Room use may be
submitted by email, mail, or by fax to the Recreation Office.
(d) A group using the Meeting Room must conclude their business
and leave the room in good order no later than 15 minutes
prior to the scheduled end time in the approved facility use
request.
5. The following fees shall apply to use of the Meeting Room:
Monday-
Friday 9:00
a.m. - 5:00
p.m.
Monday-
Friday 5:00
p.m. - 10:00
p.m.
Saturday/
Sunday
Maximum
Occupancy
200 people 200 people 200 people
Holmdel
Township
Library
programs
Free of Charge Free of Charge Free of Charge
Holmdel
Township
programs/
meetings
Free of Charge Free of Charge Free of Charge
Holmdel
Township Non-
Profit
Organizations
(see C below)
Free of Charge $50/hour $75/hour
Other Non-
Profits, Private
Businesses and
For-Profit
Organizations
$50/hour $75/hour $100/hour
Security
Deposit
(refundable)
$150 $150 $150
§ 13-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-2.2
1:409
For purposes of the above fee structure, the following definitions
shall apply:
(a) HOLMDEL TOWNSHIP LIBRARY PROGRAMS – Shall be
defined as programs sponsored and/or operated by the
Monmouth County Library Commission, in its capacity as
operator of the Holmdel Township Library and Learning
Center.
(b) HOLMDEL TOWNSHIP PROGRAMS/MEETINGS – Shall be
defined as programs sponsored and/or operated by the
Township of Holmdel, including but not limited to activities by
the Holmdel Recreation Department.
(c) HOLMDEL TOWNSHIP NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION – Shall
be defined as a user group constituted as a legally-established
entity with current non-profit status, demonstrated by proof of
proper tax and/or corporate filings to the Township, which
must be re-submitted on an annual basis, and additionally
comprised with 65% or more of its members as Holmdel
Township residents.
(d) The rental fee and security deposit may be paid by cash, check
or money order and shall accompany the application. If
payment is made by check or money order, it must be made
payable to the Holmdel Township with the name and phone
number of the person or organization requesting the room
printed on the check. Fees will be returned if the reservation
cannot be confirmed, or if due to inclement weather or other
unforeseen circumstances, the Township and/or Bell Works
needs to close unexpectedly. If the user group chooses to
cancel its reservation, the Township must be given two
business days' prior notice; otherwise the room rental fee will
not be refunded.
(e) When the Meeting Room is used pursuant to this Section, a
Holmdel Township employee must be on site during the
duration of the facility use. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
Holmdel Township employee need not be present for Holmdel
Township Library programs, provided an employee of the
Monmouth County Library Commission assumes the
appropriate responsibilities for the Meeting Room on behalf of
the Township.
6. The following are additional provisions governing the use of the
Meeting Room:
(a) Food and drink are not permitted.
§ 13-2.2 HOLMDEL § 13-2.2
1:410
§ 13-2.3. Outdoor Facilities. [Ord. No. 2014-07 § 3; 3-2.1i; Ord. No.
2016-05; Ord. No. 2018-12]
(b) The Meeting Room must be left neat and clean after its use.
User groups will be charged for damage to rooms or equipment
beyond normal wear and tear at the current replacement cost.
(c) Materials may not be affixed to the walls, ceiling or windows.
(d) User groups are required to comply with any applicable
copyright laws in their use of print, film, video, music, or other
media, and are also responsible for observing the policies
associated with the Public Performance Site License and
admission policies of the Motion Picture Association of
America (MPAA) when showing rated films as applicable.
(e) The meeting room is handicap accessible. User groups using
the Meeting Room are responsible for providing any additional
accommodations that may be required pursuant to the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or other applicable law,
including but not limited to auxiliary aids and services to
persons requiring accommodations.
(f) The Township does not provide storage space for user groups
using the Meeting Room.
(g) The Township reserves the right to revoke reservation
privileges and refuse to book Meeting Room space for user
groups who do not comply with the guidelines of this policy or
fail to pay any assessed fees or fines. The Township further
reserves the right to pursue legal recourse for any violations of
the terms governing use of the Meeting Room, including but
not limited to this Ordinance.
a. The Holmdel Township Department of Parks and Recreation shall
sponsor adult and youth programs at Township Outdoor Facilities and
the fees will be recommended by the Recreation Director.
b. The Township Recreation Director shall establish user fees for activities
at Township Outdoor Facilities and to update the fees on a periodic
basis as may be required.
c. Classification and Prioritization of Approved User Groups. User groups
using Township permitted programs and Outdoor recreational facilities
pursuant to this Section shall be classified as stated below:
1. Holmdel Township sponsored events.
2. Holmdel Board of Education sponsored events.
3. Resident Children's group. A Holmdel group that consists of school
age children (i.e. H.Y.A.A., Holmdel Football Association, Scout
Groups).
§ 13-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-2.3
1:411
§ 13-2.4. Annual Fees for Certain User Groups. [Ord. No. 2014-07
§ 3; 3-2.1i; Ord. No. 2016-05; Ord. No. 2018-12]
§ 13-2.5. Fee Adjustments. [Ord. No. 2014-07 § 3-2.1j; Ord. No.
2016-05]
4. Principally Holmdel Children's Group. A group that is intended to
consist of a significant number (100 or more) of Holmdel residents
or an organization whose membership consists of significant
percentage (50% or more) of Holmdel residents or both (i.e.
Holmdel F.C.).
5. Nonresident Group. A nonresident group that is not intended to
consist of only Holmdel residents (less than 50% resident).
6. For profit group (resident or nonresident). A for profit group who
intends to run a program/event for the sole purpose of earning a
profit (i.e. private camps/clinics, etc).
d. Scheduling of uses pursuant to this Section shall be granted in the
following priority order.
1. Holmdel Township.
2. Holmdel Board of Education.
3. Holmdel Children's groups.
4. Holmdel Adult Groups.
5. Principally Holmdel Children's Groups (50% or more residents).
6. Nonresident Groups.
7. For Profit Groups.
a. The Holmdel Township Department of Parks and Recreation shall
sponsor adult and youth programs and the fees will be recommended by
the Recreation Director.
b. The Township Recreation Director shall establish user fees for activities
at Township Facilities and to update the fees on a periodic basis as may
be required.
a. The Holmdel Township Department of Parks and Recreation shall
sponsor adult and youth programs and the fees will be recommended by
the Recreation Director.
b. The Township Recreation Director shall establish user fees for activities
at Township Facilities and to update the fees on a periodic basis as may
be required.
§ 13-2.3 HOLMDEL § 13-2.6
1:412
§ 13-2.6. Program Fees. [Ord. No. 2005-02 § 2; Ord. No. 2005-22 § 1;
Ord. No. 2011-06 § 1; Ord. No. 2014-07; Ord. No. 2016-05]
§ 13-3. SWIM CENTER.83
§ 13-3.1. Establishment. [1976 Code § 69-1; Ord. No. 19-83]
§ 13-3.2. Fees and Charges; Membership Applications. [1976 Code
§ 69-3; Ord. No. 19-83; Ord. No. 3-84; Ord. No. 90-20; Ord. No. 91-8;
Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 95-5 § 1; Ord. No. 96-7; Ord. No. 97-6 § 1;
Ord. No. 98-15 § 1; Ord. No. 2003-04 § 1; Ord. No. 2004-13 § 1; Ord.
No. 2005-07 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-04 § 1; Ord. No. 2008-06 § 1; Ord.
No. 2009-05 § 1; Ord. No. 2011-02; Ord. No. 2011-07; Ord. No.
2012-05; Ord. No. 2014-02; Ord. No. 2015-01; Ord. No. 2016-02;
Ord. No. 2018-03]
a. The Holmdel Township Department of Parks and Recreation shall
sponsor adult and youth programs and the fees will be recommended by
the Recreation Director.
b. The Township Recreation Director shall establish user fees for activities
at Township Facilities and to update the fees on a periodic basis as may
be required.
a. There is hereby established the Holmdel Swim Center ("Center").
b. The Center shall be and is located on lands owned by the Township of
Holmdel, situated on Holmdel-Keyport Road, adjacent to lands owned
by the New Jersey Highway Authority in the Township of Holmdel, New
Jersey.
c. The Center shall be maintained for recreational purposes pursuant to
this section, as amended and supplemented from time to time by the
Township Committee.
d. All facilities, including buildings, swim pools, tennis courts, supplies,
equipment, machinery and appurtenances shall be and remain the
property of the Township of Holmdel. All personal property shall be
inventoried at least twice each year during the month of April and again
at least once each year in September. Each inventory shall be filed with
the Superintendent of Recreation and with the Pool Advisory
Committee established by this section.
a. Memberships. The classes of membership and fees for the year are as
follows. All fees shall be paid in full.
1. Resident family membership:
83.Editor's Note: Refer to Chapter 2, subsection 2-53.4 Swim Center for the establishment of
the Pool Advisory Committee.
§ 13-2.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-3.2
1:413
Prior to April 15 $585
After April 15 $645
2. Resident individual membership 18 years or older, proof required:
Prior to April 15 $330
After April 15 $385
3. Resident senior citizen membership 62 years or older, proof
required:
Prior to April 15 $135
After April 15 $155
4. Non-resident family:
Prior to April 15 $780
After April 15 $830
5. Non-resident individual membership 18 years or older, proof
required:
Prior to April 15 $425
After April 15 $475
6. Non-resident senior citizen membership 62 years or older, proof
required:
Prior to April 15 $185
After April 15 $205
7. August/Labor Day only Family (membership available ONLY after
seasonal membership reaches capacity).
Resident family: $400
Non-resident family: $445
8. August/Labor Day only Individual (membership available ONLY
after seasonal membership reaches capacity).
Resident: $250
Non-resident: $295
9. Swim Lessons.
Members: $50 class
Non-Members: $75 class
10. Swim Team Fee (member):
§ 13-3.2 HOLMDEL § 13-3.2
1:414
§ 13-3.3. Dedication of Revenues. [1976 Code § 69-4; Ord. No.
19-83]
First Child: $80
Each Additional Child: $65
Late Fee after 6-20-2015: $15 each child
Swim Team Individual
(membership limited to swim
team):
Resident $250
Non-Resident $275
Volunteer Work Bond $50
11. Guest Book - Book of five Passes: $40.
12. Daily Guest Pass (Members): $10.
Twilight Guest Pass (after 5:00 p.m. - Members): $5
13. Replacement ID Card Fee: $10.
14. Labor Day Guest Fee - Guest of Member: $5.
15. Family Day Entrance Fee (non-member): $5.
b. Guest books may be purchased as follows: family members may
purchase three books; individual memberships may purchase two
books; senior citizen memberships may purchase one book. Books may
be purchased through the Recreation Office (Township Hall);
nonrefundable. Guest passes are required for guests ages two and up.
c. Any member or guest 17 years or younger must be accompanied by a
member 18 years of age or older. All guests must be accompanied by a
pool member.
d. Senior citizen relatives, 62 years or older (proof required), fully attired
and not desirous of swimming, may enter pool complex free of charge.
The relative must be accompanied by pool member 13 years of age or
older.
e. Prior to April 1 of each year, the Pool Advisory Committee shall publish
and issue pool membership applications and information and shall
provide for payment of fees so as to ensure sufficient moneys to
properly operate the swim center for the season.
a. All revenues received from all sources, including membership fees,
guest fees, special event fees, if any, and food stand income, shall be
dedicated revenues to be used solely for the payment of bonded
indebtedness, operation, care and maintenance of the Center. The
bonds heretofore authorized by ordinances of the Township Committee,
§ 13-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-3.3
1:415
§ 13-3.4. Rules and Regulations. [1976 Code § 69-5; Ord. No. 19-83]
The Township Committee hereby adopts by incorporation the rules and
regulations for the operation of the Center promulgated by the Pool
Advisory Committee.84
§ 13-3.5. Liability. [1976 Code § 69-6; Ord. No. 19-83; Ord. No.
2008-08 § 1]
§ 13-3.6. Violations and Penalties. [1976 Code § 69-7; Ord. No.
19-83]
duly adopted, shall be regarded as having been authorized for selfliquidating
purposes within the intent and purpose of N.J.S.A.
40:61-22.23 and the Local Bank Law of the State of New Jersey.
b. The Township Committee shall establish, charge and collect from
revenues of the Center an amount or amounts sufficient to reimburse
the Township for miscellaneous administrative services provided by the
Township to the Center through the Clerk, Treasurer, Administrator,
Attorney, Engineer, Auditor or any Township office or department.
c. All Center accounts shall be kept separate and distinct from any other
accounts of the Township (N.J.S. 40:61-22.26).
d. Any annual appropriation of moneys appearing in the Township budget
shall be covered by and offset by appropriate revenues to be raised
from the users of the swim pool facilities of the Center.
a. The Holmdel Swim Center will not be responsible for valuables brought
into any area of the pool property.
b. All persons using the Holmdel Township Pool Center's facilities do so at
their own risk and sole responsibility. Neither Holmdel Township, the
Township Committee, the Recreation Advisory Council, the Pool
Committee, employees of the Pool Center nor other Township
employees assume responsibility or shall have any personal liability for
any act, accident or injury in connection with the use of the facility.
Members and their guests agree with Holmdel Township for and in
consideration for the use of the Pool Center's facilities and other good
and valuable considerations to make no claim against Holmdel
Township or any representative of the Township or the Pool Center for
or on account of any loss or damage sustained.
c. Members agree to be responsible for actions of their children and their
guests which may lead to property damage or personal injury to other
members.
a. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction in actions for
violation of any rules set forth in this section. The rules shall be
84.Editor's Note: Refer to subsection 2-53.4, the establishment of the Pool Advisory Center.
§ 13-3.3 HOLMDEL § 13-3.6
1:416
§ 13-4. TENNIS CENTER.
§ 13-4.1. Establishment. [1976 Code § 71A-1; Ord. No. 91-9]
§ 13-4.2. Fees and Charges. [1976 Code § 71A-3; Ord. No. 91-9; Ord.
No. 94-11; Ord. No. 2000-2 § 1; Ord. 2008-08 § I; Ord. No. 2011-05]
enforced by the same proceedings and processes, and the practice
for the enforcement thereof shall be the same as that provided by
law for the enforcement of other ordinances of the Township (N.J.S.
40:61-22.28).
b. Any person who shall violate any rule of the Swim Center shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty established in Chapter 1, Section
1-5.
c. All moneys collected either as fines or penalties for violation of a rule
shall become part of the funds of the municipality (N.J.S. 40:61-22.29).
a. There is hereby established the Holmdel Tennis Center, ("Center").
b. The Center shall be and is located on lands owned by the Township of
Holmdel, situated on Holmdel Road, adjacent to the lands owned by the
New Jersey Highway Authority in the Township of Holmdel, New Jersey.
c. The Center shall be maintained for recreational purposes pursuant to
this section as amended and supplemented from time to time by the
Township Committee.
d. All facilities including buildings, tennis courts, supplies, equipment,
machinery and appurtenances shall be and remain the property of the
Township. All personal property shall be inventoried prior to opening of
the season and upon conclusion of the season. Each inventory shall be
filed with the Superintendent of Recreation and with the Tennis
Committee established by this section.
a. Seasonal Memberships. The classes of membership and the fees for the
year are as follows. All fees must be paid in full.
1. Resident family membership: $150.
2. Resident individual membership (19 years or older, proof required):
$100.
3. Resident individual junior membership (18 years and younger):
$30.
4. Resident senior citizen membership (62 years or older, proof
required): $75.
5. Nonresident family: $175.
§ 13-3.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-4.2
1:417
§ 13-4.3. Rules and Regulations. [1976 Code § 71A-4; Ord. No. 91-9]
§ 13-4.4. Liability. [1976 Code § 71A-5; Ord. No. 91-9; Ord. No.
2008-08 § 1]
§ 13-4.5. Violations of Rules and Regulations. [1976 Code § 71A-6;
Ord. No. 91-9]
6. Nonresident individual membership (18 years or older, proof
required): $130.
7. Nonresident individual junior membership 17 years and younger):
$50.
8. Nonresident senior citizen membership (62 years or older, proof
required): $85.
9. Husband/Wife: Resident: $130. Nonresident: $150,000.
b. Guest Pass Policy. Season permit holders, only: $10/pass.
a. The Township Committee hereby adopts by incorporation the rules and
regulations for the operation of the Center promulgated by the Tennis
Committee.85
a. The Township Tennis Center will not be responsible for valuables
brought into any area of the property.
b. All persons using the Holmdel Township Tennis Center's facilities do so
at their own risk and sole responsibility. Neither Holmdel Township, the
Township Committee, the Recreation Advisory Council, the Tennis
Committee, employees of the Tennis Center, nor other Township
employees assume responsibility or shall have any personal liability for
act, accident or injury in connection with the use of the facility.
Members and their guests agree with Holmdel Township for and in
consideration for the use of the Tennis Center's facilities and other good
and valuable considerations, to make no claim against Holmdel
Township or any representative of the Township or the Tennis Center
for or on account of any loss or damage sustained.
Members agree to be responsible for actions of their children and their
guests which may lead to property damage or personal injury to other
members.
a. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction in actions for
violation of any rules set forth in this section. The rules shall be
enforced by the same proceedings and processes, and the practice for
the enforcement thereof shall be the same as that provided by law for
85.Editor's Note: See subsection 2-53.3 for the establishment of the Tennis Advisory
Committee.
§ 13-4.2 HOLMDEL § 13-4.5
1:418
Chapter 14
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
the enforcement of other ordinances of the Township. (N.J.S.
40:61-22.28).
b. Any person who violates this section shall, after conviction, be liable to
the penalty in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
c. All moneys collected either as fines or penalties for violation of a rule
shall become part of the funds of the municipality. (N.J.S. 40:61-22.29).
§ 13-4.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-4.5
1:419

ARTICLE I
Administration of Low- and Moderate-Income Housing86
§ 14-1. INTENT. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-1; Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-1]
It is the intent of this Article to regulate the development and management
of low- and moderate-income units in compliance with the Housing Plan
Element and Fair Share Plan of the Township of Holmdel.
§ 14-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-2; Ord. No. 2013-02
§ 14-2]
The terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings provided in the Fair
Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.) and the Council on Affordable
Housing Regulations (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., 5:91-1 et seq., 5:92-1 et
seq., 5:93-1 et seq., 5:94-1 et seq. and 5:95-1 et seq.). Specifically, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — Shall mean the entity responsible for
administering the affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable
housing program for the Township to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLAN — Shall mean the Township of Holmdel's
Housing Plan Element and Fair Share Plan.
COAH — Shall mean the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — Shall mean the employee charged by
the Governing Body with the responsibility for oversight and administration
of the affordable housing program for the Township.
UHAC — Shall mean the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
§ 14-3. ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT AND MUNICIPAL HOUSING
LIAISON. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-3; Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-3]
a. Administrative Agent.
1. The Township has delegated to its Administrative Agent the day-today
responsibility for implementing practices and procedures
designed to ensure effective compliance with the controls set forth
in this chapter, the Affordable Housing Plan, the COAH regulations
and the provisions of all Affordable Housing Agreements. The
Township, however, shall retain the ultimate responsibility for
ensuring effective compliance with the requirements.
2. The Administrative Agent's duties shall include the responsibility to
income qualify low- and moderate-income households; to place
86.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 87-5A, 87-11,
87-13, 88-22, 90-13, 90-35, 91-5, 93-6, 93-12, 94-30, 96-36 and 97-12.
§ 14-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-3
1:421
income eligible households in low- and moderate-income units
upon initial occupancy; to provide for the initial occupancy of lowand
moderate-income units with income-qualified households; to
continue to qualify households for reoccupancy of units as they
become vacant during the period of affordability controls; to assist
with advertising and outreach to low- and moderate-income
households; to enforce the terms of the deed restrictions and
mortgage loans as per N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.; to take
enforcement action, as authorized by this chapter and N.J.A.C.
5:80-26-1 et seq., against any owner for violation of this chapter,
the Affordable Housing Plan; any Affordable Housing Agreement
with the Township or any of housing affordability controls included
in the COAH's regulations; and such other responsibilities set forth
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
3. The fees associated with the administration of this chapter by the
Administrative Agent shall be paid from the Township Development
Fee Account and partially-reimbursed by the owner of restricted
rental units and sellers or resellers of restricted ownership units.
Owners of restricted rental units will be charged a fee of $500 for
each income-certified household that is provided to the owner for
the purpose of filling a vacancy.
Sellers or resellers of restricted ownership units will be charged
a fee of 2.75% of the sale price for services provided by the
Administrative Agent related to the sale or resale of their home.
This fee shall apply to sellers who submit a signed intent to sell
their restricted ownership units to the Administrative Agent on or
after January 1, 2013 and the fee shall be collected at closing and
paid directly to the Administrative Agent.
b. Municipal Housing Liaison.
1. There is hereby established the position of Municipal Housing
Liaison for the Township.
2. Subject to the approval of COAH, the Municipal Housing Liaison
shall be appointed by the Governing Body and may be a full- or
part-time municipal employee.
3. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight
and administration of the affordable housing program for the
Township, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out:
(a) Serving as the Township's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the State, affordable housing providers,
Administrative Agents, and interested households;
(b) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Affordable
Housing Plan;
§ 14-3 HOLMDEL § 14-3
1:422
§ 14-4. DEVELOPER'S RESPONSIBILITIES. [Ord. No. 2006-12
§ 14-4; Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-4]
The responsibilities of developers of low- and moderate-income housing
shall include but not be limited to the following:
(c) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as
required by COAH;
(d) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
Administrative Agents, as applicable;
(e) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(f) If applicable, serving as the Administrative Agent for some or
all of the restricted units in the Township.
4. Subject to approval by COAH, the Township may contract with or
authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency
charged by the Governing Body, which entity shall have the
responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of
the Township. If the Township contracts with another entity to
administer all or any part of the affordable housing program,
including the affordability controls and affirmative marketing plan,
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting
Administrative Agent.
5. Compensation shall be fixed by the Governing Body at the time of
the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
a. Submit to the Township a description of the mechanism to be used to
ensure that the required low- and moderate-income units are sold or
rented only to low- and moderate-income households for a period of not
less than 30 years.
b. Submit information as to financing terms readily available to low- and
moderate-income households for use by the Administrative Agent in
computing maximum sales prices.
c. Market all low- and moderate-income units in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
d. Submit quarterly reports to the Administrative Agent detailing the
number of low- and moderate-income households who have signed
leases and purchase agreements, as well as the number who have taken
occupancy of lower-income units, including household size, number of
bedrooms in the unit, sales price and monthly carrying costs or, in the
case of rental units, the monthly rental charges and utilities included.
e. The developer's responsibilities hereunder shall expire automatically
with respect to for-sale low- and moderate-income units upon the date
§ 14-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-4
1:423
§ 14-5. OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITIES. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-5;
Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-5]
The responsibilities of owners of a low- or moderate-income unit include but
are not limited to the following:
§ 14-6. LOW- AND MODERATE-INCOME SPLIT. [Ord. No. 2006-12
§ 14-6; Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-6]
The affordable housing units provided through inclusionary developments
shall be divided equally between low- and moderate-income households. At
least half of all units in each bedroom distribution and half of all rental units
shall be available for low-income households throughout the affordability
control period.
§ 14-7. BEDROOM DISTRIBUTION. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-7; Ord.
No. 2013-02 § 14-7]
upon which the last low- and moderate-income unit within the
particular development is sold by the developer. With respect to rental
low- and moderate-income units, the developer's responsibilities shall
be assumed by the landlord and shall be performed by the landlord so
long as such unit is a rental low- and moderate-income unit and subject
to the restrictions of this chapter.
a. Notifying the Administrative Agent in writing no less than 90 days prior
to any proposed sale or rental of a low- or moderate-income unit.
Owners shall not execute any purchase agreement, lease agreement,
convey title or otherwise deliver possession of a low- or moderateincome
unit without the prior approval of the Administrative Agent.
b. Unless otherwise exempt pursuant to this chapter, the owner shall only
resell or rent his or her low- or moderate-income unit to a qualified
purchaser or renter as determined by the Administrative Agent.
c. Unless otherwise exempt pursuant to this chapter, the owner shall be
responsible for guaranteeing that the necessary documents are
executed and filed at the closing of title or rental of a low- or moderateincome
unit to assure that the unit remains affordable to and occupied
by low- or moderate-income households.
d. The owner shall adhere to all obligations and requirements set forth in
the Affordable Housing Agreement with the Township and such other
requirements imposed upon the owner by this chapter, the Affordable
Housing Plan, COAH regulations or any other applicable law.
a. Affordable housing units, other than units intended for occupancy by
senior-citizen households, shall have the following distribution of
bedroom types:
1. At a minimum, 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two bedroom units; and
§ 14-4 HOLMDEL § 14-7
1:424
§ 14-8. UNIT LOCATION. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-8; Ord. No.
2013-02 § 14-8]
Affordable housing units or neighborhoods shall be situated on the
development tract in accordance with accepted practice for projects which
contain a mix of market and affordable units, and shall be accessible to
common open space, community facilities and services.
§ 14-9. PHASING. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-9; Ord. No. 2013-02
§ 14-9]
Final site plan approval shall be contingent upon the development meeting
the following phasing schedule, whether developed in one stage or in two
or more stages.
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
Percentage of Market Housing
Units Completed
0 25
10 25 + 1 unit
50 50
75 75
100 90
— 100
§ 14-10. OCCUPANCY SELECTION. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-10; Ord.
No. 2013-02 § 14-10]
2. At a minimum, 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three bedroom units; and
3. The combination of efficiency and one bedroom units shall be no
greater than 20% of the total low- and moderate-income units; and
4. The remainder, if any, may be allocated at the discretion of the
developer.
b. Affordable housing units intended for occupancy by senior-citizen
households need contain no more than one bedroom. At a minimum, the
number of bedrooms shall equal the number of senior citizen low- and
moderate-income units within the inclusionary development.
a. Residency and Size of Household Priorities.
1. The Township may designate certain sales and/or rental units for
preferential purchase or rent by income eligible members of a
household that resides or works in COAH Region 4.
§ 14-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-10
1:425
§ 14-11. INCOME ELIGIBILITY STANDARDS. [Ord. No. 2006-12
§ 14-11; Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-11]
2. A household of the size provided for in this paragraph shall have
priority over households with a lesser number of persons for one
bedroom, two bedroom and three bedroom units.
3 bedroom 4 or more persons (a household of more than 4
shall be treated the same as a household of 4)
2 bedroom 3 persons, or a 2 person household consisting of
a single parent and a child
3. All applicants shall be classified in one of the priority categories set
forth above on the basis of the information provided in the initial
application.
b. Appeals. In the event that an applicant is determined to be ineligible for
a low- or moderate-income unit by the Administrative Agent, the
applicant may submit additional proofs and request reconsideration.
Such request for reconsideration shall be made within 10 days of
receipt of notice of ineligibility by the applicant.
a. The Administrative Agent shall utilize income eligibility ceilings of lowand
moderate-income units for various sized households based upon
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
"uncapped median income by family size" as adopted by COAH. No
applicant with a household income in excess of these ceilings shall be
eligible to purchase or rent the low- and moderate-income units.
1. Very low-income units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than or equal to 30% of median income.
2. Low-income units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than or equal to 50% of median income.
3. Moderate-income units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than 80% of median income.
b. Upon annual adoption of updated income limits by COAH, the
Administrative Agent shall modify its income eligibility ceilings
accordingly.
c. For purposes of determining income and eligibility, the Administrative
Agent shall consider:
1. All sources of income, whether taxable or nontaxable, including
Social Security and pensions.
2. Imputed Income. Rents, interest on the present value of real
property, and extraordinary personal property owned by the
applicant shall be imputed and deemed additional income. Interest
§ 14-10 HOLMDEL § 14-11
1:426
§ 14-12. INITIAL SALES AND RENTAL PRICE. [Ord. No. 2006-12
§ 14-12; Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-12]
shall be imputed at the average interest rate on money market
accounts in the region as determined by the Administrative Agent.
3. The income and assets of all adult members of the household as
well as the income and assets of any adult individual who is
expected to occupy the unit for which the household is seeking to
qualify shall be included in the determination of eligibility. The form
used for verification of household income shall include an affidavit
attesting that the application contains the complete income of all
current or anticipated adult household members.
d. The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's certified monthly
income.
e. The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very low-income, lowincome
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to
the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not exceed 35% 40%
for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible monthly income as
determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may be exceeded if
one or more of the following circumstances exists:
1. The household currently pays more than 35% 40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
2. The household has consistently paid more than 35% 40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
3. The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
4. The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
5. The household documents proposed third-party assistance from an
outside source such as a family member in a form acceptable to the
Administrative Agent and the owner of the unit.
§ 14-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-12
1:427
a. In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units, the
Administrative Agent shall follow the procedures set forth in UHAC and
COAH, utilizing the regional income limits established by COAH.
b. The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each affordable
development shall be affordable to households earning no more than
60% of median income, and the average rent for restricted low- and
moderate-income units shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 52% of median income.
c. The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units.
1. At least 13% of all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be
affordable to households earning no more than 30% of median
income.
d. The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 70% of median income, and each affordable development
must achieve an affordability average of 55% for restricted ownership
units; in achieving this affordability average, moderate-income
ownership units must be available for at least three different prices for
each bedroom type, and low-income ownership units must be available
for at least two different prices for each bedroom type.
e. In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with the
affordability average requirements for restricted units other than
assisted living facilities, the following standards shall be used:
f. The following criteria shall be considered in determining rents and
sales prices:
1. Efficiency units shall be affordable to one person households.
2. One bedroom units shall be affordable to 1.5 person households.
3. Two bedroom units shall be affordable to three person households.
4. Three bedroom units shall be affordable to 4.5 person households.
5. Four bedroom units shall be affordable to six person households.
g. In determining the initial rents for compliance with the affordability
average requirements for restricted units in assisted living facilities,
the following standards shall be used:
1. A studio shall be affordable to a one person household;
2. A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a 1.5 person household;
and
§ 14-12 HOLMDEL § 14-12
1:428
3. A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two person household
or to two one person households.
h. The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units except
those financed under UHORP or MONI shall be calculated so that the
monthly carrying costs of the unit, including principal and interest
(based on a thirty-year loan equal to 95% of the purchase price and the
Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest), taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowners' association fees
do not exceed 28% of the gross monthly income of an appropriate
household size as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4; provided,
however, that the price shall be subject to the affordability average
requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3 in making these calculations, the
following considerations shall govern:
1. Property taxes shall be determined by applying the equalized
property tax rate in the Township of Holmdel currently in effect to
the proposed restricted selling price of the unit;
2. The developer shall use the best available assumptions to
determine the insurance and homeowners' association fees to be
applied to the units, subject to the approval of the Administrative
Agent as to reasonableness only for use in this calculation.
3. Homeowners' association fees shall be equal to those paid by
market purchasers.
i. The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as not
to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
household size as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be
amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be
subject to the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3,
as may be amended and supplemented.
j. The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the Administrative Agent be lower
than the last recorded purchase price.
k. The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased annually
based on the percentage increase in the Housing Consumer Price Index
for the United States. This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year.
Rents for units constructed pursuant to low-income housing tax credit
regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations governing lowincome
housing tax credits.
l. Utilities. Tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility allowance
shall be so stated in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility
allowance approved by DCA for its Section 8 program.
§ 14-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-12
1:429
§ 14-13. PROCEDURE FOR RESALE TRANSACTION. [Ord. No.
2006-12 § 14-13; Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-13]
§ 14-14. CALCULATION OF RESALE PRICE. [Ord. No. 2006-12
§ 14-14; Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-14]
The resale price of the affordable housing unit shall be the base price
increased pursuant to paragraphs a and b herein.
m. The Administrative Agent shall approve all sales and rental prices,
including (where applicable) the proposed stratification and proposed
affordability level.
a. All resale transactions of affordable housing units shall be administered
by the Administrative Agent. From the date on which the Administrative
Agent receives a notice of intent to sell by the owner of a low- or
moderate-income unit, the Administrative Agent shall have the
exclusive right to purchase the unit or to refer prospective purchasers
to that unit for a period of 90 days unless waived in writing by the
Administrative Agent. In the event that a contract for the unit is
executed within the ninety-day period set above and the prospective
buyer is unable to close, the period during which the Administrative
Agent shall have the exclusive right to market the unit is automatically
extended for a period of 21 days from the date it is notified of the
buyer's inability to close.
b. In the event no contract has been entered into for the unit at the end of
a ninety-day period, the owner of the unit may seek approval from the
Administrative Agent to sell the unit directly. If the Administrative
Agent determines at that point not to purchase the unit, it may
authorize the applicant to sell the unit as follows.
1. In the case of a low-income unit, to a low- or moderate-income
buyer; or
2. In the case of a moderate-income unit to a buyer whose income
does not exceed 120% of median.
3. Any subsequent sale shall be fully subject to the resale restrictions
contained in these regulations. The deed to the above income
purchaser shall specifically contain a deed restriction establishing
that it is subject to all the affordability controls outlined in this
chapter.
a. Maximum Restricted Sale Price. The maximum resale price for a
restricted ownership unit, if the resale occurs prior to the one-year
anniversary of the date on which title to the unit was first transferred to
a certified household, is the initial purchase price. If the resale occurs
on or after such anniversary date, the maximum resale price shall be
consistent with the regional income limits most recently published by
COAH and calculated pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94-7.2(b). The
§ 14-12 HOLMDEL § 14-14
1:430
§ 14-15. EXEMPT SALES. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-15; Ord. No.
2013-02 § 14-15]
The following transactions shall be deemed nonsales for the purpose of this
chapter. The owner of the affordable unit shall be entitled to a Statement of
Exemption from the Administrative Agent upon application.
Administrative Agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
b. Capital Improvements. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit,
all items of property that are permanently affixed to the unit or were
included when the unit was initially restricted (for example,
refrigerator, range, washer, dryer, dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting)
shall be included in the maximum allowable resale price. Other items
may be sold to the purchaser at a reasonable price that has been
approved by the Administrative Agent at the time of signing the
agreement to purchase. The purchase of central air conditioning
installed subsequent to the initial sale of the unit and not included in
the base price may be made a condition of the unit resale provided the
price, subject to ten-year, straight-line depreciation, has been approved
by the Administrative Agent. Unless otherwise approved by the
Administrative Agent, the purchase of any property other than central
air conditioning shall not be made a condition of the unit resale. The
owner and the purchaser must personally certify at the time of closing
that no unapproved transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and
receiving property has taken place at resale.
a. Transfer of an affordable housing unit between husband and wife;
b. Transfer of ownership of an affordable housing unit between former
spouses as a result of a judicial decree, judgment or order of divorce,
but not including sales to third parties;
c. Transfer of ownership of an affordable housing unit to family members
as a result of inheritance;
d. The transfer of ownership through an executor's deed to a Class A
beneficiary; and
e. Transfer of ownership of an affordable housing unit through an order of
the Superior Court.
A grant of exemption shall not eliminate the affordability control restrictions
set forth in these regulations. Any subsequent sale shall be subject to all of the
terms of these regulations.
§ 14-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-16
1:431
§ 14-16. RENTAL INCREASES. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-16; Ord. No.
2013-02 § 14-16]
At the anniversary date of the tenancy of the certified household occupying
a restricted rental unit, the rent may be increased, if such increase is
consistent with the regional income limits most recently published by
COAH, calculated pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94-7.2(b), and has been filed with
the Administrative Agent. If the landlord has charged a tenant less than the
initial maximum allowable rent for a restricted unit, the landlord may, with
the approval of the Administrative Agent, use the maximum allowable rent
instead of the current rent in performing this multiplication to establish the
rent for the next tenant under a new lease.
§ 14-17. RENTAL OF LOW- AND MODERATE-INCOME SALES UNIT.
[Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-17; Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-17]
§ 14-18. EXEMPTION FROM RENT CONTROL ORDINANCES. [Ord.
No. 2006-12 § 14-18; Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-18]
All rental units, both market and affordable, shall not be subject to any rent
control ordinance which may be adopted in the Township of Holmdel during
the time period in which affordable housing price controls are effective.
§ 14-19. DURATION OF CONTROLS. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-19; Ord.
No. 2013-02 § 14-19]
Except as otherwise provided in these regulations or an Affordable Housing
Agreement or other controlling document, all units for sale or rent subject
a. Except as set forth below in paragraph b, at no time shall the owner of
an affordable housing unit lease or rent the unit to any person or
persons, except on a short-term hardship basis, as approved in advance
and in writing by the Administrative Agent, subject to Township
Committee approval. N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(a), -26.18(d)4v. An owner
seeking such approval shall submit a written request to the
Administrative Agent setting forth his or her hardship, the proposed
duration of the tenancy and certification that the proposed tenant is a
qualified low- or moderate-income household. In the event the request
is approved, the Administrative Agent shall notify the owner of the unit.
The owner shall rent the unit only to a qualified low- or moderateincome
tenant for the approved period, at a rent affordable to a low- or
moderate-income tenant, whichever is applicable.
b. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a two-family affordable housing unit
may be leased to a certified household approved in writing by the
Administrative Agent, subject to Township Committee approval, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4vii. The rent shall be no greater
than the maximum permitted rent as determined by the Administrative
Agent. When requesting approval to rent his or her unit, the owner shall
submit to the Administrative Agent copies of all proposed leases prior
to having them signed by any proposed tenant.
§ 14-16 HOLMDEL § 14-19
1:432
to the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to resale or rerental
controls for a period of at least 30 years from the date of acquisition of the
unit by the initial purchaser or from the date of occupancy of the unit by
the initial lessee. All conveyances of newly constructed low- and moderateincome
sales units shall contain the restrictive covenant and mortgage lien
adopted by COAH and contained in Uniform Housing Affordability Controls,
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
All lower income dwelling units shall be covered by covenants to ensure that
in all initial sales and rentals, and in all subsequent resales and rerentals,
the units will continue to remain available and affordable to the lowerincome
households for which they were intended for the period specified
in this subsection in accordance with the requirements and standards
established by COAH.
§ 14-20. EXPIRATION OF CONTROLS. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-20;
Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-20]
The restrictive covenant governing the deeds of the low- and moderateincome
units shall include an option permitting purchase of the affordable
unit at the maximum allowable restricted sales price at the time of the
first nonexempt sale after controls on affordability have been in effect on
the unit for the period specified in this chapter. The option to buy shall
be available to the Township of Holmdel, the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs (DCA), the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance
Agency (HMFA), or a qualified nonprofit as determined by COAH.
All restrictive covenants governing low- and moderate-income units shall
require the owner to notify the Administrative Agent by certified mail of any
intent to sell the unit 90 days prior to entering into an agreement for the
first nonexempt sale after controls have been in effect on the housing units
for the period specified in this chapter.
Upon receipt of such notice, the option to buy the unit at the maximum
allowable restricted sales price shall be available for 90 days. The
Administrative Agent shall notify the Township of Holmdel, DCA, HMFA and
COAH that the unit is for sale. If the Township of Holmdel fails to exercise
this option within 90 days, the first of the other entities giving notice to the
seller of its intent to purchase during the ninety-day period shall be entitled
to purchase the unit. If the option to purchase the unit at the maximum
allowable restricted sale price is not exercised by a written intent to sell,
the owner may proceed to sell the housing unit.
If the owner does not sell the unit within one year of the date of the delivery
of notice of intent to sell, the option to buy the unit shall be restored and
the owner shall be required to submit a new notice of intent to sell 90 days
prior to any future proposed date of sale.
Any option to buy a housing unit at the maximum allowable restricted sales
price shall be exercised by certified mail and shall be deemed exercised
upon mailing.
§ 14-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-20
1:433
a. Township of Holmdel Option.
1. If an entity of the municipality elects to purchase a low- or
moderate-income unit pursuant to this chapter, it may:
(a) Convey or rent the housing unit to a low- or moderate-income
purchaser or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed the
maximum allowable restricted sale price or rental.
(b) Convey the unit at fair market value subject to the deposit of
the price differential in a trust account devoted solely to the
creation, rehabilitation or maintenance of low- and moderateincome
housing. Price differential is defined as the difference
between the restricted sales price and fair market value as
determined at the date of a proposed contract of sale after
reasonable real estate broker fees have been paid.
Money in the trust account may not be expended until the
Township develops a plan for its use which is approved by the
Township Committee.
2. In the event the Township of Holmdel purchases low-income
housing units, the Township of Holmdel shall maintain them as lowincome
housing units.
3. In the event the Township of Holmdel elects to purchase low- or
moderate-income housing units and convey them at fair market
value, the Township shall:
(a) Notify COAH of any proposed sale and resale price 90 days
before closing.
(b) Notify COAH of the price differential.
(c) Deposit the price differential in a trust account devoted solely
to the creation, rehabilitation or maintenance of low- and
moderate-income housing; and
(d) Notify COAH by February 1 of each calendar year of the
existing balance within this trust account.
4. Money deposited in trust accounts may not be expended until the
municipality submits and COAH approves a repayment housing
plan. COAH may approve the repayment housing plan if it
determines that it provides a realistic opportunity for the creation,
rehabilitation or maintenance of low- and moderate-income
housing.
5. The Township of Holmdel shall have the right to determine that the
most desirable means of promoting an adequate supply of low- and
moderate-income housing is to prohibit the exercise of the
repayment option and maintain controls on lower-income housing
units sold within the municipality beyond the period required by
§ 14-20 HOLMDEL § 14-20
1:434
this chapter. Such determination shall be made by resolution of
the municipal Governing Body. The resolution shall specify the time
period for which the repayment option shall not be applicable.
During such period, no seller in the municipality may utilize the
repayment option permitted by Section 14-20d.
If the Township of Holmdel exercises the option outlined above, it
shall:
(a) Provide public notice in a newspaper of general circulation;
and
(b) Notify the Administrative Agent of its Governing Body's action.
The Administrative Agent shall ensure that the deed restriction
on all affected housing units reflects the extended period of
controls.
b. State Option. When the DCA or HMFA elects to purchase a low- or
moderate-income unit pursuant to this section it may:
1. Convey or rent the housing unit to a low- or moderate-income
purchaser or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed the allowable
restricted sales price or rental; or
2. Convey the unit at fair market value and utilize the price
differential to subsidize the construction, rehabilitation or
maintenance of low- and moderate-income housing within the
appropriate housing region.
c. Nonprofit Option. Nonprofit agencies that have been designated by
COAH shall be eligible to purchase low- or moderate-income units
pursuant to this section for the sole purpose of conveying or renting the
housing unit to a low- or moderate-income purchaser or tenant at a
price or rent not to exceed the allowable restricted sales price or rental.
Low-income units shall be available to low-income purchasers or
tenants and the housing unit shall be regulated by the restrictive
covenant lien adopted by COAH. The term of the controls on
affordability shall be the same as those required by this chapter.
d. Seller Option. An eligible seller of a low- or moderate-income unit which
has been controlled for the period established in this chapter who has
provided notice of an intent to sell may proceed with the sale if no
eligible entity as outlined in Section 14-19 exercises its option to
purchase within 90 days.
1. The seller may elect to:
(a) Sell to a qualified low- and moderate-income household at the
controlled unit sales price, providing the unit is regulated by
the restrictive covenant and lien adopted by the Administrative
Agent; or
§ 14-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-20
1:435
§ 14-21. FORECLOSURE. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-21; Ord. No.
2013-02 § 14-21]
(b) Exercise the repayment option and sell to any purchaser at
market price, providing that 95% of the price differential is
paid to the Administrative Agent, as instrument of the
municipality, at closing.
2. If the sale will be to a qualified low- and moderate-income
household, the Administrative Agent shall certify the income
qualifications of the purchaser and shall ensure the housing unit is
regulated by the restrictive covenant and lien required by the
Administrative Agent.
3. The Administrative Agent shall examine any contract of sale
containing a repayment option to determine if the proposed sales
price bears a reasonable relationship to the housing unit's fair
market value. In making this determination, the Administrative
Agent may rely on comparable sales data or an appraisal. The
Administrative Agent shall not approve any contract of sale where
there is a determination that the sales price does not bear a
reasonable relationship to fair market value. The Administrative
Agent shall make a determination within 20 days of receipt of the
contract of sale and shall calculate the repayment option payment.
4. The Administrative Agent shall also adopt an appeal procedure by
which a seller may submit written documentation requesting the
Administrative Agent to (i) recompute the repayment obligation if
the seller believes an error has been made or to (ii) reconsider a
determination that a sales price does not bear a reasonable
relationship to fair market value. A repayment obligation
determination made as a result of an owner's appeal shall be a final
administrative determination of the Administrative Agent.
5. The repayment shall occur at the date of closing and transfer of
title for the first nonexempt transaction after the expiration of
controls on affordability. Repayment proceeds shall be deposited in
a trust account devoted solely to the creation, rehabilitation or
maintenance of low- and moderate-income housing. Money
deposited in trust accounts may not be expended until the
Administrative Agent develops and obtains Township approval of a
plan for its use.
e. Continued Application of Options. When a housing unit has been
maintained as a low- or moderate-income unit after controls have been
in effect for the period specified in Section 14-18, the restrictive
covenant governing the housing units shall allow the Township, the
State, nonprofit agencies and sellers of low- and moderate-income units
to again exercise all the same options as provided in this chapter.
§ 14-20 HOLMDEL § 14-21
1:436
§ 14-22. REFINANCING AND HOME EQUITY LOANS. [Ord. No.
2006-12 § 14-23; Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-22]
Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by an ownership unit,
the owner shall submit to the Administrative Agent a notice of intent to
incur such indebtedness, in such form and with such documentary support
as determined by the Administrative Agent, and the owner shall not incur
any such indebtedness unless and until the Administrative Agent has
determined in writing that the proposed indebtedness complies with the
provisions of this section.
With the exception of original purchase money mortgages, during a control
period neither an owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit
the total indebtedness secured by an ownership unit to exceed 95% of the
maximum allowable resale price of that unit, as such price is determined by
the Administrative Agent in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(c).
Under no circumstances shall a foreclosure of a second mortgage constitute
grounds for eliminating the resale controls provided for in this regulation.
§ 14-23. SALE OF PERSONAL ITEMS. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-24;
Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-23]
Items of personal property which are not permanently affixed to the unit
(e.g. refrigerator, freezer, washer, dryer) and which were not included when
the affordable housing unit was purchased may be the subject of separate
negotiations between the parties subsequent to the signing of the contract
for the purchase of the house. Any agreed price for the purchase of any item
or items of personal property shall be reasonable considering the original
cost, nature, age and condition of the item. The price to be paid for items of
personal property must be approved prior to closing by the Administrative
Agent. Furthermore, prices to be paid for items of personal property shall
not be used as a mechanism to avoid or circumvent the limitations on the
a. Any mortgage for a low- and moderate-income unit shall contain a
provision requiring the holder of a mortgage on the property to inform
the Administrative Agent at any time that the purchaser of a unit is 45
days or more in arrears on payment of his mortgage payments. The
Administrative Agent shall further be notified by the mortgagees in the
event of institution of a foreclosure action. This notification provision
does not apply to any mortgage which prohibits notice to a third party.
b. The Township shall at all times have the right to intervene in any
foreclosure action. In addition, the Administrative Agent shall have the
right to advance and pay all sums necessary to cure any arrears, to cure
any other default or exercise any right of redemption or pay and satisfy
any first mortgage or other lien so that the unit may be preserved and
retained as a low- and moderate-income unit. All sums advanced by the
Administrative Agent shall become a lien against the unit and shall have
higher priority than any lien except that of a first mortgage and tax or
other liens had by any government agencies.
§ 14-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-23
1:437
resale price of the unit itself. In no event shall the right to purchase the unit
be conditioned upon the buyer's willingness to agree to purchase any item
or items of personal properties of the seller.
§ 14-24. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-25;
Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-24]
§ 14-25. MINIMUM FLOOR AREAS. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-26; Ord.
No. 2013-02 § 14-25]
Minimum floor area requirements for low- and moderate-income housing
units shall be as follows:
Unit Type
(bedroom units)
Minimum Floor Area
(square feet)
0 (studio) 500
1 600
2 750
3 or more 950, plus 175 for each bedroom in excess of 3
bedrooms
§ 14-26. CONTROLS ON AFFORD ABILITY ESTABLISHED BY COAH.
[Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-27; Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-26]
In addition to the standards and procedures established in this chapter, all
inclusionary developments shall comply with the controls on affordability
established by COAH in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, et seq.
§ 14-27. AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-28;
Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-27]
The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy designed to
attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority groups, regardless
of sex, age or number of children, to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer/sponsor, municipality and/or designated
Administrative Agent of Affordable Housing. The plan will address the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, et seq. In addition, the plan prohibits
a. No certificate of occupancy for a low- or moderate-income unit shall be
issued until the developer shall have submitted and have approved by
the Administrative Agent a deed restriction encompassing all the
provisions of these regulations.
b. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the resale of a low- or
moderate-income unit unless the Administrative Agent shall certify that
the resale complies with the terms of these regulations.
c. No low- and moderate-income unit shall be occupied by an initial
purchaser or resale purchaser without a certificate of occupancy.
§ 14-23 HOLMDEL § 14-27
1:438
discrimination in the sale, rental, financing or other services related to
housing on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, handicap, age, familial
status/size or national origin. Holmdel Township is in the housing region
consisting of Monmouth, Mercer and Ocean Counties. Advertising and
outreach shall take place during the first week of the marketing program
and each month thereafter until all units have been leased or sold. The
affirmative marketing program is a continuing program and will meet the
following requirements:
a. All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for applications
for low- and moderate-income units will appear in the following daily
regional newspaper:
1. Asbury Park Press.
b. The primary marketing will take the form of at least one press release
sent to the above publications and a paid display advertisement in each
of the above newspapers. Additional advertising and publicity will be on
an "as needed" basis. The advertisement will include a description of
the:
1. Street address of units;
2. Direction to housing units;
3. Number of bedrooms per unit;
4. Range of prices/rents;
5. Size of units;
6. Income limits; and
7. Location of applications, including business hours and where/how
applications may be obtained;
8. Applications fees, if any.
c. All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for applications
for low- and moderate-income housing will appear in the following
neighborhood oriented newspapers, religious publications and
organizational newsletters within the region:
1. The Two River Times;
2. The Courier;
3. The Independent;
4. Holmdel Township Newsletter;
5. St. Benedict Church Bulletin;
6. Holmdel Community Church Bulletin;
§ 14-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-27
1:439
7. Greek Orthodox Church Bulletin;
8. St. Catherine's Church Bulletin.
d. The following regional radio and cable television stations will be used:
1. New Jersey 101.5 FM;
2. Local Cable Access Channel 8.
e. The following is the location of applications, brochure(s), sign(s) and/or
poster(s) used as part of the affirmative marketing program, including
specific employment centers within the region:
1. Municipal administration building (Township Administrator's
Office);
2. Municipal library;
3. Developer's sales office at Holmdel Meadows, The Woods at
Holmdel and Holmdel Valley Estates Senior Housing Project;
4. Bayshore Community Hospital;
f. The following is a listing of community contact organizations in
Monmouth, Mercer and Ocean Counties that will aid in the affirmative
marketing program with particular emphasis on contacts that will reach
out to groups that are least likely to apply for housing within the region:
1. Monmouth County Social Services;
2. Monmouth County Office on Aging;
3. Monmouth County Community Development;
4. Ocean County Board of Social Services;
5. Ocean County Office on Aging;
6. Ocean County Administration Building;
7. Mercer County Community Services Division;
8. Mercer County Office on Aging;
9. Mercer County Senior Citizens Services.
g. Quarterly flyers and applications will be sent to each of the following
agencies for publication in their journals and for circulation among
their members:
1. Board of Realtors in Monmouth, Mercer and Ocean Counties.
h. Applications will be mailed to prospective applicants upon request.
Additionally, quarterly informational circulars and applications will be
§ 14-27 HOLMDEL § 14-27
1:440
sent to the chief administrative employees of each of the following
agencies in the counties of Monmouth, Mercer and Ocean:
1. Social Services;
2. Rental Assistance Office (local office of DCA);
3. Office on Aging;
4. Community Development or Housing Agency;
5. Library.
i. The following is a description of the random selection method that will
be used to select occupants of low- and moderate-income housing.
There will be a period in which to complete and submit preapplications.
Households that have completed preapplications in that timeframe and
preliminarily indicated that they are income eligible will be randomly
selected to establish an order (service list) in which they will be
evaluated by the Administrative Agent for the available unit(s). If the
first household on the list is not of an appropriate household size,
income or does not live or work in the COAH region, that applicant will
be skipped and the next applicant household will be evaluated for the
available unit. This will continue until a properly sized household with
sufficient income to purchase the unit is reached. The applicant
household will then be required to submit a complete application to
establish their eligibility as defined by COAH. If the end of the service
list is reached before an appropriately-sized household that lives or
works in the COAH region is identified, the Administrative Agent will
review skipped households in the order of the random selection.
Households that live or work in the COAH region that are smaller than
the ideal household size, as defined by this chapter, will be considered
next.
Any applicants that are skipped for size, income or regional preference
will remain on the list and continue to be considered for future
restricted units in the order in which they were selected in the random
selection.
Unless applicants ask to be removed from the list or become ineligible
for assistance, or are unresponsive to communications, they will remain
on the service list. Therefore, these applicants will not need to be in
future random selections. Instead, the service order created by future
random selections will be placed at the end of the service list set by all
prior random selections.
j. By resolution, the Township will name an Administrative Agent. The
chosen Administrative Agent will administer the affirmative marketing
program. The Administrative Agent will refer prospective renters and
owners to counseling services on subjects such as budgeting, credit
issues, mortgage qualifications, rental lease requirements and landlord/
tenant law.
§ 14-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-27
1:441
§ 14-28. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. 2006-12 § 14-29; Ord. No.
2013-02 § 14-28]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-11, the COAH
regulations (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., 5:91-1 et seq., 5:92-1 et seq., 5:93-1
et seq., 5:94-1 et seq. and 5:95-1 et seq.), the Affordable Housing Plan,
the Affordable Housing Agreements and other applicable laws and
requirements, the following shall apply to any violation of this chapter, the
Affordable Housing Plan, any Affordable Housing Agreement between an
owner and the Township or any COAH regulation:
k. Households who live or work in the COAH Housing Region 4 may be
given preference for sales and rental units constructed. Applicants
living outside the housing region will have an equal opportunity for
units after regional applicants have been initially serviced. Holmdel
Township intends to comply with N.J.A.C. 5:80-1 et seq.
l. All developers of low- and moderate-income housing units will be
required to assist in the marketing of the affordable units in their
respective developments through their participation in the marketing
program. At a minimum, developers of low- and moderate-income
housing units will be required to pay for the cost of all advertising
specific to their units.
m. The marketing program will commence at least 120 days before the
issuance of either temporary or permanent certificates of occupancy.
The marketing program will continue until all low- and moderateincome
housing units are initially occupied and for as long as affordable
units are deed restricted and occupancy or preoccupancy of units
continues to be necessary.
n. The Administrative Agent will comply with monitoring and reporting
requirements as per N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
a. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner of a low- or
moderate-income unit and advising the owner of the penalties for such
violations and advising the owner/tenant of what steps must be taken to
cure the violation, the Township or its designee may take one of the
following actions set forth in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 below against the
owner for any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days
after service of the written notice:
1. The Township or its designee may file a court action in Municipal
Court or the Superior Court of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 against the owner alleging a violation or violations of this
chapter, the Affordable Housing Plan, any Affordable Housing
Agreement between the owner and the Township or any COAH
regulations. If a violation is found by the Court, the owner shall be
subject to one or more of the following penalties, at the discretion
of the Court:
§ 14-27 HOLMDEL § 14-28
1:442
(a) A fine of not more than $2,000 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day that the
violation continues or exists shall be considered a separate and
specific violation of these provisions and not as a continuing
offense;
(b) In the case of an owner who has resold his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of this chapter, the
Affordable Housing Plan, any Affordable Housing Agreement
between the owner and the Township or any COAH
regulations, payment into Township of Holmdel Housing Trust
Fund of the difference between the unauthorized resale price
and the maximum resale price allowed by this chapter;
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of this chapter, the
Affordable Housing Plan, any Affordable Housing Agreement
between the owner and the Township or any COAH
regulations, payment into the Township of Holmdel Housing
Trust Fund of the difference between the unauthorized rental
charge and the maximum rental charge allowed by this
chapter;
(d) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of this chapter, the
Affordable Housing Plan, any Affordable Housing Agreement
between the owner and the Township or any COAH
regulations, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the Court; and/or
(e) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of this chapter, the
Affordable Housing Plan, any Affordable Housing Agreement
between the owner and the Township or any regulation of
COAH, require the owner, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18, to
offer to sell the low- or moderate-income unit to the innocent
tenant with the total of all rent already paid to the owner by the
tenant being credited to tenant as down payment to the owner.
Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the person
offered a unit under such a rent to equity program must first be
certified as eligible under the provisions of the chapter;
2. The Township or its designee may file a Court action in the Superior
Court of New Jersey seeking a judgment which would result in the
termination of the owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in
the nature of a mortgage foreclosure. Any judgment shall be
enforceable as if the same were a judgment of default of the first
purchase money mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the
low- and moderate-income unit.
§ 14-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-28
1:443
(a) Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
Township or its designee, by means of an execution sale by the
Sheriff, at which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the
violating owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less
than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any first
purchase money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the Township, including
attorney's fees, and not more than the maximum resale price
permitted by this chapter. The violating owner shall have his
right to possession terminated as well as his title conveyed
pursuant to the Sheriff's sale. Only bidders who have been
income qualified by the Administrative Agent in accordance
with this chapter prior to the Sheriff's sale will be permitted to
bid on the unit at the Sheriff's sale.
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior
liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if
any, shall be applied to reimburse the Township for any and all
costs and expenses incurred in connection with either the
Court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's
sale are insufficient to reimburse the Township in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible
for and to the extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and
all costs incurred by the Township in connection with
collecting such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains
after satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be
placed in escrow by the Township for the owner and shall be
held in such escrow for a maximum period of two years or until
such earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
Township for such. Failure of the owner to claim such balance
within the two-year period shall automatically result in a
forfeiture of such balance to the Township. Any interest
accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the Township, whether such
balance shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the Township.
(c) Foreclosure by the Township shall not extinguish the
restrictions of this chapter, the Affordable Housing Plan, any
Affordable Housing Agreement between the owner and the
Township of Holmdel or any COAH regulations as the same
apply to the low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall be
conveyed to the purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to said
restrictions and provisions. The owner determined to be in
violation of said restrictions and provisions and from whom
title and possession were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale
shall not be entitled to any right of redemption.
§ 14-28 HOLMDEL § 14-28
1:444
§ 14-29. ACCESSIBILITY REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. 2013-02
§ 14-29]
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage
and any prior liens, the Township may acquire title to the lowand
moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating
owner with an amount equal to the difference between the first
purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income
unit could have been sold under the terms of this chapter. This
excess shall be treated in the same manner as the excess which
would have been realized from an actual sale as previously
described.
(e) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the Township shall obligate
the owner to accept an offer to purchase from any qualified
purchaser which may be referred to the owner by the
Township, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income unit as
permitted by the terms and provisions of this chapter.
(f) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of this chapter
until such time as title is conveyed from the owner; or
3. The Township shall have all other rights and remedies available at
law and in equity for the enforcement of this chapter, the
Affordable Housing Plan, any Affordable Housing Agreement
between the owner and the Township of Holmdel or any COAH
regulation.
a. The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to the
technical design standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7
and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14.
b. All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in other
multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is attached to at
least one other dwelling unit shall have the following features:
1. An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
2. An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
3. An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor;
4. An interior accessible route of travel shall not be required between
stories within an individual unit;
§ 14-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-29
1:445
§ 14-29A. EXCLUSIONARY ZONING. [Ord. No. 2013-02 § 14-30]
5. An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door or
the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor; and
6. An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7
and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14, or evidence that the Holmdel Township has
collected funds from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the
adaptable entrances in the development accessible:
(a) Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable entrance,
upon the request of a disabled person who is purchasing or will
reside in the dwelling unit, an accessible entrance shall be
installed.
(b) To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit funds
within Holmdel's Affordable Housing Trust Fund sufficient to
install accessible entrances in 10% of the affordable units that
have been constructed with adaptable entrances.
(c) The funds deposited under paragraph (b) above shall be used
by Holmdel for the sole purpose of making the adaptable
entrance of any affordable unit accessible when requested to
do so by a person with a disability who occupies or intends to
occupy the unit and requires an accessible entrance.
(d) The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design plan
and cost estimate for the conversion from adaptable to
accessible entrances to the Construction Official of Holmdel.
(e) Once the Construction Official has determined that the design
plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable to accessible
meet the requirements of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-7 and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14, and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to the
Holmdel's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of the
Municipal Treasurer who shall ensure that the funds are
deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and
appropriately earmarked.
(f) Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is site
impracticable to meet the requirements. Determinations of site
impracticability shall be in compliance with the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14.
a. Design. In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market units.
b. Payments-in-Lieu and Off-Site Construction. The standards for the
collection of payments-in-lieu of constructing affordable units or
§ 14-29 HOLMDEL § 14-29A
1:446
standards for constructing affordable units offsite, shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.4.
c. Utilities. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source
as market units within the affordable development.
§ 14-29A GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-29A
1:447

ARTICLE II
Development Fee Provisions87
§ 14-30. PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 2016-04]
§ 14-31. BASIC REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. 2016-04]
§ 14-32. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2016-04]
The following terms, as used in this Article, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean a development
included in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but
is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a 100% affordable development.
a. In Holmdel Builder's Association V. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
b. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46 section 8 (C. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (C. 40:55D-8.1
through 8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate regulations
necessary for the establishment, implementation, review, monitoring
and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust funds and
corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under the
jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and have a
COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from nonresidential
development.
c. This Article establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance P.L. 2008, c.46, Sections 8 and 32-38. Fees collected
pursuant to this ordinance shall be used for the sole purpose of
providing low- and moderate-income housing. This ordinance shall be
interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees,
codified at N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
a. This Article shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
b. Holmdel Township shall not spend development fees until COAH has
approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with N.J.A.C.
5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
87.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes Ordinance Nos. 97-12, 2001-30, 2002-04,
2004-37, 2005-08, 2005-34, 2006-12.
§ 14-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-32
1:449
COAH OR THE COUNCIL — Shall mean the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing established under the Act which has primary
jurisdiction for the administration of housing obligations in accordance with
sound regional planning consideration in the State.
DEVELOPER — Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot
or of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Shall mean money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — Shall mean the assessed value of a
property divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value
for the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c.123 (C.54:1-35a through
C.54:1-35c).
§ 14-33. RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT FEES. [Ord. No. 2016-04]
The following residential fees shall be determined annually by resolution of
the Township Committee, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3, limited to
the following:
a. Imposed Fees.
1. Within the all zoning districts, residential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee up to 1.5% of the equalized assessed value for
residential development provided no increased density is
permitted.
2. When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of up to 6% of
the equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on a
site that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal up to 1.5%
of the equalized assessed value on the first two units; and the
specified higher percentage up to 6% of the equalized assessed
value for the two additional units, provided zoning on the site has
not changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of such
a variance application.
§ 14-32 HOLMDEL § 14-33
1:450
b. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development.
1. Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
2. Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval.
A "substantial change" is a revision to an approved preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision which meets any one of the following
limitations:*
(a) Five feet of improvements into any yard setback;
(b) Five feet in building height;
(c) 1% in floor area ratio;
(d) 1% in impervious coverage;
(e) Five feet in building spacing or location;
(f) Three parking spaces;
(g) Five feet in driveway locations;
(h) 1% in site disturbances;
(i) Five feet in lot line locations;
(j) Any change in residential density;
(k) Any new variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40-55D-70.c or d;
(l) Any such change encumbered above shall not alter the
percentage of low/moderate income housing in an approved
project, if applicable.
*A substitution of similar landscaping material, lighting fixtures and
signage is not a substantial change as long as there is no change in
approved quantities or dimensions.
Where a site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building
permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval
for this purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that
the building permit is issued.
§ 14-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-33
1:451
§ 14-34. NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT FEES. [Ord. No.
2016-04]
3. Owner-occupied residential structures demolished and replaced as
a result of a fire, flood, or natural disaster shall be exempt from
paying a development fee.
4. Single family structures new or renovated that result in no
additional residential structures;
5. Public government agencies and schools, which are classified by
the Tax Assessor as exempt from payment of property taxes
(Property Classes 15A & 15C), shall be exempt from paying
development fees.
a. Imposed Fees.
1. Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land
and improvements, for all new non-residential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
2. Nonresidential developers, exempt for developers of the type of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized value resulting from any additions
to the existing structure to be used for non-residential purposes.
3. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessment value of the pre-existing land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the non-residential development fee shall be
zero.
b. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for
Nonresidential Development.
1. The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the 2.5% development fee,
unless otherwise exempted below.
2. The 2.5% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
3. Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
non-residential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008 c. 46, as specified in the
§ 14-33 HOLMDEL § 14-34
1:452
§ 14-35. COLLECTION PROCEDURES. [Ord. No. 2016-04]
Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
certification/Exemption" Form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
4. A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
non-residential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008 c. 46 shall be
subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
5. If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees pursuant to this section within 45 days of the termination of
the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential development
fees under these circumstances may be enforceable by Holmdel
Township as a lien against the real property of the owner.
a. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval,
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
b. For nonresidential development only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed as
per the instruction provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare an estimate and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
c. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
d. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal tax assessor,
based upon the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
e. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
§ 14-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-35
1:453
§ 14-36. AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND. [Ord. No. 2016-04]
f. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
g. Should Holmdel Township fail to determine or notify the developer of
the amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the
request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due
and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set
forth in subsection b of section 37 of P.L. 2008, c.46 (C.40:55D-8.6).
h. The development fee shall be collected at the issuance of the certificate
of occupancy.
i. Appeal of Development Fees.
1. A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest bearing escrow account by Holmdel Township.
Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made to the tax
court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the
date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed
shall be credited to the prevailing party.
2. A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing escrow account
by Holmdel Township. Appeals from a determination of the Director
may be made to the Tax Court in accordance with the provisions of
the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S.54:48-1 et seq., within
90 days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
a. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing Housing Trust
Fund to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
b. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
1. Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
§ 14-35 HOLMDEL § 14-36
1:454
§ 14-37. USE OF FUNDS. [Ord. No. 2016-04]
2. Developer contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
3. Rental income from municipally operated units;
4. Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
5. Recapture funds;
6. Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
7. Any other funds collected in connection with Holmdel Township's
affordable housing program.
c. Within seven days from the opening of the Trust Fund account, Holmdel
Township shall provide COAH with written authorization, in the form of
a three-party escrow agreement between the municipality, the bank,
and COAH to permit COAH to direct the disbursement of the funds as
provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
d. All interest accrued in the Housing Trust Fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
a. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for
any activity approved by COAH to address the Holmdel Township's fair
share obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan
program. Such activities include, but are not limited to: preservation or
purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing
affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable
housing units and related costs, accessory apartment, market to
affordable, or regional housing partnership programs, conversion of
existing non-residential buildings to create new affordable units, green
building strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with
accepted national or State standards, purchase of land for affordable
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable
housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase affordability,
administration necessary for implementation of the Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 8.9 and specified in the approved spending
plan.
b. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Holmdel Township for past
housing activities.
c. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
§ 14-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-37
1:455
§ 14-38. MONITORING. [Ord. No. 2016-04]
Holmdel Township shall complete and return to COAH all monitoring forms
included in monitoring requirements related to the collection of
development fees from residential and nonresidential developers, payments
in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds from the sale of
units with extinguished controls, barrier free escrow funds, rental income,
repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other funds
collected in connection with Holmdel Township's housing program, as well
as to the expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan certified
by COAH. All monitoring reports shall be completed on forms designed by
COAH.
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
1. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
2. Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income.
3. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
d. Holmdel Township may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
e. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees,
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing
program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of
the revenues collected from development fees shall be expended for
such administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for
income qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and
rental units, and compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements.
Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing
sites or objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not
eligible uses of the affordable housing trust fund.
§ 14-37 HOLMDEL § 14-39
1:456
§ 14-39. ONGOING COLLECTION OF FEES. [Ord. No. 2016-04]
The ability for Holmdel Township to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with its substantive certification unless
Holmdel Township has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive certification, and has
received COAH's approval of its development fee ordinance. If Holmdel
Township fails to renew its ability to impose and collect development fees
prior to the expiration of substantive certification, it may be subject to
forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its municipal trust fund.
Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey Affordable
Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to section 20 of P.L. 1985, c.222
(C.52:27D-320). Holmdel Township shall not impose a residential
development fee on a development that receives preliminary or final site
plan approval after the expiration of its substantive certification or
judgment of compliance, nor shall Holmdel Township retroactively impose
a development fee on such a development. Holmdel Township shall not
expend development fees after the expiration of its substantive certification
or judgment of compliance.
§ 14-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-39
1:457
Chapter 15
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
§ 15-1. HAZARDOUS SPILLS REIMBURSEMENT.
§ 15-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2008-11 § I]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COLLECTING AGENCY — Shall mean the Township of Holmdel.
DISCHARGE — Shall mean any intentional or unintentional action or
omission resulting in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring,
emitting, emptying or pumping of hazardous substances into any waters
which flow within the jurisdiction of the Township or any land within the
jurisdiction of this Township or into the waters or land outside the
jurisdiction of the Township when damage may result to the people, lands,
waters, or natural resources within the jurisdiction of the Township.
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Shall mean any items used to extinguish or prevent
any hazardous material or fire or stop or contain any leak, release or spill
involving any hazardous material which cannot be reused or replenished
without cost after that particular incident. These expendable items include,
but are not limited to, firefighting foam, chemical extinguishing agents,
absorbent materials, sand, recovery drums, and any protective equipment
and clothing, to include but not be restricted to chemical protective suits,
gloves, boots, goggles and any other item owned or controlled by the
Township of Holmdel or owned or controlled by any volunteer organization
or other municipal organizations rendering assistance.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Shall mean any material, solid, liquid or gas,
listed as a hazardous substance or material, including but not necessarily
limited to the NFPA Guide of Hazardous Materials, the Department of
Transportation Guide Book, the list of hazardous substances and toxic
pollutants designated by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
pursuant to Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
Amendment of 1972, as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977 (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) and the list of toxic pollutants designated by Congress or the
EPA pursuant to Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, and
hospital or medical waste, including but not limited to syringes, bandages
and discarded pharmaceutical products and any material warranting
removal or cleanup in the opinion of the Holmdel Township Office of
Emergency Management.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean and include the Township of Holmdel's
employees, agents, officers, officials and supporting units as directed by the
Office of Emergency Management.
§ 14-39 HOLMDEL § 15-1.1
1:458
VEHICLE — Shall mean any motorized equipment, registered or
unregistered, including but not limited to a passenger car, motorcycle,
truck, tractor trailer, construction equipment, farm machinery, watercraft,
aircraft, and trains.
VESSEL — Shall mean any container, drum, box, cylinder, bottle or tank
used to hold, contain, carry or store any hazardous materials, whether or
not said container was manufactured for the containment of hazardous
material.
VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATION — Shall mean any duly incorporated
volunteer fire, ambulance, first aid, emergency or rescue company or squad.
§ 15-1.2. Purpose; Reimbursement Rates. [Ord. No. 2008-11 § I]
§ 15-1.3. Discharge Prohibited; Notice; Liability for Costs. [Ord. No.
2008-11 § 1]
a. This section provides for the reimbursement for the expenses incurred
by the Township of Holmdel, any and all volunteer organizations, as
defined above, and all persons rendering both volunteer and nonvolunteer
services from other local municipalities for the use of their
vehicles, expendable items and equipment and for the wages (both
regular and overtime) paid to their employees, agents, servants, and
those persons from local municipalities who render non-volunteer
services as a result of an incident involving a hazardous material fire or
leak, release or spill of a hazardous material and for the costs of
medical and hospital treatment for injuries incurred by agents,
servants, and employees of the Township of Holmdel as well as those
persons who render voluntary service as part of a volunteer
organization and/or non-voluntary service for the Township of Holmdel
as a result of the incident.
b. Any person causing any hazardous material fire or leak, spill or release
involving a hazardous material must reimburse the Township for the
aforementioned services at the rate of $100 per hour for the use of a
lighting truck; $75 per hour for the use of any other vehicle or
equipment: $25 per hour for each hour of time rendered by a member of
a volunteer organization as defined above; for expendable items at the
rate of 100% of the current cost; 100% of the regular or overtime
wages, whichever is applicable, plus fringe benefits; and 100% of the
regular or overtime wages, whichever is applicable.
a. The discharge of hazardous substances is prohibited within the
Township. This section shall not apply to discharge of hazardous
substances pursuant to and in compliance with the conditions of a
Federal or State permit.
b. Any person who may be subject to liability for a discharge or who
becomes aware of a discharge which occurred prior to or after the
effective date of this section88 shall immediately notify the Township of
Holmdel Office of Emergency Management during normal business
§ 15-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-1.3
1:459
§ 15-1.4. Parties Responsible. [Ord. No. 2008-11 § 1]
Reimbursement to the Township for expendable items used shall be made
by the owner or operator of the vehicle responsible for any hazardous
material fire or leak or spill of hazardous material; the owner or person
responsible for the vessel containing the hazardous material involved in
such fire, leak or spill on public or private property, whether stationary
or in transit and whether accidental or through negligence, the owner
or person responsible for any property from which any leak or spill of
hazardous material emanates, whether accidental or through negligence;
and any person responsible for any hazardous material fire, leak or spill
or hazardous material on public or private property, whether accidental or
through negligence.
§ 15-1.5. Reimbursement for Services. [Ord. No. 2008-11 § 1]
Any person causing any fire or leak, spill or release involving a hazardous
material must provide reimbursement for services rendered by any recovery
company, towing company or any other technical assistance called for by
the Township to handle such incident. In the event of a vehicle having
been responsible for an incident such vehicle shall be impounded until such
time as it has been deemed safe to proceed by the responsible official in
conjunction and cooperation with the Township of Holmdel and until such
hours or through the Holmdel Township Police Department after
business hours.
c. Whenever any hazardous substance is discharged, the Township may, in
its discretion, act to remove or arrange for the removal of such
discharge.
d. Any person who has discharged a hazardous substance or who has
failed to report a discharge or who is in any way responsible for any
hazardous substance which has been or shall be removed by the
Township shall be strictly liable, jointly and severally, without regard to
fault, for all cleanup and removal costs and shall be liable for the costs
associated with the use of Township or volunteer organization vehicles,
expendable items and equipment and for the wages (regular and
overtime) paid to Township employees, agents, and servants and those
persons from local municipalities who render non-volunteer services as
a result of an incident involving a hazardous material fire or leak,
release or spill of a hazardous material and for the costs of medical and
hospital treatment for injuries incurred by agents, servants and
employees of the Township of Holmdel as well as those persons who
render voluntary service as part of a volunteer organization and/or
those persons who render non-voluntary service for the Township of
Holmdel as a result of the incident.
88.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2008-11, codified herein as Chapter 15, was adopted May 1,
2008.
§ 15-1.3 HOLMDEL § 15-1.5
1:460
time as law enforcement officials determine that such evidence may be
released.
§ 15-1.6. Period for Payment. [Ord. No. 2008-11 § 1]
The person or entity responsible for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous
materials shall reimburse the Township the full price of expendable items
and costs used to extinguish such fire, or to stop or contain such leak,
or to control such spill within 15 days after receipt of a bill therefor. The
collecting agency shall utilize its best efforts to collect costs hereunder and
shall reimburse its agents or the local units for amounts collected. In the
event that the collecting agency is not able to collect said costs or only a
portion thereof, the collecting agency shall not be responsible to its agents
or the local units for the full amount of the same.
§ 15-1.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2008-11 § 1]
The person or entity found to have violated this chapter by being
responsible for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous material shall be subject
to one or more of the following: (a) a fine of not less than $2,500 nor more
than $10,000; or (b) to imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days;
or (c) a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. The person or
entity responsible for committing a spill, or who or which fails to report the
same, will be liable for the same penalties as set forth above. The violation
of any provision of this chapter, other than that described above, shall carry
penalties as set forth in Section 1-5 of this code.
§ 15-1.8. Management of Reimbursed Funds. [Ord. No. 2008-11
§ 11]
The Township through its Chief Financial Officer, shall arrange for the
management of the funds received as reimbursement pursuant to
subsection 15-1.5. To the extent possible, those funds shall be used to
replace materials used in and to otherwise reimburse the Township for
clean up expenses.
Chapter 16
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
§ 16-1. MANDATORY PROGRAM FOR RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
§ 16-1.1. Purpose. [1976 Code § 60A-1; Ord. No. 87-6; Ord. No. 88-5;
Ord. No. 94-8; Ord. No. 95-17 § 1; Ord. No. 2009-17 § I]
a. It shall be mandatory for all persons, except those physically disabled
who are owners, lessees and occupants of residential property, to
separate glass bottles and jars, newspapers, leaves and aluminum cans
as hereinafter defined from all other solid waste produced by such
residence for collection and ultimate recycling of these materials.
§ 15-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1.1
1:461
§ 16-1.2. Definitions. [1976 Code § 60A-2; Ord. No. 87-6; Ord. No.
88-5; Ord. No. 94-8]
As used in this section:
b. In accordance with existing State regulations (N.J.A.C. 14A:3-11), all
service stations, oil retainers and motor vehicle reinspection stations
with "used oil holding tanks" shall accept up to five gallons at a time of
used motor oil from individuals changing oil from cars, lawn mowers or
motorcycles, and shall post a sign informing the public that they are a
"Used oil collection site."
c. It shall be mandatory for all owners, lessees or occupants of business
schools and industrial property and of private, public and governmental
institutions and buildings to separate glass bottles and jars,
newspapers, leaves, aluminum cans, corrugated cardboard and/or high
grade paper from all other solid waste produced by the nonresidential
establishments and arrange for collection and the ultimate recycling of
said material. It shall be mandatory for all haulers of recyclables from
nonresidential establishments to provide a record to the municipality of
the types and quantities of materials recycled. Weight receipts and/or
letters on official company stationery should clearly describe the
quantity and disposition of each material.
d. It shall be mandatory for all owners, lessees or occupants of both
residential and nonresidential properties to separate tin and bimetal
cans in addition to the items previously required to be recycled under
this section.
e. All apartments and other multi-family complexes, schools, businesses
and institutions shall provide separate and clearly marked containers
for use of residents, students, employees, customers or other visitors,
for trash and the various categories of recyclables.
f. Construction, demolition or land clearing debris, which includes
asphalt, concrete, brick, block, tree parts, metal appliances or other
bulk metal items larger than one cubic foot and/or five pounds and solid
waste, shall not be disposed of at any Monmouth County landfill. As of
January 1, 2011, computers, computer monitors and related electronics
hardware, as well as analog or digital televisions, are prohibited from
being placed with other solid waste for disposal.
g. It shall be mandatory for all owners, lessees or occupants of both
residential and nonresidential properties to separate, from their solid
waste, pourable plastic containers (#1 and #2), in addition to the items
required to be recycled under previous sections herein.
h. The Township shall issue construction and demolition permits only after
the applicant has identified disposal and recycling arrangements. The
applicant shall provide appropriate records documenting the quantity
and disposition of all materials.
§ 16-1.1 HOLMDEL § 16-1.2
1:462
ALUMINUM — Shall mean and include only disposable items made of
aluminum including aluminum containers used for soda, beer or other
beverages. Excluded are foil wrappers, containers for prepared food, screen
frames and lawn chairs.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Shall mean and include cardboard of the
type used to make cardboard boxes, cartons, pasteboard and similar
corrugated and kraft paper material.
GLASS — Shall mean and include all products made from silica or sand,
soda ash and limestone; the product being transparent or translucent and
being used for packing or bottling of various matters excluding, however,
blue or flat glass commonly known as window glass.
HIGH GRADE PAPER — Shall mean and include white and/or off-white
stationery, photocopy and computer paper.
NEWSPAPER — Shall mean and include paper of the type commonly
referred to as newsprint and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily
or weekly, having printed thereon news and opinions and containing
advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly excluded,
however, are all magazines or other periodicals as well as all other products
of any nature whatsoever.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Shall mean and include all disposable containers
made from plastic used for liquid such as soda, water, milk, juice, bleach
as well as soap/detergent-powdered and liquid, or like products, Not
acceptable are containers such as yogurt, ice cream, deli products, motor
oil, antifreeze, paint thinners, insecticides, or products marked hazardous
or toxic.
SOLID WASTE — Shall mean and include all garbage and rubbish normally
produced by the occupants of commercial, industrial and residential
property and disposed of by private or public pick-up.
§ 16-1.3. Recycling Coordinator. [1976 Code § 60A-3; Ord. No. 94-8]
a. The position of Recycling Coordinator is hereby created and established
within the Township.
b. The Recycling Coordinator shall be appointed by the Township
Committee for a term of one year expiring December 31 of each year.
c. The Recycling Coordinator, subject to the approval of the Township
Committee, shall establish and promulgate reasonable rules and
regulations as to the manner, days and times for the collection, sorting,
transportation, sale and/or marketing of recyclable material in order to
encourage the preservation of material resources while minimizing the
cost of the recycling program to the Township.
§ 16-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1.4
1:463
§ 16-1.4. Collection by Authorized Persons. [1976 Code § 60A-4;
Ord. No. 87-6; Ord. No. 94-8; Ord. No. 2009-17]
The Township Committee may use municipal personnel to collect residential
recyclable materials set forth herein at curbside and/or from a drop-off
center and shall sell recyclable material if a market exists therefor pursuant
to N.J.S. 40A:11-1 et seq.
The Township Committee may elect to enter into agreements with qualified
persons or corporations authorizing them to collect residential recyclable
material at curbside or from a drop-off center and to sell recyclable
material.
Any private hauler collecting recyclables from nonresidential
establishments shall register with the recycling coordinator, the name,
address and phone number of their company and the name and address of
the establishment from which they are collecting recyclables.
Any nonresidential establishment shall register with the Recycling
Coordinator the name and address of the private hauler with which they
have contracted for collection of recyclables.
No owners, lessees or occupants of any nonresidential establishment or
premises shall set out or deposit any recyclable materials at curbside for
collection as part of the municipal recycling pickup, nor deposit or have any
recyclable materials at a municipal drop-off center.
Any company or agency providing dumpsters, roll-off or other containers
to multifamily residential complexes with shared disposal/recycling areas,
businesses, institutions, schools or construction/demolition job sites, shall
be responsible for clearly marking such containers for "trash" or for specific
"recyclables," as may be appropriate.
§ 16-1.5. Collection by Unauthorized Persons Prohibited. [1976
Code § 60A-5; Ord. No. 87-6; Ord. No. 94-8]
It shall be a violation of this section for any person unauthorized by the
Township Committee to pick up, or cause to be picked up, recyclable
materials as defined herein. Each collection in violation hereof shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter
provided.
§ 16-1.6. Collection of Recyclable Materials. [1976 Code § 60A-5;
Ord. No. 87-6; Ord. No. 88-5]
a. Those materials required to be recycled in the Township pursuant to
this section shall be placed for collection in such manner and at such
times as provided for in the rules and regulations promulgated by the
Recycling Coordinator.
§ 16-1.4 HOLMDEL § 16-1.6
1:464
§ 16-1.7. Direct Disposal of Recyclable Material by Resident. [1976
Code § 60A-6; Ord. No. 87-6; Ord. No. 94-8]
Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any person, partnership
or corporation who is owner, lessee or occupant of a residential or
nonresidential property, may donate or sell recyclable materials as defined
herein, to any person, partnership or corporation whether or not operating
for a profit. The person, partnership or corporation, however, shall not pick
up recyclable materials at curbside or at a drop off center.
§ 16-1.8. Violations and Penalties. [1976 Code § 60A-7; Ord. No.
87-6; Ord. No. 88-5; Ord. No. 2009-17 § I]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with
any provision of this section or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant
thereof, shall be liable, upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Chapter
1, Section 1-5. As an alternate penalty, a convicted person may be ordered
to perform community service in the recycling program, for a period not to
exceed 90 days.
Each day such violation or neglect is committed or permitted to continue,
shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such.
Fines levied for noncompliance with the provisions of the Municipal
Recycling Ordinance may be placed in a designated municipal fund for
reinvestment in the local recycling program(s).
This section may be enforced by any official or office of the Township.
The Recycling Coordinator, the Monmouth County Health Department and
Municipal Code Enforcement Officer are hereby individually and severally
empowered to inspect solid waste and recycling arrangements and
compliance at local residences, businesses, schools and institutions, and
to enforce the provisions of this section, by issuance of summonses and
complaints. A typical inspection may consist of sorting through containers
and opening bagged solid wastes to detect the presence of any recyclable
materials.
§ 16-2. REFUSE CONTAINERS/DUMPSTERS.
b. Solid waste haulers shall be prohibited from collecting household
garbage which contains materials required by this section to be
separated for the purpose of recycling.
c. In the event that a fine is imposed upon a Township as a result of a
private contractor bringing unseparated mandatory recyclable
materials to the Monmouth County Reclamation Center, then in that
event, the Township shall have a right to require reimbursement by the
private contractor in the amount of any penalty imposed upon the
Township.
§ 16-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-2.1
1:465
§ 16-2.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2010-11 § I]
The purpose of this section is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and prohibit the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of
liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by Holmdel Township and/or the waters of
the State so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 16-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-11 § I]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by Holmdel Township
or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Shall mean any waste container that a person
controls whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash
cans, garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 16-2.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2010-11 § I; Ord. No.
2010-32 § 1]
Any person who controls, whether owned, leased or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
§ 16-2.1 HOLMDEL § 16-2.3
1:466
Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by Holmdel Township.
No dumpsters are allowed on a public street, except in the instance where
the driveway immediately adjacent to the street is under construction or is
being replaced. In such an instance a permit may be granted by the Code
Enforcement Officer for a maximum of five days at a cost of $25.
Any roll-off dumpster or roll-off container parked on or along any street,
highway or public property in the Township shall be equipped with and
display markers consisting of all yellow reflective diamond-shaped parcels
having a minimum size of 18 inches by 18 inches in order to warn passersby
of the presence of a traffic hazard requiring the exercise of unusual care.
These panels shall be mounted at the edge of the dumpster at both ends
nearest the path of passing vehicles and facing the direction of oncoming
traffic. The markers shall have a minimum mounting height of three feet
from the bottom of the panels to the surface of the roadway.
§ 16-2.4. Exceptions to Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2010-11 § I]
The following are exempt from the prohibitions set forth in this section:
§ 16-2.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2010-11 § I; Ord. No. 2010-32 § I]
This section shall be enforced by the Holmdel Township Code Enforcement
Officer.
§ 16-2.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2010-11 § I]
Any person found guilty or pleading guilty to a violation of this section shall
be subject to the penalty provisions of Section 1-5, General Penalty.
§ 16-3. SOLID WASTE COLLECTION REGULATIONS.
a. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
b. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
c. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
d. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
e. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 16-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3.1
1:467
§ 16-3.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2014-24]
The purposes of the regulations set forth herein are to preserve the peace
and quiet in neighborhoods during the hours when most residents are
asleep pursuant to the authority granted by N.J.S.A. 40:66-1.6.
§ 16-3.2. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2014-24; Ord. No. 2015-03]
§ 16-3.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2014-24]
For violation of any provision of this section, the penalty shall be as set forth
in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, General Penalty.
Chapter 17
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 17-1. EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS.
§ 17-1.1. Title. [1976 Code § 41-1]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Street Excavation
Regulations of the Township of Holmdel."
§ 17-1.2. Definitions and Word Usage. [1976 Code § 41-2]
For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular and words in the
singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
APPLICANT — Shall mean any person making written application to the
Township Clerk for an excavation permit hereunder.
a. No person, company or other entity shall do or cause to be done any
activity related to the collection of solid waste in any areas of the
Township zoned for residential use or within 500 feet of an existing
residential use at any times set forth below:
1. Monday through Friday — 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
2. Saturday, Sunday and any Federal holiday — 9:00 p.m. to 8:30 a.m.
b. In further explanation of the hours of solid waste collection restrictions
set forth in paragraph a above, the permissible solid waste collection
hours are only as follows:
1. Monday through Friday — 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
2. Saturday, Sunday and any Federal holiday — 8:30 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
§ 16-3.1 HOLMDEL § 17-1.2
1:468
EMERGENCY — Shall mean any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence,
the existence of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger or hazard
to person or property.
EXCAVATION WORK — Shall mean the excavation, removal, replacement,
repair, construction or other disturbance of any portion of the public
improvements within a public street or drainage right-of-way. These public
improvements include, but are not limited to, curbs, sidewalks, driveways
and driveway aprons, drainage structures and conduits, pavements, base
courses, gutters, retaining walls, channels, headwalls, railings, guardrails
or any other public improvements existing within the public right-of-way For
the purposes of this section, that work which is being performed outside
of the public right-of-way, but which requires the storage of materials
or the operation of equipment within the public right-of-way, in such a
manner as may cause damage, will also be deemed "excavation work."
The term "excavation work" shall also include the construction, addition,
installation or other provision of the whole or portions of the improvements
within a public street, drainage right-of-way or other public way or public
grounds by persons other than those exempted from the provisions of this
section, including privately sponsored construction of curbing, sidewalks,
pavement extensions, aprons, drainage or any other portions of the public
improvements.
PERMITTEE — Shall mean any person who has been issued a permit
pursuant to the terms and conditions of this section and who is obligated to
fulfill all the terms of this section.
PERSON — Shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or public or private organization of any kind.
STREET — Shall mean and include any public street, highway, sidewalk,
alley, public easement, public right-of-way or public grounds accepted or
maintained by the Township and any State or county road over which the
Township may have acquired jurisdiction by agreement.
§ 17-1.3. Permit Required; Exceptions. [1976 Code § 41-3]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any excavation work, as
defined herein, or to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in
any manner break up any street or to make or cause to be made any
excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose or to
place, deposit or leave upon any street, any earth or other excavated
material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the
street or dig up, break, excavate or undermine or in any way affect any
other public improvement within a public right-of-way, unless such
persons shall first have obtained a permit therefor from the Township
Clerk as herein provided.
b. This section shall not apply to corporations having, by their charters or
under the laws of this State, authority to excavate or open the surface of
streets or roads without the consent of the municipal or local
authorities, so far as concerns the uses and purposes to which such
§ 17-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1.3
1:469
§ 17-1.4. Application for Permit. [1976 Code § 41-4; Ord. No. 88-39]
No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application for the
issuance of an excavation permit is submitted to the Township Clerk on
the form provided by the Township of Holmdel and signed by the applicant
performing the work. The form must be completed in such a fashion as to
contain a clear and definite description of the name, address and telephone
number of the applicant, the nature, scope, location and purpose of the
excavation, together with the approximate size of the opening to be made in
a sketch which clearly shows the location and dimensions of the proposed
opening, the proposed dates of commencement and completion of the
excavation, which date shall be the expiration date of any permit issued
pursuant to the application, and such other data as may be reasonably
required by the Department of Public Works, including complete plan,
profile and details of any proposed curb, sidewalk, pavement or other
proposed improvement or structure being installed. Upon receipt of the
application, the Township Clerk shall refer same to the Department of
Public Works for comments within five business days of receipt of a
complete application. All comments shall be made and the application
returned to the Township Clerk with a recommendation of approval or
disapproval (and the reasons therefore) within seven days of the receipt of
the application by the Department of, Public Works. The Township Clerk
shall issue all permits approved within three days of receipt of the
application by the Department of Public Works or the expiration of the seven
day comment period, whichever occurs first.
Work on any opening to be made under the permit provided for herein
shall commence within 30 days from the date of the permit and prosecuted
with diligence until its completion. If for any reason the work is not started
within this period, the permit shall be void and any portion of the
application fee in excess of the $25 minimum shall be refunded to the
applicant, together with any unused portion of its cash repair deposit or
performance bond.
§ 17-1.5. Permit Fees. [1976 Code § 41-5; Ord. No. 88-39; Ord. No.
95-29 § I]
authority extends, but shall in other respects apply to such corporations
in full force.
a. A nonrefundable application fee of $25, shall be paid to the Township to
cover the cost of processing the application and providing inspection as
outlined herein. This fee shall be waived in connection with an
application by a property owner for the repair or replacement of 20 or
fewer contiguous feet of an existing sidewalk.
b. Permit fees may be waived in the case of installation of new public
improvements by a subdivider or site developer in accordance with
approved plans without cost to the Township.
§ 17-1.3 HOLMDEL § 17-1.6
1:470
§ 17-1.6. Excavation Placard. [1976 Code § 41-6]
The Township Clerk shall provide each permittee at the time a permit is
issued hereunder a suitable placard plainly written or printed in English
letters at least two inches high with the following notice: "Township of
Holmdel, Permit No. _____, Expires __________," and in the first blank space
there shall be inserted the number of the permit and after the word
"expires" shall be stated the date when the permit expires. It shall be
the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep the placard posted in a
conspicuous place at the site of the excavation work. It shall be unlawful for
any person to exhibit such placard at or about any excavation not covered
by such permit or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of
expiration of the permit.
§ 17-1.7. Cash Repair Deposit and Inspection Fee. [1976 Code
§ 41-7; Ord. No. 88-39; Ord. No. 90-33; Ord. No. 2000-24 § I; Ord.
No. 2001-01 § I]
a. The application for an excavation permit to perform excavation work
under this section shall be accompanied by a cash repair deposit unless
a performance guaranty is accepted in lieu thereof pursuant to
subsection 17-1.8 or has been posted pursuant to subsection 30-13.2
and covers the same work for which the permit hereunder is sought.
Such cash repair deposit shall take the form of cash or certified check,
payable to the Township of Holmdel, and shall be received by the
Township Clerk prior to the issuance of any permit. Any cash repair
deposit made hereunder shall serve as security for the inspection,
repair and performance of work necessary to put the street in as good a
condition as it was prior to the excavation if the permittee fails to make
the necessary repairs or to complete the proper refilling of the opening
and the excavation work performed in accordance with the excavation
permit. Upon the permittee's completion of the work covered by such
permit, in conformity with this section as determined by the Township,
1/2 of the remaining cash deposit shall be promptly refunded by the
Township to the permittee and the balance shall be refunded by the
Township to the permittee upon the expiration of two years from the
date of final approval of the work upon the Township's determination
that the permittee has performed the work in conformity with this
section.
b. The amount of cash repair deposit to be collected by the Township
Treasurer shall be:
1. Areas that are not within the traveled way or shoulders:
(a) Opening not exceeding 10 square feet — $250.
(b) Openings exceeding 10 square feet — $2.50 each for the first
10 square feet, and $2 for each square foot or part thereof in
excess of 10 square feet. The minimum required cash repair
deposit shall be $250.
§ 17-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1.7
1:471
§ 17-1.8. Performance Guarantee. [1976 Code § 41-8; Ord. No.
88-39; Ord. No. 17-74; Ord. No. 2000-24 § I]
2. Areas within the traveled way or shoulders:
(a) Openings not exceeding 100 square feet — $3 per square foot
or part thereof. The minimum required cash repair deposit
shall be $250.
(b) Openings over 100 square feet, $3 each for the first 100 square
feet and $2.50 for each square foot or part thereof in excess of
100 square feet.
c. In the case of excavation or removal or alteration of other public
improvements such as drainage, sidewalks, driveways, driveway
aprons, etc., the Township Clerk's office shall determine in each case
the amount of the cash repair deposit in sum total sufficient to allow the
Township to perform all required repairs and restorations. The
Township Clerk's office may request a report from the Township
Engineer in such cases as deemed necessary by the Township Clerk.
The amount shall be estimated to include gross Township costs,
including fees, temporary maintenance costs, permanent restoration
costs, engineering costs, etc.
d. Cash repair deposits may be waived in the case of installation or repair
of sidewalk by the owner or by a person acting for the owner of real
property and may be waived in the case of installation of new public
improvements by a subdivider or site developer in accordance with the
approved plans and without cost to the Township; provided, however,
that such waiver will not be granted if, in the opinion of the Township, a
cash repair deposit is necessary to assure protection of existing
improvements or to guarantee against damages during construction.
e. The application for an excavation permit to perform work shall be
accompanied by an inspection fee in the amount of $0.50 per square
foot or part thereof with a minimum inspection fee deposit of $100,00.
The inspection fee will be used to cover the cost of inspection of the
excavation during construction as well as inspection of the temporary
repair and inspection of the final repair. In the event additional
inspection is required, the Township Engineer will calculate the cost of
the additional inspection fees, which shall not exceed the actual costs
thereof.
f. In submitting the cash repair deposit and inspection fee provided for
herein, the applicant shall do so by separate checks. If separate checks
are not submitted, the Township Treasurer may determine to deposit
the single check and use alternative means to create the two distinct
funds; however, if such segregation of funds is performed by Township
personnel, the applicant shall have been deemed to have consented to
the Township charging the inspection fee account a $100 charge to
segregate the funds.
§ 17-1.7 HOLMDEL § 17-1.8
1:472
a. If an individual cash repair deposit required by subsection 17-1.7
exceeds $1,000 or if the aggregate of the cash repair deposits which
any applicant expects to be required to provide within a period of one
year exceeds $5,000 or if the applicant is a public utility regulated by
the Federal government and/or the State of New Jersey, then 90% of the
required cash repair deposits may be posted in the form of a surety
bond and 10% by certified check or cash. If a surety bond is to be
provided in accordance with the requirements of this section, the
applicant shall deposit with the Township Clerk a surety bond for 90%
of the amount to be determined by the Township Clerk in accordance
with paragraph b of this subsection, made payable to the Township of
Holmdel. The required bond must be:
1. With good sufficient surety;
2. By a surety company authorized to transact business in the State of
New Jersey;
3. Satisfactory to the Township Attorney in form and substance;
4. Conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with this section and
to secure and hold the Township and its officers harmless against
any and all claims, judgments or other costs arising from the
excavation and other work covered by the excavation permit or for
which the Township, the Township Committee or any Township
officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to
person or property through the fault of the permittee either in not
properly guarding the excavation or for any other injury resulting
from the negligence of the permittee, and shall be further
conditioned to fill up, restore and place in good and safe condition
as near as may be to its original condition and to the satisfaction of
the Township all openings and excavations made in streets.
b. The amount of the performance bond to be submitted to the Township
Clerk shall be a minimum of 90% of double the amount of cash repair
deposit required pursuant to subsection 17-1.7 of the Code of the
Township of Holmdel. In the event that the Township Engineer
determines that the cost of proper restoration of the excavation work
will exceed the amount of the calculation, then additional bond for the
particular job in question may be required by the Department of Public
Works in a sum determined by the Township Engineer.
In lieu of a performance bond per job, any utility regulated by the
BPU or any contractor expecting to request multiple permits per year,
may post a blanket performance guarantee in the minimum sum of
$10,000 with the Township on an annual basis. Ninety may be by
surety pursuant to paragraph a above and 10% by cash or certified
check. In the event the Township Engineer determines that the cost
of proper restoration of the area disturbed and pavement surface will
exceed the amount of the blanket performance guarantee, an additional
performance guarantee for that particular job, in an amount to be
§ 17-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1.8
1:473
§ 17-1.9. Routing of Traffic. [1976 Code § 41-9; Ord. No. 88-39]
determined by the Township Engineer, shall be posted by the permittee
prior to the issuance of any permit(s).
a. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to insure that during the
performance of the excavation work traffic conditions shall be
maintained as nearly normal as practicable at all times so as to cause as
little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting
property and to the general public, provided that the Department of
Public Works with the approval of the Traffic Safety Officer, may permit
the closing or partial closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time
prescribed as necessary. The permittee shall route and control traffic,
including its own vehicles, as directed by the Township Police
Department. The following steps shall be taken before any street may
be closed or restricted to traffic:
1. The permittee must receive the approval of the Police Department
therefor;
2. The permittee must notify, in writing, the Volunteer Fire Company;
3. Upon completion of construction work, the permittee shall notify, in
writing, the Township Police Department, Fire Company, First Aid
Squad, and Board of Education before traffic is moved back to its
normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may be made.
4. The permittee shall provide traffic directors and/or Police Officers
and related equipment (i.e., signs, cones, etc.) for traffic control
and direction of traffic at the street excavation site during the
course of the excavation. Permittee shall pay all costs associated
with the use of any private traffic directors or the use of Holmdel
Police personnel, if they are required during the course of the
excavation, any work performed in connection therewith and
during cleanup operations. The Township Committee may relax or
modify the requirements of this section in its discretion, upon
application by the permittee.
b. Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours, if
possible. In instances in which this would not be feasible, the Chief of
Police will designate detours. The Township shall maintain roadway
surfaces of existing roadways designated as detours without expense to
the permittee but in case there are no existing highways, the permittee
shall construct all detours at its expense and in conformity with the
specifications of the Township Engineer. The permittee shall be
responsible for any damage caused to any roadways by the operation of
its equipment.
§ 17-1.8 HOLMDEL § 17-1.10
1:474
§ 17-1.10. Clearance for Fire Equipment. [1976 Code § 41-10]
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to
interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or
obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fire hydrants. Passageways
leading to fire escapes or firefighting equipment shall be kept free of piles
of material or other obstructions.
§ 17-1.11. Protection of Traffic. [1976 Code § 41-11]
The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable barriers to confine to a
minimum the encroachment of earth from trenches or other excavations
upon highways. The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and
safe crossings over excavations and across highways under improvement
to accommodate vehicular pedestrian traffic at all street intersections.
Vehicular crossings shall be constructed and maintained of plank, timbers,
steel sheet and blocking of adequate size to accommodate vehicular traffic
safety. Decking, if timber shall be not less than four inches thick and
shall be securely fastened together with heavy wire and staples. Pedestrian
crossings shall consist of planking three inches thick, 12 inches wide and
of adequate length, together with necessary blocking. The walk shall be not
less than three feet in width and shall be provided with a railing on both
sides.
§ 17-1.12. Removal and Protection of Utilities. [1976 Code § 41-12]
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the
written consent of the Township Engineer and/or the utility company or
person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing
utility, this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned by the Township
shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work
be borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall
be similarly borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements
with the owner of the utility. The permittee shall support and protect, by
timbers or otherwise, all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus
which may be in any way affected by the excavation work and do everything
necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across
the work, in accordance with applicable statutory provisions. In case any
pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, they shall
be repaired by the agency or owner and the expense of such repairs
shall be borne by permittee, and his or its bond shall be liable therefor.
The permittee shall be responsible for any damage done to any public or
private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas
pipe, electric conduit or other utility, and its bond shall be liable therefor.
The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all
underground utilities and protect the same against damage.
§ 17-1.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1.13
1:475
§ 17-1.13. Protection of Adjoining Property. [1976 Code § 41-13]
The permittee shall, at all times and at his or its own expense, preserve and
protect from injury any adjoining property providing proper foundations
and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection
of such property, it is necessary to enter private property for the purpose
of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain
permission from the owner of such private property for such purpose. The
permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings,
walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the progress
of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or
private property or highways resulting from its failure to properly protect
and carry out the work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to
trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and
replaced after ditches have been backfilled as required in this section. All
construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated
to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as
nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began. The
permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which
exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property without
first having notified and obtained the consent of the property owner or,
in the case of public property, the appropriate Township department or
Township official having control of such property.
§ 17-1.14. Sidewalk Excavations. [1976 Code § 41-14; Ord. No.
88-39]
Any excavation made in any sidewalk or under a sidewalk shall be provided
with a substantial and adequate footbridge over the excavation on the line
of the sidewalk, which bridge shall be at least three feet wide and securely
railed on each side so that foot passengers can pass over safely at all times.
This requirement may be waived by the Department of Public Works if found
unnecessary or unreasonable because of the nature of the excavation or
conditions affecting same.
§ 17-1.15. Protective Measures. [1976 Code § 41-15]
a. The permittee shall erect and maintain, approaching and throughout
the site of the excavation work, such signs, lights, barricades and other
protective devices as are required. In the absence of specific written
direction by the Police Department, all signs shall be provided as
required by the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices," section
concerning construction signs, as published by the United States
Department of Commerce.
b. Should the Township Police Department, at any time, determine that
the permittee has failed to provide all required signs and protective
devices in accordance with the directions of the Police Department and/
or the requirements of the previously mentioned Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, the Township may provide and erect or cause
§ 17-1.13 HOLMDEL § 17-1.15
1:476
§ 17-1.16. Attractive Nuisances. [1976 Code § 41-16]
It shall be unlawful for the permittee to suffer or permit to remain
unguarded at the place of excavation or opening any machinery, equipment
or other device having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to
attract children and hazardous to their safety or health.
§ 17-1.17. Care of Excavated Material. [1976 Code § 41-17]
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in
any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger
those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets and so
that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and
adjoining property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too
narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such as
might be the case in a narrow alley, the Township shall have the authority
to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a storage site
and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the
the provision and erection of such required signs, barricades and traffic
control devices and the cost thereof may be deducted from the cash
repair deposit provided by the applicant or may be billed directly to the
applicant by the Township. If such billing is made and not paid by the
applicant within 15 working days after such billing, the amount may
be deemed due and recoverable from the applicant's cash deposit or
surety.
c. The Township shall normally provide the applicant with 24 hours' notice
of its intention to provide any such required signs, barricades and
traffic control devices and its intention to bill the applicant the cost
thereof, to deduct the cost thereof from the applicant's cash repair
deposit or to recover the cost thereof from the applicant's surety, except
that in case of immediate emergency or hazard to the public health or
safety, the Township may cause the provision and erection of such
devices without notice.
d. The permittee shall erect such fence, railing or barriers about the site
of the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons using the
street or sidewalks, and such protective barriers shall be maintained
until the work shall be completed or the danger removed. At twilight
there shall be placed and maintained upon such place of excavation and
upon any excavated materials or structures or other obstructions to
streets, suitable and sufficient lights which shall be kept burning
throughout the night during the existence of such obstructions. It shall
be unlawful for anyone to remove or tear down the fence or railing or
other protective barriers or any lights provided there for the protection
of the public at twilight. Excavations of any traveled portion of the
roadway shall be backfilled so as to allow vehicular traffic to proceed on
the roadway unless otherwise directed by the Township Engineer.
§ 17-1.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1.17
1:477
permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary permission and to make
all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal sites.
§ 17-1.18. Damage to Existing Improvements. [1976 Code § 41-18;
Ord. No. 88-39]
All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the
excavation work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials for such
repairs shall conform with the requirements of any applicable code or
ordinance. If, upon being ordered, the permittee fails to furnish the
necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the Department of Public
Works shall require the labor and materials to be furnished and the cost
shall be charged against the permittee, and the permittee shall also be
liable on his or its bond therefor.
§ 17-1.19. Property Lines and Easements. [1976 Code § 41-19]
Property lines and limits or easements shall be indicated on the plan of
excavation submitted with the application for the excavation permit, and
it shall be the permittee's responsibility to confine excavation work within
these limits.
§ 17-1.20. Cleanup. [1976 Code § 41-20; Ord. No. 88-39]
As the excavation work progresses, all streets and private properties shall
be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris
resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such
excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall
be completed to the satisfaction of the Department of Public Works. From
time to time as may be ordered by the Department of Public Works and, in
any event, immediately after completion of the work, the permittee shall at
his or its own expense clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials
of any kind resulting from the work; and upon failure to do so within 24
hours after having been notified to do so by the Township, the work may be
done by the Township and the cost thereof charged to the permittee, and
the permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond
provided hereunder.
§ 17-1.21. Protection of Watercourses. [1976 Code § 41-21; Ord. No.
88-39]
The permittee shall provide for the flow of all watercourses, sewers or
drains intercepted during the excavation work and shall replace the same
in as good condition as it found them or shall make such provisions for them
as the Department of Public Works may direct. The permittee shall provide
for environmental protection for streams and watercourses. The permittee
shall not obstruct any drainage facility on any street but shall use all proper
measures to provide for the free passage of surface water. The permittee
shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water, muck, silt, slicking
or other runoff pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or other
§ 17-1.17 HOLMDEL § 17-1.21
1:478
operations and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from its failure
to so provide.
§ 17-1.22. Breaking Through Pavement. [1976 Code § 41-22; Ord.
No. 2000-24 § I]
Whenever it is necessary to break through existing pavement for excavation
purposes and where trenches are to be two feet or more in depth, the base
pavement shall be removed to at least 12 inches beyond the outer limits
of the trench. The face of the remaining pavement shall be approximately
vertical. A power-driven concrete saw shall be used so as to permit removal
of concrete pavement with a clean saw cut edge.
§ 17-1.23. Tunnels. [1976 Code § 41-23; Ord. No. 88-39]
Tunnels under pavement shall not be permitted except by permission of
the Department of Public Works. If permitted, tunnels shall be adequately
supported by timbering and backfilling under the direction of the Township
Engineer.
§ 17-1.24. Excavation and Backfilling Requirements. [1976 Code
§ 41-24; Ord. No. 88-39; Ord. No. 2000-24 § I]
§ 17-1.25. Restoration of the Surface. [1976 Code § 41-28; Ord. No.
39-88; Ord. No. 88-39; Ord. No. 2000-24 § I]
a. All trench openings shall be neatly saw cut. Unless specifically allowed,
in writing, by the Holmdel Road Department for unusual circumstances,
no excavation work area shall remain open overnight.
b. All applications for excavations exceeding four feet in depth shall be
accompanied by engineering plans showing how the excavation will be
protected from side-wall collapse and damage to adjoining property and
structures.
c. Unless otherwise allowed, the contractor shall backfill all trenches at
the end of each working day with suitable materials from the trench
excavation or with granular borrow material. Rocks larger than six
inches may not be included in backfill. Backfill material shall be
deposited in layers and mechanically compacted to a minimum 90%
Modified Proctor Density. Consolidation will not be acceptable as a
method to achieve the soil densities specified.
d. The backfilling, replacement of sub-base, and installation of base
course shall be completed within 24 hours after commencement of
work.
a. Bituminous Concrete Roads (See Detail "A" Attached89).
89.Editor's Note: Detail "A" may be found as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 17-1.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1.25
1:479
1. Following compaction, the permittee shall install no less than six
inches of dense graded aggregate followed by eight inches of
bituminous stabilized base course to the trench. If the distance
from the edge of the excavation work area to the existing curb or
roadway edge is less than two feet, the permittee shall be required
to excavate to the curb and evenly install six inches of dense
graded aggregate followed by eight inches of bituminous stabilized
base course in the entire area.
2. The partially restored pavement shall be allowed to settle for no
less than 90 days and no more than 180 days. The permittee shall
have the responsibility to monitor and maintain the trench so that a
depression does not develop. If at any time during the settlement
period the trench becomes unacceptable in the view of the Holmdel
Road Department or Township Engineer, the permittee shall be
notified of the condition requiring repair, and such repair shall be
performed by the permitted within 24 hours of such notification by
the Holmdel Road Department or Township Engineer. In the
absence of such repair, the Township may use bond fees to repair
said trench.
3. Following the period of settlement, the permittee shall be required
to mill the excavation work area surface as specified in paragraph 4
below and install no less than two inches of FABC surface course.
The permittee shall also be required to provide a tack coat on all
existing bituminous concrete surfaces and hot-poured, rubber
asphalt joint sealer per Section 908 of DOT Standard Specifications
for Roads and Bridges.
4. All longitudinal excavations shall require milling and restoration of
the excavation work area extending from the curb or edge of
pavement to the center line of the road or a minimum of one foot
beyond the outer edges of the excavation, whichever is greater.
5. All square excavations or longitudinal excavations less than 100
square feet shall be repaired using infrared thermal bond seamless
bituminous pavement patching.
6. The permittee shall be required to replace any facilities, including
but not limited to curb, pavement, sidewalk, line striping, etc. that
are affected by the excavation and restoration work.
7. With Township approval, the centerline of road milling and
restoration may be offset by the distance necessary to avoid
disturbing the existing line striping or markers.
b. Granite Paver Crosswalks and Intersections (See Detail "B" Attached90).
1. Following compaction, the permittee shall install no less than six
inches of dense graded aggregate base course to the trench. If the
90.Editor's Note: Detail "B" may be found as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 17-1.25 HOLMDEL § 17-1.25
1:480
distance from the edge of the excavation work area to the existing
curb is less than two feet, the permittee shall be required to
excavate to the curb and evenly install six inches of dense graded
aggregate base course in the entire area.
2. Following approval by the Township Road Department or Township
Engineer, the permittee shall install six by six welded wire mesh
reinforcement. The permittee will then follow with eight inches of
Class "B" concrete bringing the finished trench to within four
inches of grade.
3. Following a period of concrete curing, the permittee shall set
matching granite pavers on a latex modified mortar setting bed,
1 1/2 inches thick.
4. The permittee shall be required to replace any facilities, including
but not limited to curb, pavement, sidewalk, line striping, etc. that
are affected by the excavation and restoration work.
c. Brick Paver Sidewalks (See Detail "C" Attached91).
1. Following compaction, the permittee shall install no less than four
inches of dense graded aggregate base course to the trench. The
permittee shall maintain a 2.00% slope toward the road or match
the existing adjacent slope.
2. The permittee shall follow with matching brick pavers approved by
the Department of Public Works, 2 1/4 inch thick on a 1 1/2 inch
sand setting bed leaving a 1/8 inch separation for swept in sand.
3. The permittee shall be required to replace any facilities, including
but not limited to curb, pavement, sidewalk, line striping, etc. that
are affected by the excavation and restoration work.
d. Raised Concrete Intersections (See Detail "D" Attached92).
1. Following compaction the permittee shall install no less than eight
inches of dense graded aggregate to the trench. If the distance
from the edge of the excavation work to the existing curb is less
than two inches, the permittee shall be required to excavate to the
curb and evenly install eight inches of dense graded aggregate
base course in the entire area.
2. Following approval by the Township Road Department or Township
Engineer, the permittee shall install six by six welded wire mesh
reinforcement. The permittee will then install 10 inches of Class
"B" concrete in accordance with Detail "D" attached.
If at any time during the first two years following restoration
the trench becomes unacceptable due to excess settling or other
91.Editor's Note: Detail "C" may be found as an attachment to this chapter.
92.Editor's Note: Detail "D" may be found as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 17-1.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1.25
1:481
§ 17-1.26. Temporary Patching. [Ord. No. 2000-24 § 1]
The permittee may be required to place a temporary surface over openings
made in paved traffic lanes if the road must be reopened before the normal
completion of work. Except when the permanent replacement paving is
to be replaced before the opening of the cut to traffic, the fill above the
bottom of the existing pavement shall be tamped into place, properly graded
and topped with a minimum of four inches of bituminous patch material
which is suitable to maintain the opening in good condition until permanent
restoration can be made, but in no case shall temporary patch be used for
more than seven days.
§ 17-1.27. Township's Right to Restore Surfaces or Eliminate
Violations. [1976 Code § 41-29; Ord. No. 2000-24 § I]
condition which could adversely affect public safety in the view
of the Township Road Department or Township Engineer, the
permittee shall be notified of the condition requiring repair, and
such repair shall be performed within 24 hours of such notification.
e. Maintenance Procedures. Performance bond will be released when final
pavement restoration is approved by the Holmdel Road Department.
Such release shall be subject to the permittee agreeing to maintain the
restored excavation work area for a period of two years from the date of
final approval of the work and posting a maintenance bond to guarantee
same. As such, the Township Clerk shall retain as a maintenance
guarantee 50% of the cash repair deposit and/or performance guaranty
during the two-year period.
If an inspection reveals that the restored excavation area becomes
in need of repair within the maintenance period, the Holmdel Road
Department shall notify the permittee that he must repair the area in
accordance with the aforementioned procedure within 30 days from
the date of notification or sooner if safety on public conveyances is
involved. If the permittee fails to repair the trench within this time limit
the Township will utilize the permittee's maintenance guarantee to pay
for the cost of the repairs.
Upon termination of the two year maintenance period, any remaining
portions of said maintenance guarantee that has not been expended
shall be returned to the permittee without interest.
a. If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the street to
its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by
such permit or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation
work covered by such permit or shall fail to adhere to other
requirements of this section, the Township shall have the right to do all
work necessary to restore the street, to eliminate violations and to
complete the excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the
actual cost thereof and 25% of such cost, in addition, for general
overhead and administrative expenses. The Township shall have a
§ 17-1.25 HOLMDEL § 17-1.27
1:482
§ 17-1.28. Trenches in Pipe Laying. [1976 Code § 41-30; Ord. No.
2000-24 § I]
Except by special permission from the Township Engineer, no trench shall
be excavated more than 150 feet in advance of pipe laying or left unfilled
more than 150 feet where pipe has been laid. The length of the trench that
may be opened at any one time shall not be greater than the length of pipe
and the necessary accessories which are available at the site ready to be
put in place during that single working day. Trenches shall be braced and
sheathed according to generally accepted safety standards for construction
work and/or as prescribed by the Township Engineer. Except with the
written permission of the Township Engineer, no timber bracing, lagging,
sheathing or other lumber shall be left in any trench.
§ 17-1.29. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2000-24 § I]
§ 17-1.30. Prompt Completion of Work. [1976 Code § 41-31; Ord.
No. 2000-24 § I]
The permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expedition all excavation
work covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such
work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be,
as soon as practicable and, in any event, not later than the date specified in
the excavation permit therefor.
§ 17-1.31. Urgent Work. [1976 Code § 41-32; Ord. No. 2000-24 § I]
If traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public or the
public interest require that the excavation work be performed as emergency
work, the Holmdel Road Department shall have full power to order, at the
time the permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities
be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day, for the duration of the
project so that such excavation and repair work may be completed as soon
as possible. In enforcing this provision, the Township does not assume
under any circumstances the responsibility for the health and safety of the
cause of action for all fees, expenses and amounts paid out and due it
for such work and shall apply, in payment of the amount due it, any
funds of the permittee deposited as herein provided; and the Township
shall also enforce its rights under any surety bond provided pursuant
to this section. The Township will normally give the permittee 24 hours'
notice of its intent to act, under the terms of this section, to eliminate
violations of this section or to restore the surface, except that in the
case of immediate danger to public health or safety, certified to by the
appropriate officials, no such notice will be provided.
b. It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site
of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior to the
excavation for one year after restoring it to its original condition.
§ 17-1.27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1.31
1:483
contractor's employees, subcontractors, or other agents acting on behalf of
the contractor, the public or other third parties.
§ 17-1.32. Emergency Action. [1976 Code § 41-33; Ord. No. 2000-24
§ I]
In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit or utility in
or under any street breaks or bursts or otherwise is in such condition as to
immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual,
the owner or operator of such sewer, main, conduit or utility, without
first applying for and obtaining a permit, shall immediately take proper
emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the
protection of property, life, health and safety of individuals. However, such
owner or operator shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the
end of the next succeeding day during which the Township Clerk's office
is open for business and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without
first obtaining an excavation permit.
§ 17-1.33. Noise, Dust and Debris. [1976 Code § 41-34; Ord. No.
88-39; Ord. No. 2000-24 § I]
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such
manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the
general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall
take appropriate measures to reduce, to the fullest extent practicable in
the performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris
and during the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not use, except with
the express written permission of the Department of Public Works or in
case of any emergency as herein otherwise provided, any tool, appliance
or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or
repose of occupants of the neighboring property. Dust shall be controlled by
means of maintaining the work area in a clean condition, cleaning and/or
sweeping pavement areas and applying calcium chloride.
§ 17-1.34. Preservation of Monuments. [1976 Code § 41-35; Ord.
No. 2000-24 § I]
The permittee shall not disturb any survey monuments, hubs or pipes found
on the line of excavation work until and unless ordered to do so by the
Township Engineer.
§ 17-1.35. Notice and Inspections. [1976 Code § 41-36; Ord. No.
88-39; Ord. No. 2000-24 § I]
Forty-eight hours prior to the commencement of the work, the permittee
shall notify the Holmdel Road Department and request that an inspector be
present to observe the excavation and restoration. The permittee shall also
call for a utility markout prior to undertaking any excavating activity. No
pavement surface restoration shall be performed until the backfill operation
§ 17-1.31 HOLMDEL § 17-1.35
1:484
is complete and approved by the Holmdel Road Department or Township
Engineer.
§ 17-1.36. Maintenance of Drawings. [1976 Code § 41-37; Ord. No.
2000-24 § I]
Users of subsurface street space shall maintain accurate drawings, plans
and profiles showing the location and character of all underground
structures including abandoned installations. Two copies of as-built
drawings shall be filed with the Township Engineer within 60 days after new
installations, changes or replacements are made.
§ 17-1.37. Township Work Exempt. [1976 Code § 41-38; Ord. No.
2000-24 § I]
The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any excavation work
by employees of the Township or by any contractor of the Township or
agency or department of the Township performing work, for and on behalf
of the Township, necessitating openings of excavations in streets. Nor shall
the provisions of subsections 17-1.5 and 17-1.7 apply to any excavation
work performed adjacent to or within public rights-of-way by subdividers
or site developers in accordance with approved subdivision or site plans,
provided such subdividers or site developers have complied with applicable
ordinance requirements governing subdivisions.
§ 17-1.38. Insurance. [1976 Code § 41-39; Ord. No. 88-39; Ord. No.
2000-24 § I]
A permittee, prior to the commencement of excavation work hereunder,
shall furnish to the Township Clerk satisfactory certificates of insurance
indicating that the permittee has in force and will maintain in force, during
the performance of the excavation work and the period of the excavation
permit, public liability insurance of not less than $300,000 for any one
person and $1,000,000 for any one accident, and property damage
insurance of not less than $500,000, duly issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in this State. The Township shall be named as
an additional insured on the permittee's insurance policy. In cases where
the character or nature of the proposed excavation work are such as to
present an unusual hazard or a higher than normal risk of damage or injury,
the Township Committee may require the provision of increased amounts of
liability and property damage insurance. Any permits which occasion such
increased hazard or liability shall be referred, by the Department of Public
Works, for the consideration of the Committee prior to the issuance of a
permit.
By the making of an application for a permit, the permittee agrees to
indemnify and save harmless the Township of Holmdel, its offices, agents
and servants from and against any loss, injury or damage (including the
costs of providing a defense) resulting from any negligence or the fault of
the permittee in the case of work covered by the permit. The permittee shall
§ 17-1.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1.38
1:485
also indemnify and save harmless the Township of Holmdel (including the
costs of providing a defense) against any damage done to other utilities as
the result of a road opening.
§ 17-1.39. Liability of Township. [1976 Code § 41-40; Ord. No.
2000-24 § I]
This section shall not be construed as imposing upon the Township or
any official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any
person injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an
excavation permit is issued hereunder; nor shall the Township or any official
or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or
responsibility by reason of inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance
of any permit or the approval of any excavation work.
§ 17-1.40. Violations and Penalties. [1976 Code § 41-41; Ord. No.
88-39; Ord. No. 2000-24 § I]
For the violation of the provisions herein contained, the Director of Public
Works may revoke the permit and the excavation or opening and pavements
may be restored by the Township of Holmdel at the expense of the
permittee. In addition, any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the
Municipal Court of the Township of a violation of the terms of this section
shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalties established in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5.
§ 17-2. RIGHT-OF-WAY MAINTENANCE. [1976 Code §§ 32-10 —
32-16; Ord. No. 94-4; Ord. No. 99-6, § I; amended 9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-20]
§ 17-2.1. Duty of Owners or Tenants to Cut and Remove.
The owner or tenant of any lands lying within the limits of the Township
of Holmdel shall comply with the following requirements in maintaining
property:
a. All brush, hedges and other plant life growing within 10 feet of any
roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection of two roadways shall be
cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet.
b. All hanging tree limbs, branches, vines, or other vegetation, either
living or dead, shall be cleared to at least a height of 20 feet over any
roadway.
c. All tree limbs, branches, vines, or other vegetation, either living or
dead, of any height, shall be kept clear from obstructing the view of any
traffic control device or any sight line necessary for the safe operation
of motor vehicles on any roadway within the Township.
§ 17-1.38 HOLMDEL § 17-2.1
1:486
§ 17-2.2. Service of Notice to Remove.
Such notice to cut and remove pursuant to the requirements of this section
shall be given by the Township Code Enforcement Officer to the owner or
tenant by registered or certified mail to the last known address of the owner
or tenant. Removal of such shall occur within 10 days after notice in order
to preserve the safety of the public.
§ 17-2.3. Failure of Owner or Tenant to Cut or Remove After Notice.
In the event of the failure of any owner or tenant to comply with the notice
to remove served in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 17-2.2
above, the Township of Holmdel may proceed to cause the cutting and
removal of such brush, hedges and other plant life under the direction of
the Township Engineer.
§ 17-2.4. Cost of Removal to Become Lien Upon Property.
Whenever the Township has cut and removed brush, hedges and other
plant life in accordance with the terms and conditions of this section, the
Township Engineer shall certify to the Township Committee the cost thereof
including all charges of the Township Engineer's Office in regard thereto,
and if the amount so certified appears, by resolution of the Committee,
to be correct and reasonable, the Township Clerk shall forthwith deliver
a certified copy of the resolution to the Township Tax Collector and the
amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands from
which the brush, hedges and other plant life were cut and removed and
shall be added to and become part of the taxes next to be assessed and
levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as other
taxes and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as taxes.
§ 17-2.5. Enforcement by County.
The Monmouth County Engineer's Office is hereby designated as an officer
of the Township of Holmdel empowered to carry out the terms and
provisions of this section on all county roads and at all intersections with
county roads situate within the Township, provided, however, that if the
county performs the cutting and removal of brush, hedges and other plant
life as specified herein, there will be no fees or charges levied against the
affected property owners within the Township of Holmdel.
§ 17-2.6. Snow Removal.
No person shall cause or permit snow and/or ice accumulations to be
plowed or cast in any manner from private property including driveways,
sidewalks and private roads onto the portion of any public street, highway,
roadway or rights-of-way within the Township improved, designed, or
d. All tree limbs, branches, vines or other vegetation, either living or dead,
shall be kept clear within a distance of 10 feet from any public utility
line, pole, or support.
§ 17-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-2.6
1:487
ordinarily used for vehicular travel (hereafter "public way"). Snow and ice
accumulations plowed or cast from driveways and/or private property onto
a public way shall be promptly removed therefrom and deposited on private
property so as to avoid the creation of any public safety hazard. Nothing
herein shall be construed as prohibiting snow and/or ice accumulations
from being plowed or cast across a public way so long as same is done safely
and so long as the snow and/or ice accumulations only remain in the public
way momentarily while being transported out of the public way.
§ 17-2.7. Violations and Penalties.
Any person convicted of violating any of the terms or provisions of this
section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500. Each and every day
in which the owner or tenant shall refuse or neglect to comply with the
terms and provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. The
imposition and collection of any fine or penalty prescribed by this section
shall not bar the right of the Township to collect the cost of the cutting of
brush, hedges and other plant life as hereinabove specified and all remedies
shall be cumulative.
§ 17-2.8. (Reserved)
§ 17-2.9. No Obstructions on Traffic Islands.
No sign, as defined in Section 30-3 including a political sign, or other object
designed to attract the attention of the driver of a motor vehicle or which
tends to obstruct the view of the driver of a motor vehicle shall be placed
upon any of the following traffic islands:
§ 17-3. CONSTRUCTIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS ON TOWNSHIP
OWNED PROPERTY.
§ 17-3.1. Construction Prohibited. [Ord. No. 98-26 § I]
Any construction and/or installation on Township owned property and/or
within Township rights-of-way, including but not limited to railroad tie walls,
tree wells, ornamental walls, stanchions, gate pillars, other structures, etc.,
is prohibited except as set forth below.
a. Holmdel Road and Crawfords Corner Road.
b. Holmdel Road and Roberts Road.
c. Crawford Corner Road and Red Hill Road.
d. Hillcrest Road and Bethany Road.
e. Everett Road and American Way.
f. Middletown Road and Stillwell Road.
g. Middletown Road and East Main Street.
§ 17-2.6 HOLMDEL § 17-3.2
1:488
§ 17-3.2. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 98-26 § I]
The following shall be exceptions to the prohibitions set forth in subsection
17-3.1 above:
a. Sprinkler/irrigation systems for the purpose of watering lawns and/or
landscaped areas (hereafter referred to as "installations") may be
installed on or within Township owned property and/or rights-of-way
under the following conditions:
1. Any such installations shall be undertaken at the sole risk and
expense of the person making such installation and who, by taking
such action, shall be deemed to agree to indemnify and hold the
Township, its officials, agents, employees, boards, commissions and
agencies (hereafter collectively referred to as "Township")
harmless from any and all liability or expense resulting from or in
any way relating to such installation.
2. If, in the course of any Township use of such property or right-ofway,
the installation is required to be removed and/or is damaged,
the person making the installation or the person whose property is
benefitted thereby, shall remove the installation at the request of
the Township, or the Township may choose to do such removal. As a
result of any such removal and/or damage, the Township shall have
no responsibility to repair or reconstruct such installation, nor shall
it have any other liability resulting therefrom.
b. Other construction, including but not limited to railroad tie walls, tree
wells, ornamental walls, stanchions, gate pillars, other structures, etc.,
(hereafter referred to as "construction") may be constructed on
Township property or within Township rights-of-way if, in the sole
discretion of the Township, special circumstances exist warranting such
permission. In order to seek such permission, any person proposing to
undertake such construction shall submit a written request to the
Township Administrator together with a nonrefundable review fee of
$350. In the event the expense to the Township for engineering, legal or
planning review paid to the Township's professionals exceeds the
review fee, the applicant shall reimburse the Township for any
deficiency. The written request must specifically detail the action
proposed, including any and all reason such construction is impractical
to be undertaken on property not owned by the Township. The
Township Administrator shall review the request, may request
additional information from the applicant, and, after seeking such
advice from the Township Engineer, Township Attorney or other
Township agencies, employees or professionals as the Township
Administrator deems appropriate, shall present the request to the
Township Committee together with a recommended action. The
Township Committee shall, by written resolution and within the bounds
of authority possessed by it, approve, disapprove, or approve with
conditions the construction proposed. The application process provided
herein is not one of right, the Township having no obligation to permit
§ 17-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-3.2
1:489
§ 17-3.3. Violations: Penalties. [Ord. No. 98-26 § I]
Each and every person violating any of the provisions of this section, shall,
upon conviction, be liable to the penalties stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 17-4. SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE.
§ 17-4.1. Preliminary Finding. [Ord. No. 95-29 § 66-1]
The Township has an extensive amount of sidewalks abutting its streets and
roads. Although it is desirable for these sidewalks to be as safe as practical,
the Township has neither the financial resources nor the manpower
necessary to inspect and maintain in good repair all of the sidewalks within
its borders.
Property owners as compared with the Township are in the better position
to inspect the sidewalks abutting their properties, determine whether they
are in need of repair, and make such repairs. This section sets forth the
responsibility of property owners to do so as compared with the Township.
It is not the purpose of this section to reverse existing Township policy of
periodic sidewalk replacement which program shall continue without cost
to individual homeowners.
§ 17-4.2. Responsibility of Property Owner. [Ord. No. 95-29 § 66-2;
Ord. No. 99-32 § I]
§ 17-4.3. Shade Trees. [Ord. No. 95-29 § 66-3]
Nothing in subsections 17-4.1 through 17-4.4 shall be construed to permit
or authorize the property owner to interfere with or injure a municipal
shade tree, including roots, without the consent of the Shade Tree
Committee.
any such construction, but is adopted as an accommodation to those
seeking permission to undertake such construction on Township owned
property. No right of hearing before the Township Committee is hereby
created. In the event such permission is granted, the conditions set
forth in subsection 17-3.2a1 and 2 above shall apply.
a. Property owners and not the Township shall be responsible for
repairing and maintaining sidewalks abutting the front and side of their
property. The property owner shall not be responsible for repairing or
maintaining sidewalks abutting the rear of their property. All sidewalk
repair or maintenance shall comply with any and all requirements set
forth in Chapter 30 Development Regulations. The cost of such repair
or maintenance shall be borne by the abutting property owner.
b. (Reserved)
§ 17-3.2 HOLMDEL § 17-4.4
1:490
§ 17-4.4. Liability. [Ord. No. 95-29 § 66-4]
Nothing in subsections 17-4.1 to 17-4.6 shall be read to expand the liability
of property owners to third parties with respect to sidewalks beyond the law
as it currently exists.
§ 17-4.5. Duty to Remove Snow and Ice.93 [Added 9-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-15]
Any owner or tenant of lands or premises abutting or bordering on any
public street in the Township shall remove all snow and ice from the
abutting sidewalks of such streets or, in the case of ice which may be so
frozen as to make removal impracticable, cause the same to be thoroughly
covered with sand, ashes, or any other traction-enhancing product, within
12 hours of daylight after the same shall fall or be formed thereon.
§ 17-4.5.1. Sidewalks to Be Kept Clear from Piled Brush and Leaves.
[Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-16]
Property owners shall keep all sidewalks adjoining public roadways on their
property clear of piled brush and leaves, so as to not cause any public
safety hazards, and shall further comply with all relevant provisions of the
Township Brush and Leaf Collection Program, as set forth in § 2-34.2.
§ 17-4.6. Removal of Overhanging Vegetation by Property Owner.
[Ord. No. 95-29 § 66-6]
Property owners shall keep all trees (except those administered by the
Shade Tree Committee), brush, hedges and other plant life and vegetation
pruned, cut and trimmed in order to prevent such trees (except those
administered by the Shade Tree Committee), brush, hedges and other plant
life and vegetation from overhanging within a height of eight feet above the
sidewalks abutting their property.
§ 17-4.7. Violation and Penalties. [Ord. No. 95-29 § II; New]
Any person convicted of violating the terms or provisions of subsection
17-4.5 or subsection 17-4.6 shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty
stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. Each and every day in which the property
owner shall refuse or neglect to comply with the terms and provisions
of subsection 17-4.5 and/or subsection 17-4.6 shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 17-5. SERVICE OF PRIVATE ROADS.
93.Editor's Note: Former subsection 17-4.5, Removal of Snow and Ice by Property Owner,
previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 95-29, was repealed
in its entirety by Ordinance No. 99-32.
§ 17-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-5.1
1:491
§ 17-5.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 97-5 § I]
The Township Committee having been advised that it has the discretion to
service private roads within the Township if, in its opinion, such service
is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of residents of the
Township and if travel along such private roads is sufficient to warrant such
action, it is the purpose of this section to set forth the policy, criteria and
standards for such action.
§ 17-5.2. Declaration and Determination. [Ord. No. 97-5 § I]
It is the opinion of the Township Committee, as to the private roads listed
in subsection 17-5.8, Schedule A,94 that the expenditure for the service
described in subsection 17-5.4 is warranted because:
§ 17-5.3. Eligibility. [Ord. No. 97-5 § I]
A road within the Township not dedicated to and accepted by the Township
as a public road and which is not within the purview of the Municipal
Services Act, N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.2 to 23.8, shall be eligible for service as
described in subsection 17-5.4 by the Township provided:
a. Travel along such roads is sufficient; and
b. The health, safety and welfare of sufficient residents and members of
the public may be advanced.
a. Users and/or owners of the road undertake periodic scraping to prevent
road conditions from deteriorating so that access by emergency and/or
Township equipment would be impeded or the equipment damaged.
b. Users and/or owners of the road undertake trimming and removal of
branches or other obstructions which might impede or damage
emergency and/or Township equipment.
c. There exists along the road four or more private single family homes
which use the private road exclusively for ingress and egress to a public
road.
d. The homes referred to in paragraph c above are not located on lots:
1. Which are adjacent to a public road, unless access to the public
road is unavailable by virtue of the existence of wetlands.
2. Which adjoin a lot or lots in the same ownership which are adjacent
to a public road.
3. From which there exists an easement of right-of-way from the home
to a public road.
e. The private road is designated in subsection 17-5.8, Schedule A.
94.Editor's Note: Schedule A, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 17-5.1 HOLMDEL § 17-5.4
1:492
§ 17-5.4. Service. [Ord. No. 97-5 § I]
The level of service to be given to the private roads set forth in subsection
17-5.8, Schedule A, shall generally consist of the following:
§ 17-5.5. Nonexclusive Control. [Ord. No. 97-5 § I]
Nothing herein shall be deemed as effecting exclusive control in the
Township over such roads as are listed in subsection 17-5.8, Schedule
A. Others may undertake any action in maintaining, servicing and/or
improving such private roads. The Township assumes no liability for any
damage resulting from the servicing or use of such private roads whether
such damage is to the road or to the adjoining property. The Township will
cease all service activity relating to such private roads in the event that
those with the legal right to exercise control over the private road forward
written requests to the Township Clerk and a copy to the Department of
Public Works that no further service activity is desired.
§ 17-5.6. Level of Access and Use. [Ord. No. 97-5 § I]
The discretion of the Township Committee exercised hereby is based upon
current usage of the private roads listed in subsection 17-5.8, Schedule A.
If usage shall decrease below the level warranting continued service, in the
opinion of the Township Committee, such private roads may be deleted. If
usage increases to a level which, in the opinion of the Township Committee,
warrants dedication of the roadway to the Township, written notification
shall be given to the owner(s) of such private road(s). If within 60 days
thereafter the owner(s) shall not have granted such dedication as required
by the Township, further service hereunder may cease and such private
road(s) will thereafter be deleted from subsection 17-5.8, Schedule A.
§ 17-5.7. Assumption of Risk. [Ord. No. 97-5 § I]
Those choosing to use the private roads set forth in subsection 17-5.8,
Schedule A, for any purpose whatsoever, shall do so at their own risk and
the Township assumes no control or liability over such roads.
§ 17-5.8. Private Roads to Be Serviced. [Ord. No. 97-5 § I; Ord. No.
97-14 § I]
The roads or parts of roads described in Schedule A attached to and made
a part of this section shall be serviced by the Township in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
Chapter 18
SEWERS
a. Brush pickup.
b. Snow plowing.
§ 17-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-1
1:493
§ 18-1. REGIONAL SEWERAGE AUTHORITY.
§ 18-1.1. Bayshore Regional Sewerage Authority Created. [1976
Code § 22-1]
Pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (c), Section 4 of the Sewerage
Authorities Law of the State of New Jersey (Laws of 1946, Chapter 138,
as amended and supplemented), there is hereby created a public body
corporate and politic under the name and style of "Bayshore Regional
Sewerage Authority."
§ 18-1.2. Powers and Duties. [1976 Code § 22-2]
The Bayshore Regional Sewerage Authority is and shall be an agency and
instrumentality of the three municipalities95 created by parallel ordinances
duly adopted by their governing bodies, and is a sewerage authority
contemplated and provided for by the Sewerage Authorities Law and shall
have and exercise all of the powers and perform all of the duties provided
for by the Sewerage Authorities Law and any other statutes heretofore or
hereafter enacted and applicable thereto.
§ 18-1.3. Membership; Authorized Salaries of Members. [1976 Code
§ 22-3]
The Bayshore Regional Sewerage Authority shall consist of six members
thereof, and two of such members shall be appointed by the Governing
Body of each of the municipalities in accordance with the provisions of
the Sewerage Authorities Law. (The Bayshore Regional Sewerage Authority
shall be authorized to establish an annual salary for each of its members of
not more than $2,000.)
95.Editor's Note: The three municipalities referred to, as stated in a preamble to the
ordinance, are Hazlet Township, Holmdel Township and the Borough of Union Beach. The
preamble states that: There are in and about the communities of Hazlet Township,
Holmdel Township and the Borough of Union Beach, waters which are polluted and
subject to pollution by sewerage and industrial and other wastes arising from causes
within the territories of the municipality and the other two municipalities hereinafter
mentioned, and the Township Committee of Holmdel Township has ascertained that there
is imperative need to relieve such water from pollution and thereby to reduce and
ultimately abate the menace to the public health resulting from such pollution. The
Sewerage Authorities Law of the State of New Jersey (Laws of 1946, Chapter 138, as
amended and supplemented) grants power to any two or more municipalities, the areas of
which, together, comprise an integral body of territory, by means and through the agency
of a sewerage authority, to acquire, construct, maintain, operate or improve works for the
collection, treatment, purification or disposal of sewerage or other wastes, and the areas
of Holmdel Township, Hazlet Township and the Borough of Union Beach, together,
comprise such an integral body of territory. The Township Committee of Holmdel
Township has decided and hereby determines that it is necessary and advisable and is in
the best interests of the inhabitants of Holmdel Township that by joint or parallel action
by or on behalf of Holmdel Township, Hazlet Township and the Borough of Union Beach,
each a municipal corporation of the State of New Jersey, situate in the County of
Monmouth and herein called "municipalities," there be created a sewerage authority,
pursuant to said Sewerage Authorities Law, as a public body corporate and politic and an
agency and instrumentality of said municipalities for the purposes of the relief of water in
or bordering the State from pollution arising from causes within the area of the
municipalities and the relief of waters in, -bordering or entering said area from pollution
or threatened pollution and the consequent improvement of conditions affecting the
public health.
§ 18-1 HOLMDEL § 18-1.4
1:494
§ 18-1.4. Limitation of Powers. [1976 Code § 22-4]
The Bayshore Regional Sewerage Authority shall be limited in its power
to install, maintain and operate collector mains and a sewerage treatment
plant for the purposes of collecting and treating the effluent from sewer
lines and mains installed, maintained and operated and controlled by the
participating municipalities or their local sewer authority counterparts.
§ 18-1.5. Certified Copy of Chapter to Be Filed. [1976 Code § 22-5]
A copy of this chapter, duly certified by the Township Clerk, shall forthwith
be filed by the Township Clerk in the office of the Secretary of State of the
State of New Jersey.
§ 18-2. HOLMDEL TOWNSHIP SEWER UTILITY SYSTEM.
§ 18-2.1. Establishment of Utility. [1976 Code § 65-1]
A municipal sanitary sewer utility system is hereby created and established
within the Township of Holmdel in the County of Monmouth and State
of New Jersey for the regulation and use of sewers, to insure the proper
operation and the protection and preservation of the system, fixing the
amount and charges therefor and providing rules and regulations therefor.
Such system, including the sanitary sewage treatment plant, pumping
stations and appurtenant structures, works and fixtures relating thereto,
and all extensions and improvements thereof situate in and constructed at
public expense by the Township of Holmdel, shall hereafter be operated,
maintained, managed and controlled by the Township of Holmdel as a
publicly owned utility of the Township of Holmdel within the meaning of
N.J.S. 40:63-1 et seq., amendments thereof and supplements thereto and all
other provisions of other laws applicable.
§ 18-2.2. Title. [1976 Code § 65-2]
The sanitary sewer utility system for the Township of Holmdel shall be
known as the "Holmdel Township Sewer Utility System."
§ 18-2.3. Definitions. [1976 Code § 65-3; Ord. No. 85-7]
BOD (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — Shall mean the
quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in
milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — Shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping
of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
"building sewer," beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building
wall.
BUILDING SEWER — Shall mean the extension from the "building drain" to
the "public sewer" or other place of disposal.
§ 18-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-2.3
1:495
EQUIVALENT DOMESTIC UNIT — Shall mean for nonresidential
structures, the number obtained by calculating per diem sewer flow in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:14A-23.3 and dividing by 225.
GARBAGE — Shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage
and sale of produce.
HEALTH OFFICER — Shall mean the Health Officer of the Board of Health
of the Township of Holmdel, or his agent or representative.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary
"sewage."
NATURAL OUTLET — Shall mean any outlet into a "watercourse," pond,
ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
pH — Shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — Shall mean the duly appointed Plumbing
Inspector of the Township of Holmdel, or his agent or representative:
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — Shall mean the wastes from the
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to
such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in "public sewers," with no particle greater
than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — Shall mean a "sewer" in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
RESIDENCE — Shall mean a single family home, trailer and each dwelling
unit in multiple dwelling units or attached townhouse or apartments.
SANITARY SEWER — Shall mean a "sewer" which carries "sewage" and to
which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — Shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Shall mean any arrangement of devices
and structures used for treating "sewage."
SEWAGE WORKS — Shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping,
treating and disposing of "sewage."
SEWER — Shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying "sewage."
SHALL — Is mandatory. May is permissive.
SLUG — Shall mean any discharge of water, "sewage" or "industrial waste"
which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow
exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five
§ 18-2.3 HOLMDEL § 18-2.3
1:496
times the average twenty-four hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
STORM DRAIN (SOMETIMES TERMED "STORM SEWER") — Shall mean a
"sewer" which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes
"sewage" and "industrial wastes," other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Shall mean solids that either float on the surface
of or are in suspension in water, "sewage" or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township Committee of the Township of
Holmdel, the Township of Holmdel, or the duly authorized agent, servant,
employee or representative of the Township of Holmdel.
TOWNSHIP CLERK — Shall mean the Township Clerk of the Township of
Holmdel, or his agent or representative.
WATERCOURSE — Shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs,
either continuously or intermittently.
§ 18-2.4. Prohibited Discharges. [1976 Code § 65-4; Ord. No. 6-71]
a. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters
to any public sanitary sewer.
b. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm
sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the Township. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on
approval of the Township, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
c. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas; or any liquid, solid or gas which by
interaction with other substances may cause fire or explosion.
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited to, cyanides in
excess of two milligrams per liter as CN in the wastes as
discharged to the public sewer.
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
§ 18-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-2.4
1:497
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with
the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited
to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metals, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups,
milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
5. Any septic tank waste into manholes of the system without written
consent of the Township.
d. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in
the opinion of the Township that such wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb,
public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the Township shall give consideration to
such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature
of the sewage-treatment process, capacity of the sewage-treatment
plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage-treatment plant,
and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
1. Liquid or vapor.
(a) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
[65° C.]
(b) Any liquid or vapor having a flash point lower than 235° F., as
determined by the Tagliabue (Tag) closed cup method.
2. Any soluble oils; or any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease
or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per
liter, or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between 32° F. and 150° F. [0° C. and 65°
C.]
3. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4
horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Township.
4. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron, pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
5. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment
works exceeds the limits established by the Township for such
materials.
§ 18-2.4 HOLMDEL § 18-2.4
1:498
6. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limits
which may be established by the Township as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of
the State, Federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such
discharge to the receiving waters.
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Township in compliance
with applicable State or Federal regulations.
8. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.0.
9. Materials which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or
of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride
and sodium sulfate.
(b) Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions.
(c) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities which in the opinion of the
Township constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs," as defined herein.
10. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that
the sewage treatment plan effluent cannot meet the requirements
of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters.
e. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection 18-2.4d and
which in the judgment of the Township may have a deleterious effect
upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life, public health or safety or
constitute a public nuisance, the Township may:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
§ 18-2.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-2.4
1:499
4. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of subsection 18-2.10.
If the Township permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to
the review and approval of the Township and subject to the requirements
of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
f. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Township, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Township and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection.
g. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
h. When required by the Township, the owner of any property serviced by
a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer as shall, in the opinion of the
Township, facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the Township. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his
expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible
to authorized Township personnel at all times.
i. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this section shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the
American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the
control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at the control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the
control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and
to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property.
j. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the Township and any
owner of property upon application made and a finding by the Township
that such special agreement or arrangement would be in the best
interests of the Township.
§ 18-2.4 HOLMDEL § 18-2.5
1:500
§ 18-2.5. Prohibited Connections. [1976 Code § 65-5]
§ 18-2.6. Application for Service. [1976 Code § 65-6]
Applications for connection to the sewer system shall be made to the
Township Committee of the Township of Holmdel on forms provided by the
Township. The connection fee as set forth in subsections 18-2.9 and 18-2.10
of this section shall accompany the application.
§ 18-2.7. Use of Public Sewers Required. [1976 Code § 65-7]
a. No person shall connect or allow to be connected into any part of the
sewer system located within the Township of Holmdel any drain or
drain leader or gutter designed to collect precipitation, ground or
surface waters.
b. No person shall connect or allow to be connected into the sewer system
in the Township of Holmdel any residence, commercial buildings,
institutions, factories or industrial establishments without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the Township of Holmdel and payment
of the required fee to the Township.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the Township of Holmdel or in any area under the jurisdiction of
the Township any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.
b. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
Township of Holmdel or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
Township any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions
of this section.
c. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage on any lot within the
Township that abuts a street, alley or right-of-way in which there is
located a public sanitary sewer line.
d. The owner of each house, building or property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within
the Township and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary
sewer of the Township, is hereby required at his expense to install
suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly
with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
section, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so.
e. In the event, by reason of peculiar topographical location and upon
proof that it would be impossible to pipe the sewage from the residence
to the street main by flow of gravity, it would be a hardship for the
§ 18-2.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-2.7
1:501
§ 18-2.8. Building Sewers and Connections. [1976 Code § 65-8; Ord.
No. 6-84]
property owner to connect to the sewage system, then and in the event
application may be made to the Township by such property owner to
continue the use of the private septic facility existing on the premises
at the time of the adoption of this section.
a. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Township.
b. Classes of Permits; Permit Applications.
1. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(a) For residential and commercial services;
(b) For service to establishments producing industrial waste.
2. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
form furnished by the Township. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Township. Such
application for residential, commercial building or industrial
building sewer permit shall be accompanied by a fee of $25 for the
expense of issuance of a permit. Permit fees shall be payable to the
Township.
c. All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the Township for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
d. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
e. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Township, to meet
all requirements of this section. The owner or his agent shall make
application in writing for use of such sewer. Such application shall be
accompanied by whatever information is considered pertinent by the
Township, and by a fee of $10 for the expense of issuance of a permit.
f. The size, slope, alignment, materials or construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements
§ 18-2.7 HOLMDEL § 18-2.8
1:502
§ 18-2.9. Sewerage System Connection Charges (Fees). [1976 Code
§ 65-9; Ord. No. 17-77; Ord. No. 85-7; Ord. No. 91-3; Ord. No. 98-23
§ II; Ord. No. 98-32, § I]
The following are the charges or fees to be paid to the Township upon
application for services and connection to the sewer system:
of the Building and Plumbing Codes96 or other applicable rules and
regulations of the Township.
g. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the first floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
h. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
i. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or
other applicable rules or regulations of the Township. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedure and material must be approved by the
Township before installation.
j. A permit for a building sewer shall not become effective until the
installation is complete to the satisfaction of the Township. The
Township shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify
the Township when the building sewer is ready for final inspection and
connection to the building sewer. The connection shall be made under
the supervision of the Township or its representative. Such final
inspection shall be made within 24 hours after receipt of notice by the
Township. If the work is approved by the Township as a result of such
final inspection requested by the applicant, the Township shall receive
the sum of $25 for the inspection. Where there is more than one final
inspection required, the Township shall receive the sum of $5 for each
additional final inspection performed at the request of the applicant.
k. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Township.
a. Residential. $990 plus permit fee per residence where street sewers are
constructed or owned by the Township of Holmdel.
96.Editor's Note: See Chapter 10, Building and Housing.
§ 18-2.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-2.9
1:503
§ 18-2.10. Sewage System Rental or Use Charges. [1976 Code
§ 65-10]
The sewer system rental or use rates in the Township of Holmdel shall
be established by the Township Committee of the Township of Holmdel, to
commence as of July 1, 1968. The schedule of rates shall include the rates
to be charged residential buildings, commercial buildings, institutions,
hospitals, industrial uses and all other users of the sewer system. The rates
established shall remain in effect until amended in accordance with the
terms of this section.
§ 18-2.11. Powers and Authority of the Township. [1976 Code
§ 65-11]
§ 18-2.12. Payment of Connection, Sewer Rental and Use Charges.
[1976 Code § 65-12; Ord. No. 17-77; Ord. No. 27-77; Ord. No. 93-7]
b. Commercial. $990 per equivalent domestic unit, plus permit fees.
c. Schools, Churches, Hospitals and Other Public and Semi-Public
Buildings. $990 per equivalent domestic unit, plus permit fees.
d. Motels/hotels. $990 per equivalent domestic unit, plus permit fees.
e. Industrial. $990 per equivalent domestic unit, plus permit fees.
a. The Township may appoint a Superintendent or any other duly
authorized employee to enter any and all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
b. The duly authorized employee of the Township shall bear proper
credentials and identification and shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the Township is the owner of an easement, for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
sewerage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the
terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved.
a. Payment of sewer system connection charges shall be made by payment
to the "Holmdel Township Sewer Account." Payment of charges for
connection of residential users to trunks and laterals installed by the
Township of Holmdel may be made, at the discretion of the property
owner, over a period of not more than four years. There shall be a down
payment of $100 with the balance to be paid in not more than four
years, with each quarterly payment to be not less than the sum of $50
together with interest on the remaining balance at the same rate as
paid on real property taxes.
b. Payment of sewer system rental or use charges shall be made on a
quarterly basis, and charges shall be effective as of July 1, 1968, except
§ 18-2.9 HOLMDEL § 18-2.12
1:504
§ 18-2.13. Dedication of Revenues. [1976 Code § 65-13]
The Township of Holmdel hereby dedicates all revenues received from any
and all persons connecting to the sewer system in the Township of Holmdel,
including connection charges and sewer rental charges, to liquidate all
sums borrowed in connection with the establishment of such system, after
payment of all expenses chargeable to the operation and maintenance of the
sewer system.
§ 18-2.14. Interest and Penalties on Late Payments; Lien;
Disconnection of Service. [1976 Code § 65-14; Ord. No. 17-77; Ord.
No. 6-82]
All charges and rents for the sewer system shall be due and payable on
the first day of each quarter, i.e., January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1
of each year. Any and all charges, including mandatory connection charges
provided for in this section, which remain unpaid on and after the 10th day
following the first day of each quarter, i.e., January 11, April 11, July 11 and
October 11, shall draw interest at the same rate as delinquent taxes upon
real estate in the Township and shall be a lien upon the premises until paid
in full, and the Township of Holmdel shall have and exercise the remedies
for the collection thereof, together with interests, costs and penalties, as
provided in N.J.S. 40:63-8, as it has by law for collection of taxes upon real
estate. In addition and in the event that such charges and rents shall not be
paid in full, together with interest and penalties, within 60 days after the
date when the charges and rents shall become due, the connection between
the premises and the sewer system may, in the discretion of the Township
Committee, be cut off, and the connections shall not be restored until all
such charges, rents, interest and penalties are paid, and a further fee of $25
shall be paid to the Township for restoring the connection.
§ 18-2.15. Sanitary Sewage Treatment Plant. [1976 Code § 65-15]
The Township of Holmdel is hereby authorized to acquire, by purchase,
lease or otherwise, any and all sanitary sewage treatment plants which are
or may be required in the operation of the sewer system provided for herein.
The operation and maintenance of any sanitary sewer plant or plants shall
be regulated by the Township Committee of the Township of Holmdel, and
such Township Committee is hereby authorized to negotiate a contract or
contracts for the operation and maintenance of such plant or plants, to
negotiate a contract or contracts for administering the system, including
billing services, to purchase the necessary chemical or chemicals required
in the treatment of sewage, to hire employees, to acquire insurance
for connections made thereafter, in which case charges shall be
effective immediately on a pro rata basis. Bills for the sewer system
rental charges shall be rendered quarterly to the owner of each
premises and shall be computed in accordance with the tariff schedule
set forth by the Township Committee of the Township of Holmdel by
ordinance.
§ 18-2.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-2.15
1:505
coverage and to do any and all things necessary to the continued operation
and maintenance of the sewer system.
§ 18-2.16. Revision of Rates. [1976 Code § 65-16]
The rates set forth in this chapter are subject to adjustment and change to
such extent as the Township Committee of the Township of Holmdel may
deem necessary or advisable.
§ 18-2.17. Violations and Penalties. [1976 Code § 65-19; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject,
upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 18-3. SEWER RENTAL AND USE CHARGES.
§ 18-3.1. Authority and Intent. [1976 Code § 64A-1; Ord. No. 5-84]
§ 18-3.2. Charges and Rentals. [1976 Code § 642A-2; Ord. No. 3-80;
Ord. No. 2-81; Ord. No. 89-6; Ord. No. 92-9; Ord. No. 96-16; Ord.
No. 96-44 § 1; Ord. No. 97-17 § I; Ord. No. 97-30 § I; Ord. No.
2007-30 § I; Ord. No. 2010-21 § I; Ord. No. 2011-10; Ord. No.
2011-11; Ord. No. 2018-08]
Sewer charges and rentals shall be as follows:
a. The Township Committee of the Township of Holmdel, pursuant to
subsection 18-2.10 of the section creating the Holmdel Township Sewer
Utility System adopted June 17, 1968,97 hereby establishes sewer rental
and use charges for the system.
b. It is the intent of these charges to establish a schedule under which all
users shall pay their share of the total costs. This share shall include
extra operational and maintenance costs attributable to pollutant
discharges.
c. Operation and maintenance include replacement. Costs are based on
past experience. These charges shall be reviewed at least biannually
and revised as needed to meet Federal and State requirements.
a. Residences. Owners or occupants of residences, whether in the
Townships of Holmdel or Hazlet, shall pay a flat rate of $115 per
quarter, upon adoption except that owners or occupants who use 6,000
gallons of water or less, or 6,001-12,000 gallons of water, in the winter
quarter as evidenced by water consumption figures of the Water Utility
Company, shall pay a flat rate of $75 per quarter upon adoption or $100
per quarter, upon adoption respectively. All of the aforementioned shall
be per dwelling unit, except that where multiple dwelling units are
97.Editor's Note: This section supersedes former Chapter 64A, Sewer Rental and Use
Charges, of the 1976 Code, adopted 3-18-1974 as Ord. No. 8-74, as amended 10-18-1976
by Ord. No. 20-76 and 6-20-1977 by Ord. No. 18-77.
§ 18-2.15 HOLMDEL § 18-3.2
1:506
served by a single water meter, the flat rate shall be $115 upon
adoption/quarter/dwelling unit, unless the total water consumption for
the winter quarter, divided by the number of dwelling units, is equal
to 6,000 gallons or less or 6,001-12,000 gallons, in which case the
flat rate shall be $75 per quarter or $100 per quarter, upon adoption
respectively.
b. Nonresidential. Nonresidential facilities shall pay a two-part quarterly
charge comprised of a flow charge, or a minimum flow charge,
whichever is greater, and a fixed charge. Charges by category are as
follows:
1. Industrial/Manufacturing/Warehouse Facilities.
(a) Industrial/manufacturing/warehouse facilities shall pay a
quarterly flow charge per 1,000 gallons of water flow or per
1,000 gallons of sewage flow, providing sewage metering is
reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer, equal to the
most recent projected treatment cost per 1,000 gallons set
forth by Bayshore Regional Sewerage Authority (BRSA),
Monmouth County Bayshore Outfall Authority (MCBOA) and
Hazlet Township Sewerage Authority. There shall be a
minimum quarterly flow charge, regardless of the amount of
flow, as calculated in paragraph b(c) below. There shall also be
a quarterly fixed charge based on the number of equivalent
dwelling units times $100. Equivalent dwelling units for the
fixed charge shall be calculated as follows:
(Number of employees x 25 gallons per day) ÷ 225
(b) In accordance with the provisions of the BRSA tariff, there is a
surcharge for strength in excess of a biological oxygen demand
average and for suspended solids in excess of an average. This
surcharge shall be billed to the appropriate user by Holmdel
Township as levied by the BRSA. The rates for such surcharge
shall be the rates established by the BRSA as amended from
time to time.
(c) The minimum flow charge per quarter shall be based on the
number of equivalent dwelling units times 10 times the most
recent projected treatment cost described in paragraph b1(a)
above.
2. Office and Research Laboratory/Offices/Commercial Retail
Facilities.
(a) Office and research laboratory/offices/commercial retail
facilities shall pay a quarterly flow charge per 1,000 gallons of
water flow or per 1,000 gallons of sewage flow, providing
sewage metering is reviewed and approved by the Township
Engineer, equal to the most recent projected treatment cost
per 1,000 gallons set forth in BRSA, MCBOA and Hazlet
§ 18-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-3.2
1:507
Township Sewerage Authority. There shall be a minimum
quarterly flow charge, regardless of the amount of flow, as
calculated in paragraph b2(c) below. There shall also be a
quarterly fixed charge based on the number of equivalent
dwelling units times $100. Equivalent dwelling units for the
fixed charge shall be calculated as follows:
(Building square footage x 0.100 gallons per day per square
foot) ÷ 225
If property is unoccupied, the new rate will not go into effect
until the first occupancy occurs.
Restaurants — The equivalent domestic unit calculation for
restaurants shall be as follows:
Seating capacity x 20 gallons per day ÷ 225
Hotels — The equivalent of domestic unit calculation for hotels
shall be as follows:
(Number of bedrooms x 75 gallons per day per bedroom) ÷ 225
(b) In accordance with the provisions of the BRSA tariff, there is a
surcharge for strength in excess of a biological oxygen demand
average and for suspended solids in excess of an average. This
surcharge shall be billed to the appropriate user by Holmdel
Township as levied by the BRSA. The rates for such surcharge
shall be the rates established by the BRSA as amended from
time to time.
(c) The minimum flow charge per quarter shall be based on the
number of equivalent dwelling units times 10 times the most
recent projected treatment cost described in paragraph b2(a)
above.
3. Public Schools.
(a) All public schools shall pay a quarterly flow charge per 1,000
gallons of water flow or per 1,000 gallons of sewage flow,
providing sewage metering is reviewed and approved by the
Township Engineer, equal to the most recent projected
treatment cost per 1,000 gallons set forth by BRSA, MCBOA
and Hazlet Township Sewerage Authority. There shall be a
minimum quarterly flow charge, regardless of the amount of
flow, as calculated below. In addition to the flow charge, each
school shall pay a quarterly fixed charge based on the number
of equivalent dwelling units times $100. Equivalent dwelling
units for the fixed charge shall be calculated as follows:
(Number of students x "Y" gallons per day) ÷ 225, where "Y"
equals:
§ 18-3.2 HOLMDEL § 18-3.2
1:508
10 for schools with no showers or cafeteria;
15 for schools with a cafeteria;
20 for schools with a cafeteria and showers;
25 for schools with cafeteria, showers and laboratories.
(b) The minimum flow charge per quarter shall be based on the
number of equivalent dwelling units times 10 times the most
recent projected treatment cost.
4. Garden State Parkway.
(a) The Garden State Parkway facilities shall pay a quarterly flow
charge per 1,000 gallons of water flow or per 1,000 gallons of
sewage flow, providing sewage metering is reviewed and
approved by the Township Engineer, equal to the most recent
projected treatment cost per 1,000 gallons set forth by BRSA,
MCBOA and Hazlet Township Sewerage Authority. There shall
be a minimum quarterly flow charge, regardless of the
amounts of flow, as calculated below. There shall be a quarterly
fixed charge based on the number of equivalent dwelling units
times $100. Equivalent dwelling units for the fixed charge shall
be calculated as follows:
Arts Center — (Seating capacity, including lawn seats x 3
gallons per day) ÷ 225
Reception Center — (Seating capacity x 20 gallons per day) ÷
225
Police Barracks and Maintenance Office — (Building square
footage x 100 gallons per day per square foot) ÷ 225
(b) The minimum flow charge per quarter shall be based on the
number of equivalent dwelling units times 10 times the most
recent projected treatment cost.
5. Hospitals and Congregate Care Facilities.
(a) Hospitals and congregate care facilities shall pay a quarterly
flow charge per 1,000 gallons of water flow or per 1,000
gallons of sewage flow, providing sewage metering is reviewed
and approved by the Township Engineer, equal to the most
recent projected treatment cost per 1,000 gallons set forth by
BRSA, MCBOA and Hazlet Township Sewerage Authority.
There shall be a minimum quarterly flow charge, regardless of
the amount of flow, as calculated in paragraph b5(b) below.
There shall also be a quarterly fixed charge based on the
number of equivalent dwelling units times $100. Equivalent
dwelling units for the fixed charge shall be as follows:
§ 18-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-3.2
1:509
§ 18-3.3. Flow Figures. [1976 Code § 64A-3; Ord. No. 89-6; Ord. No.
2010-21 § I; Ord. No. 2011-10; Ord. No. 2011-11]
Hospitals — (Number of beds x 175 gallons per day per bed) ÷
225
Congregate Care Facilities — (Number of beds x 125 gallons
per day per bed) ÷ 225
(b) The minimum flow charge per quarter shall be based on the
number of equivalent dwelling units times 10 times the most
recent projected treatment cost described in paragraph b5(a)
above.
6. Motels.
(a) Motels shall pay a quarterly flow charge per 1,000 gallons of
water flow or per 1,000 gallons of sewage flow, providing
sewage metering is reviewed and approved by the Township
Engineer, equal to the most recent projected treatment cost
per 1,000 gallons set forth by BRSA, MCBOA and Hazlet
Township Sewerage Authority. There shall be a minimum
quarterly flow charge, regardless of the amount of flow, as
calculated in paragraph b6(b) below. There shall also be a
quarterly fixed charge based on the number of equivalent
dwelling units times $100. Equivalent dwelling units for the
fixed charge shall be calculated as follows:
(Number of bedrooms x 75 gallons per day per bedroom) ÷ 225
(b) The minimum flow charge per quarter shall be based on the
number of equivalent dwelling units times 10 times the most
recent projected treatment cost described in paragraph b6(a)
above.
7. Swim Pool Facility. The swim pool facility shall pay a flow charge of
$6,432, and a fixed charge of $2,222 for each annual season.
a. Unless otherwise indicated, all flow figures shall be those obtained from
the records of the Shorelands Water Company, the franchised public
utilities serving the properties in Holmdel and Hazlet Townships or N.J.
American Water Company. The actual flow figures may be subject to an
adjustment to reflect the actual portion entering the system, as
approved by the Township Engineer and as reflected in a resolution
which may be adopted by the governing body of the Township of
Holmdel.
b. Whenever billing shall be based on flow it is the owner's obligation to
submit an original water bill to the utility revenue collector promptly
upon receipt. If the bill is not submitted, the utility revenue collector
shall use the best available information on flow, including water supply
§ 18-3.2 HOLMDEL § 18-3.3
1:510
§ 18-3.4. Authorization of Billing. [1976 Code § 64A-4]
The Utility Revenue Collector or other such person as may be designated
by the Township Committee shall be authorized and directed to prepare and
mail bills to all users and customers of the Holmdel Township Sewer Utility
System, which bills shall reflect the aforesaid rates and charges.
§ 18-4. PRIVATE STORM DRAIN INLET RETROFITTING.
§ 18-4.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2010-10 § I]
The purposes of this section are to require the retrofitting of existing
storm drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by Holmdel Township so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 18-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-10 § I]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by Holmdel Township
or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — Shall mean an opening in a storm drain used to
collect stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet,
curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
records, history of usage and knowledge of any possible change in
usage and consumption to arrive at a correct bill.
In the event there is no alternative method the charges shall be
calculated upon the water consumption of 0.125 gallons per square
foot floor area in accordance with the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection standards for water consumption dated July
1, 1978.
§ 18-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-4.2
1:511
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 18-4.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2010-10 § I]
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 18-4.4. Design Standard. [Ord. No. 2010-10 § I]
Storm drain inlets identified in subsection 18-4.3 above shall comply with
the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
thorough storm drain inlets. For purposes of this subsection, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
subsection 18-4.4c below.
a. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
b. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in subsection 18-4.4
below prior to the completion of the project.
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from the surface into a storm drain or surface waterbody
under that grate:
1. The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bike ways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
2. A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater than 0.5
inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
§ 18-4.2 HOLMDEL § 18-4.4
1:512
§ 18-4.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2010-10 § I]
This section shall be enforced by the Holmdel Township Code Enforcement
Officer or by the Holmdel Township Police Department.
§ 18-4.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2010-10 § I]
Any person found guilty or pleading guilty to a violation of this section
shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Chapter 1, Section 1-5, General
Penalty, for each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to meet the design
standard herein.
Chapter 19
WATER
§ 19-1. DECLARATION OF WATER EMERGENCY.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0
square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension. For new and reconstructed inlets, use Type "N" curb piece
with the words "Dump No Waste — Drains to Waterway" stamped in the
curb piece.
c. This standard does not apply:
1. Where the Township Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
2. Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of solid
and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) Rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
3. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one inch spacing between the bars; or
4. Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 18-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-1.1
1:513
§ 19-1.1. Water Restrictions. [1976 Code § 56-31 A; Ord. No. 88-29]
In the case of prolonged scarcity of water from any cause; or upon direction
by the State of New Jersey; or in the event any local water company
servicing the Township advises it that it is instituting water usage
restrictions, the Mayor shall have the right to declare a water emergency.
Upon issuance of a declaration, the use of water may be restricted as
follows:
§ 19-2. FIRE HYDRANTS.
§ 19-2.1. Use of Hydrants by Authorized Persons Only. [1976 Code
§ 43-1]
No person other than Township personnel, Fire Company personnel, Water
Company personnel, unless authorized by the duly franchised water
company for the area of the Township in which such fire hydrant is located,
is permitted to operate or take water from any public or private fire hydrant
for street sprinkling, flushing sewers, stormwater drains or for building
construction or for any purposes other than fire protection purposes.
§ 19-2.2. Unusual Use; Special Permission. [1976 Code § 43-2]
Unusual use of fire hydrants may be permitted for other purposes when
special permission is obtained from the water company in writing. Permits
to use hydrants will not be issued during cold weather, more particularly
the period from December 1 to April 1, but not limited thereto. The water
company will permit such special use pursuant to its own regulations.
§ 19-2.3. Operation Regulations; Display of Permit. [1976 Code
§ 43-3]
No wrenches of any sort, other than the one supplied with the permit, shall
be used for opening or closing hydrants. The water company will supply the
Township Public Works Department, the Township Police Department and
the Township Fire Companies with the necessary wrenches to be retained
permanently for their respective use. Anyone using a hydrant shall display
his or her permit forthwith if requested. No attachment of any sort shall be
left connected to a hydrant except when it is in actual use. No hydrant shall
a. The filling of swimming pools and washing of cars may be prohibited;
b. Lawn or garden sprinkling may be prohibited or performed and
accomplished on alternate days throughout the Township. All
properties with odd number addresses or box numbers shall water only
on the odd days of the month. All properties with even number
addresses or box numbers shall water on the even days of the month.
No property owners shall be permitted to water on the 31st day of any
month;
c. Restrictions on such other water uses as shall be deemed necessary.
§ 19-1.1 HOLMDEL § 19-2.3
1:514
be left unattended while attachments are connected during the time it is
in use. The hydrant must be shut, attachments removed, caps replaced and
the hydrant left in readiness for instant use when unattended.
§ 19-2.4. Maintenance. [Ord. No. 2012-02; Ord. No. 2013-01]
All fire hydrants shall be maintained in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:9-2.2
and N.J.A.C. 14:9-3.1.
§ 19-2.5. Marking of Fire Hydrants. [Ord. No. 2012-02; Ord. No.
2013-01; Ord. No. 2013-30]
Each fire hydrant located on municipal, County or State roadways or on
private property shall be marked by the following described signing:
§ 19-2.6. Obstruction of Hydrants. [Ord. No. 2012-02; Ord. No.
2013-01; Ord. No. 2015-17]
a. Two aluminum red reflectorized Placards being a minimum dimension
of 4.0 inches by 6.0 inches bearing a white letter "H," being at least four
inches in height ("Placard"); and
b. The Placards shall be mounted back-to-back at the top of a galvanized
u-channel sign post ("post") driven a minimum of 240 inches into the
ground, which post shall be located between two feet and four feet to
the side or rear of the fire hydrant unless some limiting factor such as a
sidewalk or driveway requires a farther offset. The post with mounted
Placards shall constitute the "sign"; and
c. The sign shall be oriented so that the faces of the Placards each face the
opposing flow of traffic on the adjacent street, road, drive or parking
area; and
d. The sign shall be erected so that the top of the Placards are no less than
four feet and no more than five feet above ground level.
e. Alternative Placards may be mounted on the post. The alternative
Placards shall be a "GlowSmart" type Fire Hydrant Marker being a
minimum dimension of 4.0 inches by 6.0 inches placard with red
background on which is shown a white image of a fire hydrant at least
four inches in height.
a. "Obstruction" is defined as that which prevents the free access and use
of the hydrant, including any structure, planting, shrubbery, tree, snow,
ice or any other obstruction.
b. If the fire hydrant is owned by or located on the private property
owner's property, the property owner shall be responsible for clearing
the obstruction. If the hydrant is located within the public right-of-way,
the adjacent property owner shall be responsible for clearing the
obstruction.
§ 19-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-2.6
1:515
§ 19-2.7. Responsibility for Marking/Maintaining/Clearing
Hydrants. [Ord. No. 2012-02; Ord. No. 2013-01]
Each public or private water utility company shall be responsible for the
painting, marking and clearing of their own hydrants in accordance with
this section and N.J.A.C. 14:9-2.2. Fire hydrants located on private property
which are not maintained by the public or private utility shall be the
responsibility of the property owner for compliance.
§ 19-2.8. Initial Compliance. [Ord. No. 2013-01]
Existing fire hydrants which are on January 15, 2013 marked by a sign
which is not in strict compliance with the sign requirements of subsection
19-2.5, but approximates its characteristics, shall be considered as being
in compliance for a period of three years. Thereafter, all fire hydrants
must be in compliance with subsection 19-2.5. Any fire hydrants currently
not marked with such signs must be brought into compliance within one
year of adoption of this subsection, (February 5, 2013). All fire hydrants
subsequently installed must be in compliance upon installation.
§ 19-2.9. Flushing and Lubricating; Records. [Ord. No. 2012-02;
Ord. No. 2013-01]
All fire hydrants shall be flushed and maintained in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:9-2.2 and N.J.A.C. 14:9-3.1. Copies of the fire hydrant maintenance
records shall be provided electronically once per year to the Township.
§ 19-2.10. Out of Service Hydrants. [Ord. No. 2013-01]
All fire hydrants that go out of service shall be returned to service within 72
hours. If due to extenuating circumstances the repair will take longer than
72 hours, the water utility will communicate the proposed "in service" date
to the Police Department.
§ 19-2.11. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2012-02; Ord. No.
2013-01]
Failure to adhere to any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed
to constitute a violation of this section. Every person violating this section
shall be subject upon conviction to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section
1-5.
Chapter 20
c. Clearing of Hydrants Obstructed by Snow and Ice. The owner of any
real estate abutting a fire hydrant shall clear such fire hydrant of snow
and ice within 24 hours of the end of snow or ice accumulation. If and in
the event a fire hydrant has not been cleared it may be cleared by the
Township. In addition to any fine, the cost of clearance up to a fee of
$75 shall be assessed against the property and the property owner.
§ 19-2.6 HOLMDEL § 19-2.11
1:516
HOUSING
§ 20-1. ESTABLISHMENT OF HOUSING AGENCY; INTERNATIONAL
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE; INSPECTIONS.
§ 20-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2010-20 § 20.1]
The purpose of this section is to establish an enforcing agency to enforce
proper maintenance of, and compliance with, applicable codes and
ordinances for single-family homes, multiple dwelling units located within a
single building, and manufactured housing units in order to further protect
the safety and welfare of occupants of such dwelling units. It is also
intended to insure continued adherence to an approved site plan.
§ 20-1.2. Enforcing Agency. [Ord. No. 2010-20 § 20.1-2]
§ 20-1.3. Adoption of ICC International Property Maintenance Code
by Reference. [Ord. No. 2010-20 § 20.1-4]
In accordance with the provisions of statute, the ICC International Property
Maintenance Code/2006 (hereafter "Code"), and as may be amended from
time to time hereafter, is hereby adopted as a standard governing the
maintenance of premises within the Township.
§ 20-1.4. Rule Making Authority and Modifications. [Ord. No.
2010-20 § 20.1-5]
a. There is hereby established in the Township of Holmdel a Housing
Agency consisting of a Housing Code Official, Housing Code
Inspector(s), and Housing Code Clerk. The Housing Code Official shall
be the chief administrator of the Enforcing Agency.
b. Each official position created in paragraph a hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified and certified for such position.
c. The public shall have the right to do business with the Enforcing
Agency at one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances. The offices of the enforcing agency
established herein shall be located at the Holmdel Township Hall, four
Crawfords Corner Road, Holmdel, New Jersey 07733.
a. The Housing Code Official or his representative shall have authority, as
necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare, to
adopt and promulgate rules and procedures to interpret and implement
the provisions of this chapter and Code; to secure the intent thereof;
and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or
other conditions.
b. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter or Code, the Housing Code Official or his
representative shall have the authority to grant modifications for
§ 19-2.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1.4
1:517
§ 20-1.5. Fees. [Ord. No. 2010-20 § 20.1-7; Ord. No. 2013-06]
individual cases, provided the Housing Code Official shall first find that
the special individual reason makes the strict letter of this chapter
or Code impractical and the modifications are in compliance with the
intent and purpose of the chapter or Code and that such modifications
do not lessen the health and safety requirements.
c. Neither the Housing Code Official nor his representative shall be
deemed to be granted any authority under this section to act in any
manner inconsistent with the requirements, restrictions or obligations
of this chapter.
a. The fee for a housing inspection shall be paid before the inspection is
scheduled. All fees provided for in this section shall be calculated by
rounding off the fee to the nearest dollar value, except the surcharge
fee provided for below.
b. The Housing Code Official shall, with the advice of the Housing Code
Inspector and Housing Code Clerk, prepare and submit to the Township
Committee of the Township of Holmdel, biannually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
Agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to
the enforcement of the Housing Ordinance.
c. Charges to cover the cost of administration in connection with the
application shall be paid to the Housing Code Clerk at the time the
application is filed and shall not be refundable.
d. The fees shall be:
1. Application and Initial Inspection Fee:
(a) Application for an Initial Inspection requested more than four
business days after application:
(1) Single-family dwelling - $125.
(2) Multi-family dwelling - $150 per unit.
(b) Application for an initial inspection requested less than four
business days after application:
(1) Single-family dwelling unit - $250.
(2) Multi-family dwelling - $300 per unit.
(c) Any first reinspection required - no charge.
(d) Multi-family dwelling second and subsequent reinspections
(each) - $35 per unit.
(e) Single-family dwelling second and subsequent reinspections
(each) - $85.
§ 20-1.4 HOLMDEL § 20-1.5
1:518
§ 20-2. RENTAL PROPERTY LICENSES.
§ 20-2.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2010-20 § 20.2-1; Ord. No. 2013-06]
The purpose of this subsection is to provide a uniform set of procedures for
controlling the conditions of properties within the Township that are rented
or occupied by parties other than the owner of record through registration
of individual properties and administering the issuance, renewal and
revocation of rental licenses within the Township of Holmdel.
Exception: Owners and landlords of buildings consisting solely of lowincome
units as defined and governed by N.J.A.C. 5:97 shall be exempt from
registering for rental licenses.
2. Rental Registration and Licensing Fees:
(a) Rental registration and licensing fees:
(1) Single-dwelling units (up to 10 total units):
[a] First year - $250 per unit.
[b] Second year (if the subject property has not violated
any of the property maintenance codes and Township
ordinances regulating residential properties and use) -
$150 per unit.
[c] Third year (if the subject property has not violated any
of the property maintenance codes and Township
ordinances regulating residential properties and use) -
$100 per unit.
(2) Single-dwelling and multiple dwelling units (in excess of
10 total units):
[a] First year - $150 per unit.
[b] Second year (if the subject property has not violated
any of the property maintenance codes and Township
ordinances regulating residential properties and use) -
$125.
[c] Third year (if the subject property has not violated any
of the property maintenance codes and Township
ordinances regulating residential properties and use) -
$75.
(b) The above fee includes one change of tenancy and required
inspection. Each additional continued certificate of occupancy
inspection within the year shall be charged as indicated in
subsection 20-1.5d1 above.
§ 20-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-2.2
1:519
§ 20-2.2. Residential Rental Property Inspections; Certificates of
Occupancy. [Ord. No. 2010-20 §§ 20.4, 20.4-1, 20.5, 20.5-1, 20.5-4,
20.5-5]
§ 20-3. VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND FINES.
§ 20-3.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2010-20 § 20.6-1]
The purpose of this section is to provide a foundation for fines and penalties
to gain compliance with this chapter and related codes.
§ 20-3.2. Fines. [Ord. No. 2010-20 § 20.6-2]
§ 20-3.3. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2010-20 § 20.6-3]
a. Continued Certificate of Occupancy. The purpose of this subsection is to
provide a foundation for frequency of inspections.
b. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. At no point in time shall a
temporary certificate of occupancy be issued. If in the opinion of the
Housing Code Inspector, the violations found to exist after the
inspection would not preclude the new occupant from storing personal
belongings in the dwelling space the Housing Code Inspector may grant
permission for such storage to occur until the owner or the operator
abates the violation and/or makes the necessary repairs.
c. Expiration of the Continued Certificate of Occupancy. A continued
certificate of occupancy issued hereunder shall be valid for a period not
to exceed 60 days from the date of issuance or until there occurs a
change in occupancy.
a. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall result in the
imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,250.
b. In addition to the fine set forth above, the Court may impose
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or both.
c. It shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation, subject to the
penalty provisions of this section, for each and every day that such
violation continues and for each and every rental property and/or rental
unit for which the violation continues.
a. Upon written notification any person, owner or other allowing illegal
occupancy, use or occupying or using an existing structure themselves
without a valid Certificate of Continued Occupancy can be subject to a
maximum penalty of $500 per week. Every week the subject building is
occupied without a Certificate of Continued Occupancy the following
additional penalties shall accrue to the extent necessary to assure code
compliance and public safety:
1. First Week - $50.
§ 20-2.2 HOLMDEL § 20-3.3
1:520
§ 20-3.4. Abatement of Nuisances. [Ord. No. 2010-20 § 20.6-4]
In order to have any public nuisance on the premises or in the structure
correct any violation of this Code or maintain the premises or structure in
a proper condition under this Code, the Housing Code Official may appoint
a custodian for such premises or structure pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12
et seq. or institute a rent receivership proceeding pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.12 et seq.
In addition to any corrective or abatement work ordered by the Housing
Code Official, a lien may be placed against the real estate to be enforced by
the collection of taxes pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12f.
Chapter 21
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
Editor's Note: This chapter was originally adopted as Ord. No. 1-81,
and codified in the 1970 Code as Chapter A82. Prior ordinance
history includes portions of 1976 Code §§ A82-1 — A82-21 and
Ordinance Nos. 92-11, 2000-21 and 2002-12.
§ 21-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 1]
The Municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its nonexclusive
Municipal Consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the Municipality of a cable television and communications
system.
2. Second Week - $100.
3. Third Week - $150.
4. Fourth Week - $250.
5. Fifth Week - $500.
b. Any person, firm or corporation, who shall violate any provision of this
Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the Court. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served in accordance with
the provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense. In the
alternative or as an additional penalty pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 the
Court may order and require community service for not less than 10
days or more than 90 days upon conviction.
§ 20-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-2
1:521
§ 21-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 2]
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 C.F.R.
Subsection 76:1 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C.
Section 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
4815A-1 et seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or
conflict with the Federal and State definitions:
§ 21-3. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 3]
Public hearings conducted by the Municipality, concerning the renewal of
Municipal Consent herein granted to the Company were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully open to the public, and the Municipality, having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the Company
to receive this renewal of Municipal Consent, the Municipality hereby finds
that the Company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the Company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
a. TOWN OR MUNICIPALITY – Shall mean the Township of Holmdel,
County of Monmouth, State of New Jersey.
b. COMPANY – Shall mean the grantee of rights under this Ordinance and
is known as Comcast of Monmouth County, LLC.
c. ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT – Shall mean Chapter 186 of the
General Laws of New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto,
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1, et seq.
d. FCC – Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
e. BOARD OR BPU – Shall mean the Board of Public Utilities, State of New
Jersey.
f. OFFICE OR OCTV – Shall mean the Office of Cable Television of the
Board.
g. BASIC CABLE SERVICE – Shall mean any service tier, which includes
the retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by
the FCC.
h. APPLICATION – Shall mean the Company's Application for Renewal of
Municipal Consent.
i. PRIMARY SERVICE AREA OR PSA – Shall mean and consist of the area
of the Municipality currently served with existing plant as set forth in
the map annexed to the Company's Application for Municipal Consent.
§ 21-2 HOLMDEL § 21-4
1:522
§ 21-4. DURATION OF FRANCHISE. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 4]
The nonexclusive Municipal Consent granted herein shall expire 15 years
from the date of expiration of the previous Certificate of Approval issued by
the Board.
The consent granted herein is subject to an automatic renewal term of 10
years in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-19.
In the event that the Municipality shall find that the Company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
Ordinance, the Municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including modification
and/or termination of the Certificate of Approval; provided however, that the
Municipality shall first have given the Company written notice of all alleged
instances of noncompliance and an opportunity to cure same within 90 days
of that notification.
§ 21-5. FRANCHISE FEE. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 5]
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the Company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
Municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television
reception service in the Municipality or any higher amount permitted by the
Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
§ 21-6. FRANCHISE TERRITORY. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 6]
The consent granted under this Ordinance to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the Municipality and any property
subsequently annexed hereto.
§ 21-7. EXTENSION OF SERVICE. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 7]
The Company shall be required to proffer service along the public rightof-
way to any person's residence or business located in those areas of
the Primary Service Area as set forth herein. Any extension of the cable
television system beyond the PSA will be made in accordance with the
Office of Cable Television's ("OCTV") Line Extension Policy ("LEP"). For
purposes of the LEP, the minimum density of homes-per-mile shall be 35.
§ 21-8. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 8]
a. Restoration. In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography; the Company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
b. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
§ 21-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-8
1:523
§ 21-9. CUSTOMER SERVICE. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 9; Ord. No.
2013-29 § 1]
In providing services to its customers, the Company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1, et seq. and all applicable State and Federal Statutes and
regulations. The Company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
Company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the Municipality upon written request of
the Municipal Administrator or Clerk.
§ 21-10. MUNICIPAL COMPLAINT OFFICER. [Ord. No. 2013-16
§ 10]
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designed as the Complaint Officer
for the Municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
Municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by Municipality customers from the OCTV.
way or place the Company, upon reasonable notice by the Municipality,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
Company.
c. Removal or Trimming of Trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this Franchise, the Company shall have the authority
to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the Company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the Company's wire and cables.
a. The Company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable State
and Federal Statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
b. The Company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable State
and Federal Statutes and regulations regarding the availability of
devices for the hearing impaired and the notification of same to
customers.
c. The Company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
d. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
Municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the Complaint Officer, or impair the right of the
Complaint Officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
e. Provide a dedicated digital municipal access channel within 12 months
of approval of the Franchise by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities.
§ 21-8 HOLMDEL § 21-11
1:524
§ 21-11. LOCAL OFFICE. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 11]
During the term of this Franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours, and in no
event (excepting emergent circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
§ 21-12. PERFORMANCE BONDS. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 12]
During the life of the Franchise the Company shall give to the Municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the Company as represented in its
Application for Municipal Consent incorporated herein.
§ 21-13. SUBSCRIBER RATES. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 13]
The rates of the Company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
Federal and State law.
§ 21-14. COMMITMENTS BY THE COMPANY. [Ord. No. 2013-16
§ 14]
a. The Company shall provide Total Preferred cable television service on
one outlet at no cost to each school in the Municipality, public and
private, elementary, intermediate, and secondary provided the school is
within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the
school requesting service. Monthly service charges shall be waived on
all additional outlets.
b. The Company shall provide Total Preferred cable television service at
no cost on one outlet to each police, fire, emergency management
facility and public library in the Municipality, provided the facility is
located within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each
additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus
labor basis by the Municipality. Monthly service charges shall be
waived on all additional outlets.
c. A one-time technology grant of $35,000 paid within 12 months of
approval of the franchise by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities.
d. The Communications Act of 1934, as amended [47 U.S.C. § 543 (b)],
allows the Company to itemize and/or identify: (1) the amount on the
subscriber bill assessed as a Franchise fee and the identity of the
governmental authority to which the fee is paid; (2) the amount on the
bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the Company by
the Cable Franchise to support public, educational, and/or
§ 21-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-14
1:525
§ 21-15. TWO-WAY SERVICES AND INTERCONNECTION. [Ord. No.
2013-16 § 15]
In the event that the Municipality determines that it is necessary and
feasible for it to contract with the Company for the purpose of providing
two-way or interconnection services, the Company shall be required to
apply to the BPU for approval to enter into and establish the terms and
conditions of such contract. All costs for such application to the BPU shall
be borne by the Municipality.
§ 21-16. EMERGENCY USES. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 16]
The Company will comply with the Emergency Alert System (EAS) rules in
accordance with applicable State and Federal Statutes and Regulations.
The Company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
Municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason
the Municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system as
contemplated herein.
§ 21-17. LIABILITY INSURANCE. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 17]
The Company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
§ 21-18. INCORPORATION OF THE APPLICATION. [Ord. No.
2013-16 § 18]
All of the statements and commitments contained in the Application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the Company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The Application and other relevant writings
submitted by the Company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference provided same do not conflict with applicable State or Federal
law.
§ 21-19. COMPETITIVE EQUITY. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 19]
Should the Municipality grant a Franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation or
entity on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than the
terms contained herein, the Company may substitute such language that
governmental access channels or the use of such channels; and (3) any
grants or other fees on the bill or any tax, assessment, or charge of
any kind imposed by any governmental authority on the transaction
between the operator and the subscriber. The Company reserves these
external costs, pass-through rights to the extent permitted by law.
§ 21-14 HOLMDEL § 21-19
1:526
is more favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this
Ordinance subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ 21-20. SEPARABILITY. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 20]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any Court
or Federal or State agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the Ordinance.
§ 21-21. THIRD PARTY BENEFICIARIES. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 21]
Nothing in this Franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or Franchise.
§ 21-22. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. No. 2013-16 § 22]
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a Renewal
Certificate of Approval from the BPU.
Chapter 22
(RESERVED)
Chapter 23
SOIL REMOVAL
§ 23-1. PERMISSION REQUIRED FOR REMOVAL OF SOIL FOR
SALE. [1976 Code § 67-1; Ord. No. 32-83]
No person shall excavate or otherwise remove soil for sale or for use
other than on the premises from which the soil shall be taken, except in
connection with the construction or alteration of a building, subdivision
or installation of a swimming pool, tennis court or septic tank on such
premises and excavation or grading incidental thereto, without first having
procured permission therefrom from the Township Committee, Township
Engineer or Township Construction Code Official, as appropriate.
§ 23-2. APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION: INFORMATION
REQUIRED; FEE. [1976 Code § 67-2]
The Township Committee shall not consider any application for removal of
soil from the premises for sale or otherwise unless and until the owner
of the premises shall first file with the Township Clerk an application
requesting such permission, together with a map of the premises showing
the contour lines and proposed contour grades resulting from such intended
§ 21-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-2
1:527
removal of soil in relation to the topography of the premises, and the
proposed contour lines and proposed grades shall be subject to the
inspection and approval of the Township Committee. At the time of filing,
a fee of $20 shall be paid to the Township Clerk to cover the costs and
expenses of the Township. No such permission for soil removal shall be
issued until such map has been filed and until the proposed contour lines
and grades have been approved by the Township Committee.
§ 23-3. REVIEW OF APPLICATION: FACTORS CONSIDERED;
ISSUANCE OF PERMIT. [1976 Code § 67-3]
§ 23-4. CONDUCTING OPERATION OF EXCAVATION. [1976 Code
§ 67-4]
If permission to remove the soil shall be granted, the owner or person
in charge shall so conduct the operations that there shall be no sharp
declivities, pits or depressions, and in such a manner that the area shall
be properly leveled off, cleared of debris and graded to conform with the
contour lines and grades as approved by the Township Committee.
a. Upon written request for a hearing made by the applicant to the
Township Committee, an opportunity to be heard shall be granted
within 30 days thereafter, and the Township Committee, in considering
and reviewing the application and in arriving at its decision, shall be
guided by and take into consideration the public health, safety and
general welfare, and particular consideration shall be given to the
following factors:
1. Soil erosion by water and wind.
2. Drainage.
3. Soil fertility.
4. Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
5. Land values and uses.
6. Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the Township.
b. If after examining the application and the map provided for in Section
23-2, and after the hearing in the event a hearing is requested by the
applicant, the Township Committee shall be of the opinion that the
proposed soil removal will not create conditions inimical to the public
health, welfare and safety and will not result in the creation of any
sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion or fertility problems,
depressed land values, nor create any drainage, sewerage problems or
other conditions of danger, permission to remove the soil shall be
granted. Such permission shall be effective for a period of time to be
determined by the Township Committee.
§ 23-2 HOLMDEL § 23-5
1:528
§ 23-5. REMOVAL OF ARABLE SOIL RESTRICTED. [1976 Code
§ 67-5]
The owner of the premises or the person in charge of the removal of soil,
when permission has been duly granted, shall not take away the top layer
of arable soil for a depth of six inches, but such top layer of arable soil to a
depth of six inches shall be set aside for retention on the premises and shall
be respread over the premises when the rest of the soil has been removed,
pursuant to levels and contour lines approved by the Township Committee.
§ 23-6. BOND REQUIRED. [1976 Code § 67-6]
Before any permit or permission for soil removal shall be granted or issued,
the owner or applicant shall file with the Township Committee a bond,
in form and with surety acceptable to the Township of Holmdel, in such
amount as in the opinion of the Township Committee shall be sufficient
to insure the faithful performance of the work to be undertaken pursuant
to the permission granted by the Township Committee pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 23-7. EXCAVATIONS AND SOIL REMOVAL: CONFORMANCE WITH
PROVISIONS. [1976 Code § 67-7]
No excavation shall be made and no soil shall be removed under the
provisions of this chapter unless a permit therefor shall have been first
obtained as provided herein, and no excavation shall be made and no soil
shall be removed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 23-8. RIGHT OF ENTRY TO INSPECT. [1976 Code § 67-8]
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, any duly
authorized officer, agent or employee of the Township shall have the right to
enter into and upon any lands in or upon which soil-moving operations are
being conducted, to examine and inspect such lands.
§ 23-9. DEFINITIONS. [1976 Code § 67-9]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOIL — Shall mean any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt,
without regard to the presence or absence therein of organic matter.
§ 23-10. APPROVAL BY TOWNSHIP ENGINEER. [1976 Code
§ 67-9.1; Ord. No. 32-83]
The Township Engineer may authorize the removal of soil from premises in
conjunction with construction, excavation or installation of improvements
that are being performed as part of an approved subdivision or site plan.
The Township Engineer will have the authority to request the information
required under Sections 23-2 and 23-3, in his discretion, if he determines
§ 23-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-10
1:529
that sufficient information was not obtained during the approval process for
the subdivision or site plan.
§ 23-11. APPROVAL BY CONSTRUCTION CODE OFFICIAL. [1976
Code § 67-9.1; Ord. No. 32-83]
The Construction Code Official may authorize the removal of soil from
premises in conjunction with the installation of swimming pools, tennis
courts and septic tanks. The Construction Code Official shall indicate on the
permit issued the amount of dirt that may be removed from the site.
§ 23-12. POSSESSION OF WRITTEN APPROVAL REQUIRED. [1976
Code § 67-9.1; Ord. No. 32-83]
Any individual removing soil from property must have in his or her
possession a copy of the specific written approval issued by the Township
Committee, Township Engineer or Township Construction Code Official.
Failure to have such written authorization in his or her possession shall
result in an immediate order to cease removal of soil.
§ 23-13. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [1976 Code § 67-9.1; Ord.
No. 32-83]
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of the
Township of Holmdel of a violation of the terms of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty established in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
Chapter 24
CONSTRUCTION IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
§ 24-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
§ 24-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. No. 2009-14 § 1]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Township Committee of the Township of
Holmdel in the County of Monmouth, State of New Jersey does ordain as
follows.
§ 24-1.2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. No. 2009-14 § 1]
a. The flood hazard areas of Township of Holmdel are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
§ 23-10 HOLMDEL § 24-1.2
1:530
§ 24-1.3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 2009-14 § 1]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
§ 24-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [Ord. No. 2009-14 § 1]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas, Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
a. To protect human life and health;
b. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
h. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
§ 24-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-1.4
1:531
§ 24-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2009-14 § 1]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — Shall mean a request for a review of the engineer's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Shall mean a designated AO, AH, or
VO zone on a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with
a 1% annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Shall mean the land in the flood
plain within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in
any given year.
BASE FLOOD — Shall mean the flood having a 1% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — Shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and construction
to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of
special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — Shall mean the
official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — Shall mean a non-basement building (i) built in
the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top
c. Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 24-1.4 HOLMDEL § 24-2
1:532
of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling,
columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water,
and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area
of special flood hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient
to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — Shall mean the official report in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — Shall mean a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Shall mean zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a flood plain ordinance, grading
ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY — Shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — Shall mean the highest natural elevation
of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Shall mean any structure that is:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
b.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
§ 24-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-2
1:533
LOWEST FLOOR — Shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that
such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a structure, transportable in one
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean
a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of the flood plain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is a) built on a
single chassis; b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections; c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and d) designed primarily not for use as
a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
2.
d.
§ 24-2 HOLMDEL § 24-2
1:534
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a walled and roofed building, a manufactured
home, or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — Shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
§ 24-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 24-3.1. Lands to Which this Chapter Applies. [Ord. No. 2009-14
§ 1]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Holmdel, County of Monmouth, State of New
Jersey.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
b.
§ 24-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-3.2
1:535
§ 24-3.2. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
[Ord. No. 2009-14 § 1]
The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Holmdel, Community
No. 340300, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
§ 24-3.3. Penalties for Noncompliance. [Ord. No. 2009-14 § 1]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof shall be
subject to the penalties stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5 of the Revised
General Ordinance of the Township of Holmdel for each violation, and in
addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the Township of Holmdel from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 24-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. No. 2009-14
§ 1]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other chapters, ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.
§ 24-3.5. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 2009-14 § 1]
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
a. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Monmouth
County, New Jersey (all jurisdictions)" dated September 25, 2009.
b. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Monmouth County, New Jersey (all
jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel numbers 34025C0037F,
34025C0039F, 34025C0041F, 34025C0042F, 34025C0043F,
34025C0044F, 34025C0152F, 34025C0154F, 34025C0156F,
34025C0157F, 34025C0158F, 34025C0159F; whose effective date is
September 25, 2009.
c. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at the
Holmdel Municipal Building, 4 Crawfords Corner Road, P.O Box 410,
Holmdel, New Jersey 07733-0410.
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
§ 24-3.2 HOLMDEL § 24-3.5
1:536
§ 24-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. No. 2009-14 § 1]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Township of Holmdel, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 24-4. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 24-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit. [Ord. No. 2009-14
§ 1]
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in subsection
24-3.2. An application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Construction Official and may include, but not be limited
to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of
the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 24-4.2. Designation of the Local Administrator. [Ord. No. 2009-14
§ 1]
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
b. Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection 24-5.2b; and
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
§ 24-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-4.3
1:537
§ 24-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Local Administrator.
[Ord. No. 2009-14 § 1]
Duties of the Local Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Permit Review.
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
3. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway, assure that the
encroachment provisions of subsection 24-5.3a are met.
b. Use of other Base Flood and Floodway Data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with subsection
24-3.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the
engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other
source, in order to administer subsections 24-5.2a, Specific Standards
for Residential Construction, and 24-5.2b, Specific Standards for
Nonresidential Construction.
c. Information to be Obtained and Maintained.
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
subsection 24-4.1c.
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
d. Alteration of Water Courses.
1. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
§ 24-4.3 HOLMDEL § 24-4.3
1:538
§ 24-4.4. Variance Procedure. [Ord. No. 2009-14 § 1]
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
e. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection
24-4.4.
a. Appeal Board.
1. The Zoning Board of Adjustment as established by Township of
Holmdel shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
2. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Construction Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of
New Jersey, as provided in N.J. Court Rules, 1982, R4:69.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
§ 24-4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-4.4
1:539
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and flood plain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 24-4.4a4 and the
purposes of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
6. The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
b. Conditions for Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
(a) through (k) in subsection 24-4.4a4 have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
§ 24-4.4 HOLMDEL § 24-4.4
1:540
§ 24-5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 24-5.1. General Standards. [Ord. No. 2009-14 § 1]
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in subsection
24-4.4a4, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
a. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
2. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b. Construction Materials and Methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
c. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into flood waters;
§ 24-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-5.1
1:541
§ 24-5.2. Specific Standards. [Ord. No. 2009-14 § 1]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in subsection 24-3.2, Basis for Establishing the
Areas of Special Flood Hazard or in subsection 24-4.3b, Use of Other Base
Flood Data, the following standards are required:
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
4. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
d. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
e. Enclosure Openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
a. Residential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together
§ 24-5.1 HOLMDEL § 24-5.2
1:542
with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated to or
above base flood elevation;
2. Within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified). And, require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
b. Nonresidential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base
flood elevation; and
2. Within any AO zone on the municipality's DFIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet (at least
two feet if no depth number is specified). And, require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures; or
3. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
4. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
5. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in subsection 24-4.3c2(b).
c. Manufactured Homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
subsection 24-5.1a2.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
§ 24-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-5.3
1:543
§ 24-5.3. Floodways. [Ord. No. 2009-14 § 1]
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection
24-3.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
Chapter 25
FARMING
§ 25-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2009-18 § I]
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
COMMERCIAL FARM — Shall mean:
FARM MANAGEMENT UNIT — Shall mean a parcel or parcels of land,
whether contiguous or noncontiguous, together with agricultural or
horticultural buildings, structures and facilities, producing agricultural or
horticultural products, and operated as a single enterprise.
a. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
b. If subsection 24-5.3a is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Section 24-5, Provisions for Flood
Hazard Reduction.
c. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
A farm management unit of no less than five acres producing
agricultural or horticultural products worth $2,500 or more annually,
and satisfying the eligibility criteria for differential property taxation
pursuant to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et
seq.; or
1.
A farm management unit less than five acres, producing agricultural or
horticultural products worth $50,000 or more annually and otherwise
satisfying the eligibility criteria for differential property taxation
pursuant to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et
seq.
2.
§ 24-5.3 HOLMDEL § 25-1
1:544
FARM MARKET — Shall mean a facility used for the wholesale or retail
marketing of the agricultural output of a commercial farm, and products
that contribute to farm income, except that if a farm market is used for
retail marketing at least 51% of the annual gross sales of the retail farm
market shall be generated from sales of agricultural output of the
commercial farm, or at least 51% of the sales area shall be devoted to the
sale of the agricultural output of the commercial farm, and except that if a
retail farm market is located on land less than five acres in area, the land
on which the farm market is located shall produce annually agricultural or
horticultural products worth at least $2,500.
PICK-YOUR-OWN OPERATION — Shall mean a direct marketing alternative
wherein retail or wholesale customers are invited onto a commercial farm
in order to harvest agricultural, floricultural or horticultural products.
§ 25-2. RECOGNITION OF RIGHT. [Ord. No. 2009-18 § I]
a. The right to farm is hereby recognized to exist in the Township of
Holmdel. This right to farm includes, but not by way of limitation:
1. Production of agricultural and horticultural crops, trees, apiary and
forest products, livestock, poultry and other commodities as
described in the Standard Industrial Classification for agriculture,
forestry, fishing and trapping;
2. Erection of essential agricultural buildings in conformance with
Township of Holmdel standards;
3. The grazing of animals and use of range for fowl provided such
animals and fowl are confined to the property of the commercial
farm;
4. Construction of fencing in accord with N.J.A.C. 2:76-2A-9;
5. The operation and transportation of large, slow-moving equipment
over roads within the Township of Holmdel, provided appropriate
precautions are taken to warn operators of overtaking and
approaching vehicles;
6. Control of pests including but not limited to insects and weeds,
predators and diseases of plants and animals;
7. Conduction of agriculture-related educational and farm-based
recreational activities provided that the activities are related to
marketing the agricultural or horticultural output of the
commercial farm and permission of the farm owner and lessee is
obtained;
8. Use of any and all equipment, including but not limited to:
irrigation pumps and equipment, aerial and ground seeding and
spraying, tractors, harvest aids, and bird control devices;
§ 25-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-2
1:545
9. Processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the
commercial farm;
10. The operation of a farm market with attendant signage in accord
with Township Code Section 30-96.2d, including the construction of
building and parking areas in conformance with Township of
Holmdel standards;
11. The operation of a pick-your-own operation with attendant signage
in accord with Township Code Section 30-96.2d;
12. Replenishment of soil nutrients and improvement of soil tilth;
13. Clearing of woodlands using open burning and other techniques,
installation and maintenance of vegetative and terrain alterations
and other physical facilities for water and soil conservation and
surface water control in wetland areas;
14. On-site disposal of organic agricultural wastes;
15. The application of manure and chemical fertilizers, insecticides and
herbicides;
16. Installation of wells, ponds and other water resources for
agricultural purposes such as irrigation, sanitation and marketing
preparation.
Commercial farm operators may engage in any other agricultural activity
as determined by the State Agriculture Development Committee and
adopted by rule or regulation pursuant to the provisions of the
"Administrative Procedure Act," P.L. 1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.).
b. Commercial farm operators shall adhere to generally accepted
agricultural management practices that have been:
1. Promulgated as rules by the State Agriculture Development
Committee;
2. Recommended as site-specific agricultural management practices
by the County Agriculture Development Board;
3. Approved by the local soil conservation district in the form of a
farm conservation plan that is prepared in conformance with the
United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS) Field Office Technical Guide (FOTG),
revised April 20, 1998, as amended and supplemented; or
4. Recommended by the Rutgers Agricultural Experiment Station.
c. The foregoing activities must be in conformance with applicable
Federal and State law.
d. The foregoing practices and activities may occur on holidays, weekdays
and weekends by day or night and shall include the attendant or
§ 25-2 HOLMDEL § 25-2
1:546
§ 25-3. CONFLICT; COMMERCIAL FARMS. [Ord. No. 2009-18 § I]
Chapter 26
TAXATION
incidental noise, odors, dust and fumes associated with these practices;
but, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:1C-10, may not pose a direct threat to public
health and safety.
e. It is hereby determined that whatever nuisance may be caused to
others by these foregoing uses and activities is more than offset by the
benefits of farming to the neighborhood community and society in
general.
a. Any person aggrieved by the operation of a commercial farm shall file a
complaint with the applicable County Agriculture Development Board,
or the State Agriculture Development Committee in counties where no
County board exists, prior to filing an action in court.
b. To help parties resolve conflicts involving the operation of commercial
farms, the State Agriculture Development Committee has also
established an Agricultural Mediation Program. Mediation is a
voluntary process in which a trained, impartial mediator helps
disputing parties examine their mutual problems, identify and consider
options, and determine if they can agree on a solution. A mediator has
no decision-making authority. Successful mediation is based on the
voluntary cooperation and participation of all the parties.
§ 25-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-3
1:547

ARTICLE I
Hotel and Motel Occupancy Tax
§ 26-1. IMPOSITION OF OCCUPANCY TAX. [Ord. No. 2012-11]
There is hereby imposed within the Township of Holmdel a tax to be
charged in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48F-1 et seq., on
charges of rent for every occupancy within a hotel or motel. The tax shall be
at the rate of 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy. Said tax shall be
in addition to any and all taxes or fees imposed under State Statute or local
ordinances upon the occupancy of a hotel or motel. For purposes of this
Article, the word "hotel" shall be defined as a building regularly used and
kept open for the lodging of guests, including motels, bed-and-breakfasts
and inns.
§ 26-2. PAYMENT OF AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR OCCUPANCY TAX.
[Ord. No. 2012-11]
§ 26-3. COLLECTION OF TAX. [Ord. No. 2012-11]
a. All taxes imposed by this Article shall be paid by the occupant of the
room. "Occupant" shall be defined as a person who, for a consideration,
uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel or
motel, under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to
use or other agreement or otherwise.
b. The owner of the hotel/motel and/or the person or entity making the
hotel/motel room available for occupancy, shall not assume or absorb
any of the tax imposed by this Article.
c. The owner of the hotel/motel and/or the person making the room
available for occupancy shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to
any person or to the public in general, in any manner, directly or
indirectly, that the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the owner, that
the tax will not be separately charged and stated to the occupant, or
that the tax would be refunded to the occupant.
a. The tax imposed by this Article shall be collected on behalf of the
municipality by the person collecting the rent from the hotel/motel
occupant. That person shall either be the owner of the hotel/motel, the
manager or salesperson or other employee of the owner who arranges
with the occupant for the rental of the room.
b. Individual liability. Each person required to collect the tax imposed by
this Article shall be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or
required to be collected hereunder. Any such person shall have the
same right in respect to collecting the tax from an occupant as if the tax
were a part of the rent and payable at the same time.
c. Any unpaid tax pursuant to this Article shall be subject to interest at the
rate of 5% per annum.
§ 26-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-4
1:549
§ 26-4. PAYMENT OF TAX TO STATE; DISTRIBUTION BY STATE TO
TOWNSHIP. [Ord. No. 2012-11]
§ 26-5. ANNUAL ACTION BY TOWNSHIP CLERK. [Ord. No.
2012-11]
§ 26-6. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2012-11]
a. A person required to collect the tax imposed under this Article as
described above shall, on or before the 28th day of each month, forward
to the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of Treasury
the tax collected in the preceding month and shall make and file a
return for the preceding month with the Director on any form and
containing any information as the Director shall prescribe as necessary
to determine liability for the tax in the preceding month during which
the person was required to collect the tax. Should the Director
determine to require payments of tax liability at any intervals and based
upon any collection classifications other than described in this Article,
the person required to collect the tax shall comply with any
determinations made in that regard by the Director.
b. The Director of the Division of Taxation shall collect and administer the
tax imposed under this Article, and shall determine and certify to the
State Treasurer on a quarterly or more frequent basis the amount of
revenues collected in each municipality. The State Treasurer, upon
certification of the Director, shall pay and distribute on a quarterly or
more frequent basis, as prescribed by the State Treasurer, the amount
of revenues determined and certified as described above to the
Township of Holmdel.
a. The Township Clerk shall annually provide to the State Treasurer, not
later than January 1 of each year, a list of the names and addresses of all
of the hotels and motels in the municipality.
b. The Township Clerk shall also provide to the State Treasurer the name
and address of any hotel or motel that commences operation after
January 1 of any year.
a. Each assumption or absorption of a tax by an owner or employee of an
owner, as described in Section 26-2b above, shall be deemed a separate
offense, and each representation or advertisement by a vendor as
described in Section 26-2c above, for each day the representative or
advertisement continues, shall be deemed a separate offense.
b. Penalties. For any violation or offense committed under this Article, the
offender shall be subject to penalties in accordance with Chapter 1,
Section 1-5 of the Township Code.
§ 26-4 HOLMDEL § 26-6
1:550
ARTICLE II
Special Event Parking Tax
§ 26-7. SPECIAL EVENT PARKING TAX SURCHARGE.
§ 26-7.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2014-06]
Facilities which host special events, as defined herein, impact the Holmdel
Township budget for the expense of police, fire and other municipal
services. The enactment of this Article is an attempt to lessen the impact of
such expense upon Holmdel Township taxpayers.
§ 26-7.2. Enactment. [Ord. No. 2014-06]
A special event parking tax surcharge ("parking surcharge") pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:48C-6b, is hereby established in the Township.
§ 26-7.3. Zone. [Ord. No. 2014-06]
The entire Township will be the Parking Surcharge Zone.
§ 26-7.4. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2014-06]
The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — Shall mean a nonprofit organization that is
exempt from Federal taxation pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Federal
Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)) or section 501(c)(6) of the
Federal Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(6)).
PARKING FEES — Shall mean any amount which is charged, explicitly
or implicitly, for parking, garaging or storing a vehicle at a special event
whether such fee is a separate charge or included in the total ticket price.
Excluded shall be any parking fee charged by a nonprofit organization.
SPECIAL EVENT — Shall mean but not be limited to spectator sporting
events, trade shows, expositions, concerts, celebrations, festivals and other
public events.
§ 26-7.5. Amount of Parking Surcharge. [Ord. No. 2014-06]
The parking surcharge established hereby shall be 7% of parking fees. The
7% shall be calculated on (1) any separate parking fee, or (2) an allocated
portion of the gross ticket price if the parking fee is not separately charged.
§ 26-7.6. Times When Parking Surcharge Is Effective. [Ord. No.
2014-06]
The parking surcharge shall be in effect as to special events held on
weekday evenings starting at 6:00 p.m. or later and held any time on a
Saturday, Sunday or holiday.
§ 26-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-7.7
1:551
§ 26-7.7. Collection/Reporting/Remitting Parking Surcharge. [Ord.
No. 2014-06]
Each facility at which a special event is held shall, within the first 20 days of
each calendar quarter, file a report with the Township Clerk setting forth:
§ 26-7.8. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2014-06]
For any violation or offense committed under this Article, the offender shall
be subject to penalties in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 1-5 of the
Township Code.
a. The parking fees received for parking, garaging or storing of motor
vehicles during the times set forth in subsection 26-7.5.
b. The total parking fees collected for the previous calendar quarter as
listed in paragraph a above.
c. 7% of total parking fees listed in paragraph b above.
Enclosed with the report shall be a check made payable to the "Township of
Holmdel" in the amount set forth in paragraph c above.
§ 26-7.7 HOLMDEL § 26-7.8
1:552
Chapter 27
(RESERVED)
Chapter 28
(RESERVED)
Chapter 29
(RESERVED)
Chapter 30
DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
§ 26-7.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-7.8
1:553

ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose; Definitions
§ 30-1. SHORT TITLE. [1976 Code § 78-1; Ord. No. 3-82]
This chapter may be known as the "Holmdel Development Regulations."
§ 30-2. PURPOSE. [1976 Code § 78-2; Ord. No. 3-82]
The purposes of this chapter are to establish a pattern for land use based
on the land use element of the Master Plan and to guide appropriate and
orderly development which will promote the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare. To this end, procedures for submitting and acting
upon development applications and setting design standards to guide the
preparation of plans are included. This chapter is intended to regulate the
use of land within zoning districts; secure safety from fire, flood, panic
and other disasters; provide adequate light, air and open space; limit and
restrict buildings and structures to specified districts according to their
type and the nature and extent of their use for trade, industry, residence,
open space or other purposes; regulate the bulk, height, number of stories
and size of buildings and other structures; avoid a conflict with neighboring
municipalities, the County and the State; establish appropriate population
densities and concentrations contributing to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods, communities and regions and the preservation of the
environment; provide sufficient space for agricultural, residential,
recreational, commercial and industrial uses and open space; encourage
the location and design of transportation routes which will promote the
free flow of traffic while discouraging the location of such facilities and
routes which result in congestion or blight; promote a desirable visual
environment; promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural
resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment
through improper use of land; provide procedures for planned
developments which incorporate the best features of design and relate
the type, design and layout of residential, commercial, industrial and
recreational development to the particular site; encourage coordination
of various public and private procedures and activities shaping land
development with a view of lessening the cost of such development and
to the more efficient use of land; and to promote the conservation of
energy through the use of planning practices designed to reduce energy
consumption and to provide for maximum utilization of renewable energy
resources.
§ 30-3. DEFINITIONS AND WORD USAGE. [1976 Code § 78-3; Ord.
No. 3-82; Ord. No. 20-82; Ord. No. 21-82; Ord. No. 24-82; Ord. No.
84-7; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord. No. 86-28; Ord. No. 90-30; Ord. No. 94-5;
Ord. No. 94-18; Ord. No. 94-25; Ord. No. 95-7; Ord. No. 95-22 § I;
Ord. No. 95-24 § I; Ord. No. 97-1 § I; Ord. No. 97-13 § I; Ord. No.
97-35 § I; Ord. No. 98-11 § 2; Ord. No. 2000-11 § I; Ord. No. 2000-22
§ II; Ord. No. 2000-30 § I; Ord. No. 2002-20 § I; Ord. No. 2004-09 § I;
Ord. No. 2005-12 § I; Ord. No. 2005-32 § I; Ord. No. 2005-39 § I;
§ 30-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:555
Ord. No. 2006-06 § 2; Ord. No. 2006-19 § I; Ord. No. 2009-05 § I;
Ord. No. 2010-29 § I; Ord. No. 2013-33; Ord. No. 2015-12]
a. Any word or term not defined shall be used with a meaning of standard
usage for the context in which the word is used.
b. The following words and phrases in this chapter are used as defined in
the Municipal Land Use Law,98 as amended: "applicant," "application
for development," "Board of Adjustment," "building," "circulation,"
"conventional," "County Master Plan," "County Planning Board,"
"developer," "development," "development regulations," "division,"
"historic site," "interested party," "land," "lot," "maintenance guaranty,"
"Master Plan," "Mayor," "municipal agency," "Official County Map,"
"Official Map," "open space," "party immediately concerned," "Planning
Board," "preliminary floor plans and elevations," "structure,"
"variance," and "zoning permit."
c. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this section its most reasonable application.
The definitions below relating to stormwater are the same as or based
on the corresponding definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules
at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING — Shall mean a subordinate use or
building, the purpose of which is incidental to that of the principal use
or building on the same lot.
ACTIVE RECREATION USE — Shall mean a ball field, running track, or
other similar facility utilized for active outdoor recreation.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — Shall mean the Planning Board
Secretary for all matters other than the issuance of zoning permits and
the necessary inspections and plan reviews required to issue a zoning
permit, in which case the administrative officer shall be deemed to be
the Zoning Officer.
ADVERSE EFFECT — Shall mean development designs or existing
features on a developer's property or nearby property creating,
imposing, aggravating or leading to impractical, unsafe, unsatisfactory
or noncomplying conditions, such as a layout inconsistent with the
zoning regulations; insufficient street width, unsuitable street grade;
unsuitable street location, inconvenient street system; inadequate
utilities, such as water, drainage, shade trees and sewerage; unsuitable
98.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 30-3 HOLMDEL § 30-3
1:556
size, shape and location of any area reserved for public use or land
for open space in a planned development; infringement upon land
designated as subject to flooding; and the creation of conditions leading
to soil erosion by wind or water from excavation or grading, all as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 and measured against the design and
performance standards of this chapter.
AGRICULTURAL USE/PURPOSE — Shall mean land devoted, but not
limited, to forages and sod crops; grain and feed crops; dairy animals
and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including
the breeding and raising of such animals; bees and apiary products;
trees and forest products; or land devoted to and meeting the
requirements for compensation pursuant to a soil conservation
program under an agreement with an agency of the Federal
government. For the purposes of this chapter, "agricultural use" does
not include a dwelling. See the definitions of "farm."
APARTMENT — Shall mean a dwelling unit in a building having two or
more dwelling units.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Planning Board, unless a
different agency is designated in this chapter pursuant to the Municipal
Land Use Law.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — Shall mean a facility which is
licensed by the Department of Health to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living
services are available when needed, for four or more persons unrelated
to the proprietor. Apartment units offer, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette, and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
ATRIUM HOUSE — Shall mean an attached unit similar to a townhouse
except it is arranged to produce a private yard designed for privacy
through the use of building walls on at least two sides of the yard with
fencing and/or walls on the remaining two sides. More than two units
can be attached.
BILLBOARD — Shall mean an off-site lettered or pictorial advertising
sign.
BOARDING HOUSE — Shall mean a rooming house at which meals
are provided for consideration, usually monetary in nature. A boarding
house is not a permitted use, accessory use, or conditional use
permitted in any zone.
BUILDING COVERAGE — Shall mean the area of a lot covered by
buildings as measured around the foundation.
BUILDING FOOTPRINT — Shall mean the area encompassed by a
principal building's outer wall, excluding building projections.
BUILDING HEIGHT — Shall mean the vertical distance from grade
plane to the average height of the highest roof surface.[Ord. No.
2015-12; Ord. No. 2015-13]
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:557
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Shall mean those areas within
boundaries accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — Shall mean the geographic depiction of the
boundaries for coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores
and CAFRA Nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
CALIPER — Shall mean the diameter, in inches, of the trunk of a tree
taken six inches above the ground for trees up to and including fourinch
caliper size and taken 12 inches above the ground for trees larger
than four-inch caliper size. The term caliper is used when describing
the size of a new tree, e.g. nursery stock.
CATHEDRAL SPACE — Shall mean an interior space two or more
stories in height with no intervening ceiling or floor between the
stories.
CHILD CARE CENTERS — Shall mean any facility which is maintained
for the care, development, and supervision of six or more children
who attend a facility for less than 12 hours a day and which offers
such programs as child care centers, day care centers, drop-in centers,
day nursery schools, play schools, cooperative child centers, centers
for children with special needs, infant-toddler programs, employmentrelated
centers, and/or kindergartens that are not an integral part of a
private educational institution or system offering elementary education
in grades kindergarten through sixth. A child care center shall not offer
programs operated by a public or private day school of elementary or
high school grade, special activity programs for children, youth camps,
or religious classes or centers. Child care centers shall have a license
from the Department of Human Services pursuant to N.J.S. 30:5b-1 et
seq.
CHURCH OR HOUSE OF WORSHIP — Shall mean a building or group
of buildings, including customary accessory buildings designed or
intended for public worship. For the purpose of this chapter, the word
"church or house of worship" shall include chapels, congregations,
cathedrals, synagogues, temples and similar designations as well as
parish houses, convents and such accessory uses.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean a planned development
technique based on a density of dwelling unit(s) per acre. The permitted
number of dwelling units is then clustered into one or more portions
of the overall tract on reduced lot sizes so that individual segments of
the tract have higher densities, provided that other portions of the tract
are left in open space or common property so that the gross density
limitation of the entire tract is not exceeded.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Shall mean an open space area within
or related to a site designated as a development, and designed and
intended for the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the
development. "Common open space" may contain such complementary
structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the
use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
§ 30-3 HOLMDEL § 30-3
1:558
COMMON PROPERTY — Shall mean land or water, or a combination,
together with improvements, within or related to a site designated as
a development, and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of
residents and owners of the development. "Common property" includes
common open space and may contain such complementary structures
and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
COMPACTION — Shall mean the increase in soil bulk density.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — Shall mean submission of an application
form provided by the Township and completed by the applicant,
together with all accompanying documents required by this chapter
for approval of the application for development, including, where
applicable, but not limited to, the checklist provided for in Section 30-8.
CONDITIONAL USE — Shall mean a use permitted in a particular
zoning district only upon a showing that such use in a specified location
will comply with the conditions and standards for the location or
operation of such use as contained in this chapter and upon the
issuance of an authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONSTRUCTED STORMWATER WETLAND — Shall mean a
constructed wetland system designed to maximize the removal of
pollutants from stormwater runoff through settling and both uptake and
filtering by vegetation.
CORE — Shall mean a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic
uses serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing
and access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — Shall mean an agency designated by the
County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review
agency may either be:
A County planning agency; or
A County water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
CRITICAL ROOT RADIUS — Shall mean a distance (in feet) equal to 1.5
times the number of inches in the DBH of an existing tree.
DAYS — Shall mean calendar days.
DENSITY — Shall mean the permitted number of dwelling units per
gross acre of land to be developed. For purposes of this chapter "units/
gross acre" shall be calculated with deductions for environmentally
sensitive areas as set forth in the definition of "Environmentally
sensitive areas." Further, for purposes of this chapter, "design density"
shall be the number of units per acre on that portion of the tract
devoted to a specific housing type including streets, parking areas,
driveways and yards, but excluding other areas to be set aside for
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:559
common property or other dedicated land under a cluster development
plan.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — Shall mean a person professionally qualified
and duly licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that
may include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
DESIGNATED CENTER — Shall mean a State Development and
Redevelopment Plan Center as designated by the State Planning
Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DETENTION BASIN — Shall mean a facility, other than a swale, with
a non-emergency outlet that is designed for the temporary storage of
stormwater and that is intended to be dry between precipitation events.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the division of a parcel of land into
two or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or
structure, any mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change
in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of
use of land, by any person, for which permission is required under
the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case
of development of agricultural lands, development means: any activity
that requires a State permit; any activity reviewed by the County
Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not exempted
by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — Shall mean the diameter of
the trunk of a tree measured at a point 4.5 feet above the ground level
on the uphill side of the tree. The term DBH is used when describing
the size of an existing tree.
DRAINAGE — Shall mean the removal of surface water or groundwater
from land by drains, grading or other means, and includes control
of runoff to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after
construction or development and means necessary for water supply
preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE AREA — Shall mean a geographic area within which
stormwater, sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular
receiving water body or to a particular point along a receiving water
body.
DRIPLINE — Shall mean a line on the ground established by a vertical
plane extending from a tree's outermost branch tips to the ground, i.e.
the line enclosing the area on the ground directly beneath the crown of
the tree from which rainfall would drip.
§ 30-3 HOLMDEL § 30-3
1:560
DRIVE-UP KIOSK — Shall mean a window or kiosk from which
customer services are provided for persons remaining in their vehicles.
DRIVE-UP LANE — Shall mean a delineated access way utilized for
vehicular access to a drive-up kiosk.
DRIVEWAY — Shall mean a vehicular right-of-way other than a public
street or interior road which affords parking and vehicular access to or
as part of a property for the convenience of its users.
DUPLEX — Shall mean a residential structure consisting of two
dwelling units arranged side by side.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean a room or series of connected rooms
containing living, cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for one
family.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — Shall mean a detached building
containing one dwelling unit. For purposes of this chapter, modular
homes shall be considered single-family dwellings.
EASEMENT — Shall mean an acquired privilege or right of use or
enjoyment which one person or other legal entity may have in the
land of another, such as drainage, conservation, utility, sight or similar
purpose.
EDGE TREATMENT — Shall mean a wall, fence or hedge parallel to a
street within or outside the street right-of-way.
EFFICIENCY UNIT — Shall mean a dwelling unit in a garden apartment
building consisting of a bath plus one main room without permanent
separations to be used for living, dining and bedroom facilities, with a
kitchen area separated from the main room by either a permanent wall
or a sliding or some other temporary partition.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — Shall mean a neighborhood
designated by the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and
conjunction with" the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CONSTRAINED AREAS — Shall mean the
following areas where the physical alteration of the land is in some
way restricted, either through regulation, easement, deed restriction
or ownership such as wetlands, floodplains, threatened or endangered
species sites or designated habitats, and parks and preserves. Habitats
of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Non-game Species Program.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — Shall mean an area or
feature which is of significant environmental value, including but not
limited to: stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat
of endangered or threatened species; large areas of contiguous open
space or upland forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and
groundwater recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:561
species are identified using the Department's Landscape Project as
approved by the Department's Endangered and Non-game Species
Program.
EROSION — Shall mean the detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
ESTATE HOUSE, GREEN — Shall mean a building that conforms to the
requirements of this chapter for a green estate house.
ESTATE HOUSE, HAMLET — Shall mean a building that conforms to
the requirements of this chapter for a hamlet estate house.
ESTATE HOUSE, INDIVIDUAL — Shall mean a building that conforms
to the requirements of this chapter for an individual estate house.
ESTATE HOUSE, RURAL — Shall mean a building that conforms to the
requirements of this chapter for a rural estate house.
EXTENDED DETENTION BASIN — Shall mean a multi-stage detention
basin with an outlet that is designed for the temporary storage of
stormwater. Lower stages in the basin can detain water for extended
periods of time and may be wet most or all of the time, while higher
stages attenuate peak rates of runoff and are dry between precipitation
events.
FAMILY — Shall mean one or more persons living and cooking together
as a single housekeeping unit, exclusive of household servants.
FARM — Shall mean one or more contiguous lots with at least five acres
used only for agricultural purposes. The land used for a dwelling unit
shall not be counted as agricultural acreage.
FARM MARKET, RETAIL — Shall mean a permanent building with
footings and foundation connected to any public utility services and
to which the general public is invited for the purpose of retail sales
of all types of vegetables, fruit, flowering farm products and other
goods which are compatible with, complementary to and ancillary to
agricultural goods. For example, construction materials, commercial
landscape services, home improvement materials and farm or
household machinery and services would not be permitted for sale
at a retail farm market. Examples of ancillary, complementary and
compatible goods which would be permitted for retail sale at a farm
market would be nursery and landscape products, dairy products, meat
products, grain products and other agricultural commodities.
FARM STAND, TEMPORARY — Shall mean a movable structure which
shall not be connected to any public utility service and which is
intended to be used on a seasonal basis only for the sale of vegetable,
fruit and flowering farm products. A "temporary farm stand" shall be an
accessory use to the farm upon which it is located.
FARMLAND EASEMENT — Shall mean an easement which provides for
agricultural or farm purposes to the exclusion of other uses.
§ 30-3 HOLMDEL § 30-3
1:562
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — Shall mean a commercial establishment
where food and drink prepared for immediate consumption is
purchased at a counter and either eaten on the premises, in the
purchaser's automobile or off the premises. Those restaurants where
food is consumed only at tables on the premises and served either
cafeteria style or by waiters and waitresses shall not be deemed "fastfood
restaurants."
FENCE, PICKET — Shall mean a fence constructed of a single row of
closely spaced upright wooden stakes supported by horizontal rails and
vertical posts.
FENCE, RAIL — Shall mean a fence constructed of horizontal rails and
widely spaced upright posts.
FINAL APPROVAL — Shall mean the official action of the Planning
Board taken on a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan
after all conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have
been completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been
installed or guaranties properly posted for their completion or approval
conditioned upon the posting of such guaranties.
FLAG LOT — Shall mean a lot whose area, exclusive of its access drive,
meets the area requirement of the zoning provisions of this chapter. The
lot's configuration is one of reduced frontage on an approved street,
generally a width sufficient for use as a driveway or future street, with
the enlarged buildable portion of the lot located at the rear of the lot at
the end of the access drive.
FLOOD — Shall mean a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land from the unusual and rapid
accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Shall mean the floodway and the relatively
flat area adjoining the floodway, which area can be expected to be
inundated by rising waters at least once in 100 years.
FLOODPLAIN — Shall mean the same as the flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY — Shall mean the channel of a natural stream and portions
of the flood hazard area adjoining the channel which are reasonably
required to carry and discharge the floodwater or flood flow of any
natural stream without increasing the elevation more than 2/10 of one
foot.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — Shall mean the ratio of gross floor area to the
lot area.
FOREST — Shall mean a biological community dominated by trees
having an average canopy height greater than 20 feet and other woody
plants covering a land area of at least 10,000 square feet (0.23 acres)
and generally characterized by a tree density of 100 or more trees per
acre with at least 50% of such trees having a DBH of two inches or
greater. A forest may have been cut (but not cleared) in conjunction
with an approved forestry management plan or may be intact. An
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:563
orchard or a tree or a tree nursery is not a forest. The term "woodland"
is used interchangeably with the term "forest."
FOREST STAND — Shall mean a contiguous grouping of trees growing
on a site that are sufficiently uniform in age-class distribution,
composition and structure and are of sufficiently uniform quality to be
a distinguishable unit.
FOREST STEWARDSHIP MANAGEMENT PLAN — Shall mean a plan
prepared for qualifying property owners participating in the Federally
funded Forest Stewardship Program. The Management Plan and
Program are intended to encourage management of private forests for
their noncommodity benefits, such as wildlife, recreation, aesthetics
and water quality, in addition to or in lieu of their traditional
commodities such as timber and wood products. Forest stewardship
promotes long-term active management while emphasizing
consideration of all resources and benefits associated with forests.
GARDEN APARTMENT — Shall mean a building containing four or
more apartments, where one apartment is above the other and where
no apartment will be above the second story.
GRADE PLANE — Shall mean a reference plane representing the
average of finished ground level adjoining the building at the exterior
walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from exterior walls,
the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the
area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more
than six feet from the building, between the building and a point six feet
from the building. For the purposes of Zoning, buildings built on a slope
cannot exceed the limits of the Uniform Construction Code measured
vertically from a point six feet out from the front exterior wall.[Ord.
No. 2015-12; Ord. No. 2015-13]
GRADE, FINISHED — Shall mean the final elevation of the average
ground level adjoining a building at the front exterior wall after
development.
GREEN — Shall mean a publicly accessible passive open space bounded
on all sides by public streets and faced by building facades. For
maintenance purposes, a green created as part of a cluster subdivision
within the R-4H or R-4R Districts shall be deemed a reservation area
and shall be subject to the maintenance responsibilities outlined in
Section 30-83d.
GREENHOUSES AND SIMILAR STRUCTURES — Shall mean any type
of enclosed structure covered with glass, plastic or other similar
material used exclusively for the purpose of growing all types of plants
and vegetation with or without a temperature-and humidity-controlled
environment.
GREENWAY ACCESS CORRIDOR — Shall mean a publicly accessible
open space connecting a public street to the Township's greenway
network.
§ 30-3 HOLMDEL § 30-3
1:564
GROSS FLOOR AREA — Shall mean the total floor area in a structure
measured around the outside of the building at each story. If sharing
a common wall, the area shall be measured from the center of interior
walls and the outside of exterior walls. In residential uses, the "gross
floor area" shall exclude the areas of the garage, unfinished attic, open
porch or patio, cellar, unfinished basement, utility areas, heating and
cooling rooms and all portions of floor areas which have a ceiling height
above them of less than 7.5 feet. In nonresidential structures, the
"gross floor area" shall exclude areas used for utility, heating, cooling
and other mechanical equipment, but shall include all other areas,
including cellars, warehousing and storage areas, regardless of ceiling
height.
HABITABLE FLOOR — Shall mean any floor usable for living purposes,
such as working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation or a
combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a
"habitable floor."
HEDGING — Shall mean a pruned, solid evergreen hedge such as
boxwood or yew.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — Shall mean a nonprofit corporation
operating under a recorded land agreement through which each lot or
dwelling unit owner shall be a member; the owner of each dwelling unit
is subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the organization's
expenses for activities and maintenance, including any maintenance
costs levied against the association by the Township; and each owner
and tenant has a right to use the common property.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Shall mean a surface that has been covered
with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration
by water. Pavers used as a surface other than a driveway shall be
calculated as 50% pervious surface. Decks that extend from a
residential home shall not be calculated as impervious surface if the
deck is 18 inches above ground. The water area of swimming pools shall
not be counted as an impervious surface.[Ord. No. 2014-21]
INDUSTRIAL OR OFFICE PARK — Shall mean a tract comprehensively
planned for industrial or office uses, whether the buildings are erected
in one development stage or over a period of time, but where the
streets, utilities and lots and/or tenant's parcels are set forth for the
entire tract prior to construction of any portion of the tract. As
development takes place, changes may be made in the plans for the
undeveloped section(s), provided that the modifications conform to
logical extensions of installed segments of streets, drainage, utilities
and other facilities. Parks with no subdivided lot shall have buildings
spaced so the mortgage and/or lease lines conform to the requirements
for lot lines to establish conformance with this chapter for such matters
as building setbacks, buffers, driveway locations and distances between
buildings.
INFILTRATION — Shall mean the process by which water seeps into the
soil from precipitation.
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:565
INFILTRATION BASIN — Shall mean a facility with no outlet, other
than an emergency outlet, that is designed for the temporary storage of
stormwater to remove pollutants and infiltrate the water back into the
ground. An infiltration basin may include an emergency outlet.
INTERIOR ROAD — Shall mean a vehicular right-of-way other than
a public street which affords vehicular access to a property for the
convenience of its users.
LIRPP, LOWER INCOME REQUIRED PARTICIPATION PROPERTY —
Shall mean any parcel of land which, as of the effective date of this
chapter, has preliminary and final subdivision or site plan approval
for the development of lower income housing, or is the subject of
a Mediation Agreement concerning the provision of lower-income
housing. The specific block and lot designations for lots which satisfy
this definition are as follows: Block 58.08, Lots 38 and 39; Block 56, Lot
7; Block 52, Lot 19.02; Block 52, Lots 2 and 8; Block 58, Lots 20 and
22.02; Block 58, Lots 53, 53.01 and 53.02; and, Block 46, Lot 64 and
Block 50.19, Lots 37 and 37.01.
LOADING SPACE — Shall mean an off-street berth on the same lot as
the building being served for the temporary parking of a vehicle while
loading or unloading.
LOT — Shall mean a designated parcel, tract or area of land established
by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or
built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — Shall mean the area contained within the lot lines, but not
including any portion of a street. On flag lots, the minimum "lot area"
shall exclude the access drive. The minimum "lot area" of a lot fronting
on a street proposed to be widened in the adopted Master Plan shall be
the minimum area required for the district in which it is located, plus
the additional area needed to anticipate the widening of the street.
LOT COVERAGE — Shall mean the area of a lot covered by buildings
and paved surfaces.
LOT DEPTH — Shall mean the shortest horizontal distance measured
perpendicular from the midpoint of the front lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — Shall mean the horizontal distance between the side
lot lines measured along the street line. The minimum "lot frontage"
shall be the same as the lot width, except that on curved streets with an
outside radius of less than 500 feet, the "lot frontage" may be reduced
to 75% of the required minimum lot width.
LOT LINE — Shall mean any line, including the street line, forming a
portion of the exterior boundary of a lot.
LOT WIDTH — Shall mean the shortest straight line distance between
side lot lines measured parallel to the street line at the minimum
required building setback from the street right-of-way. On flag lots the
"lot width" shall be measured at the building location.
§ 30-3 HOLMDEL § 30-3
1:566
LOWER INCOME — Shall mean income limits established for low and
moderate income levels. Low income for the average household is less
than 50% of the median income. Moderate income is between 50% and
80% of median. For purposes of this chapter, the median income shall
be the applicable number published in the most recent "Income Limits"
by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. The low
and moderate income levels shall be based on the number of people
in the household as shown in that publication as of the date of issuing
each certificate of occupancy.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any development that provides
for ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land or increasing
impervious surface by 1/4 acre or more. Disturbance for the purpose
of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/
or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean any subdivision not classified as a
minor subdivision nor, by virtue of Section 30-32, exempt.
MEDICAL OFFICE BUILDING — Shall mean a building used in common
for the practice of medicine by two or more physicians, dentists,
psychologists, physical therapists, chiropractors, optometrists or by a
hospital for its principal or accessory uses or a combination of any two
of the above.
MINOR SITE PLAN — Shall mean a development plan for one or
more lots which proposes new development, site alterations or building
alterations requiring less than five parking spaces and/or less than 500
additional square feet of floor area and/or not more than 10% additional
lot coverage; does not involve planned development, any new street
or extension of any off-tract improvements which is to be prorated
pursuant to Section 30-79; does not involve any floodway or flood fringe
area under Section 30-67; and contains the information reasonably
required in order to make an informed determination as to whether
the requirements established by ordinance for approval of a "minor site
plan" have been met. Approval of a "minor site plan" shall be deemed
final approval and as such shall be prepared in accordance with final
plat requirements.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a subdivision of land that does not
adversely affect the development of the remainder of the tract or any
adjoining property and does not involve the creation of more than three
lots fronting on an existing improved street, including the remainder
of the original lot; planned development; any new street; extension of
any off-tract improvements, the cost of which is prorated pursuant to
Section 30-79; more than 500 square feet of steep slopes (as defined
in subsection 30-116.6) greater than 15%; stream corridors or stream
corridor buffers as defined in subsection 30-116.7); or surface water
bodies (as defined in subsection 30-116.8c).
MOBILE HOME PARK — Shall mean any lot upon which two or more
mobile homes are located and used for dwelling purposes except as
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:567
permitted under the particular regulations governing mobile homes on
farms for farm employees.
MOBILE HOME/MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a dwelling
unit manufactured in one or more sections; designed for long-term
occupancy; containing living and sleeping accommodations, a flush
toilet, a tub or shower, bath and kitchen facilities with plumbing and
electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems; and
designed to be transported on its own wheels after fabrication, arriving
at the site where it is to be occupied as a complete dwelling, usually
including major appliances and furniture, and ready for occupancy
except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations.
For purposes of this chapter, travel trailers and campers are not
considered "mobile homes."
MODULAR HOME — Shall mean a dwelling unit manufactured in one
or more sections; designed for long-term occupancy; containing living
and sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower, bath and
kitchen facilities with plumbing and electrical connections provided
for attachment to outside systems; designed to be transported after
fabrication on flatbed or other trailers, arriving at the site where it is
to be occupied as a complete dwelling; and a unit that is in conformity
with the Uniform Construction Code. For purposes of this chapter, a
modular home shall include a "manufactured" home meeting the above
requirements.
MOTEL — Shall mean a building or complex of at least 50 units, all
operated as a single business, each unit consisting of at least one
bedroom, one bathroom and one closet area, all designed and used
exclusively to accommodate transient guests and which have no
individual cooking facilities. Accessory uses incidental to the operation,
such as restaurants, kitchens, cafeterias, bars, gift shops, newspaper
stands, cigar stores, barbershops, beauty parlors, swimming pools,
sauna baths, gymnasiums, health clubs and laundries, shall be
permitted.
MULTI-FAMILY — Shall mean a building designed for or occupied by
more than one family.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean any city, borough, town, township, or
village.
NECESSARY FOOTPRINT AREA — Shall mean an area of new home
construction that includes the portions of a private residential lot
necessary for the principal building footprint, detached garage,
driveways leading to the principal building and/or detached garage,
and septic system plus an additional 20 feet beyond the perimeter of
the principal building footprint and any detached garage, and plus an
additional five feet beyond the perimeter of the driveways and septic
system.
§ 30-3 HOLMDEL § 30-3
1:568
NODE — Shall mean an area designated by the State Planning
Commission concentrating facilities and activities which are not
organized in a compact form.
NONCONFORMING LOT — Shall mean a lot, the area, dimension
or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or
amendment of a Zoning Ordinance, but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of
such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure, the size,
dimension or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of a Zoning Ordinance, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — Shall mean a use or activity which was
lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a Zoning
Ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NUTRIENT — Shall mean a chemical element or compound, such as
nitrogen or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the
development or organisms.
OFF-SITE AND OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS — Shall mean
improvements to accommodate conditions generated by a proposed
development, including but not limited to new improvements and
extensions and modifications of existing improvements.
ON-SITE — Shall mean located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Shall mean located on the property which is the subject
of a development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Shall mean any and all lands which meet the
requirements specified for open space in Section 30-58k of this chapter.
OPEN SPACE, ACTIVE — Shall mean an open space which is used or is
intended to be used primarily for active recreation uses.
PARK — Shall mean an area intended for use for passive or active
outdoor recreation containing only those structures accessory to such
recreation. For maintenance purposes, a park created as part of a
OFF-SITE — Shall mean located outside the lot lines of the lot in
question but within the property (of which the lot is a part) which
is the subject of a development application or contiguous portion of
a street or right-of-way.
1.
OFF-TRACT — Shall mean not located on the property which is the
subject of a development application nor on a contiguous portion of
a street or right-of-way.
2.
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:569
cluster subdivision within the R-4H or R-4R Districts shall be deemed
a reservation area and shall be subject to the maintenance
responsibilities outlined in Section 30-83d.
PARKING AREA — Shall mean an off-public street and an off-interior
road space for the parking of a motor vehicle.
PATIO HOME — Shall mean a single-family detached unit on a small lot
with walls along the side yards for privacy, usually with the home placed
along one side lot line. The front and rear yard can also be walled.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Shall mean any security which may be
accepted by a municipality, including cash, provided that a municipality
shall not require more than 10% of the total performance guaranty in
cash.
PERMITTED USE — Shall mean any use of land or buildings permitted
by this chapter.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, Township of Holmdel, or political
subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to
the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean and include planned unit
development, planned unit residential development, residential cluster,
planned commercial development or planned industrial development.
PLANNED RETIREMENT COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean
a planned retirement community development in this chapter; a
residential development for the habitation of people at age 55 or older
(children under 19 may not be in permanent residence, defined as 30
consecutive days or 60 days in any year as to children 17 years of age
or younger; but 90 consecutive days for those 18 years of age), and
may include assisted living residences licensed and regulated by the
New Jersey Department of Health, or the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs, as well as residential communities unlicensed or
unregulated but which retain a private age restriction mechanism. In all
regards, PRC development shall comply with the Federal Fair Housing
Act as it applies to senior citizen housing.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean an area with a
specified minimum contiguous acreage of 100 acres or more to be
developed as a single entity according to a plan, containing one or
more residential clusters or planned unit residential developments and
one or more public, quasi-public or commercial areas in such ranges
of ratios of nonresidential uses to residential uses as specified in the
zoning regulations.
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean an area
with a minimum contiguous acreage as specified in the zoning
provisions of this chapter and an area to be developed as a single
entity according to a plan containing one or more residential clusters,
which may include, as specified in the zoning provisions, appropriate
§ 30-3 HOLMDEL § 30-3
1:570
commercial or public or quasi-public uses, all primarily for the benefit
of the residential development.
PLAT — Shall mean a map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PLAT, FINAL — Shall mean the plat of all or a section of a subdivision
or site plan submitted for final approval in accordance with this chapter
and the statute, and which, if approved as a subdivision, shall be filed
with the county recording officer within the required time, otherwise
the approval shall be void. Minor or exempt subdivision or site plan
approval shall be deemed final approval and shall be prepared and
submitted to comply with final plat requirements.
PLAT, INFORMAL — Shall mean the plat submitted for purposes of
classification and discussion.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — Shall mean the plat submitted as a part of the
application for preliminary approval.
POLLUTANT — Shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical
wastes, radioactive substance (except those regulated under the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal
waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
industrial, municipal, agricultural, and construction waste or runoff,
or other residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land,
groundwaters or surface waters of the State, or to a domestic treatment
works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and non-hazardous
pollutants.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — Shall mean the conferral of certain rights,
pursuant to Section 30-37 and subsection 30-43.3, prior to final
approval after specific elements of a development plan have been
agreed upon by the Planning Board and the applicant.
PRESERVATION AREA — Shall mean open space that is intended
primarily to maintain, restore and enhance the functioning of natural
systems.
PRINCIPAL USE — Shall mean the main purpose for which any lot and/
or building is used.
PRIVATE SCHOOL — Shall mean an institution of education whose
general course work is comparable to the public school system and
whose curriculum is approved by the New Jersey Department of
Education or the New Jersey Department of Higher Education.
PROTECTED ROOF ZONE (PRZ) — Shall mean the snow-fenced area
enclosing the critical root radius of any tree, or the critical root radii
of any stand of trees, that is required to be protected from disturbance
during construction.
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:571
PUBLIC AREAS —
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — Shall mean a Master Plan,
capital improvement program or other proposal for land development
adopted by the appropriate public body, or any amendment thereof.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — Shall mean the land reserved or dedicated
for the installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or
required along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the
channel and providing for the flow of water to safeguard the public
against flood damage, sedimentation and erosion.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — Shall mean an open space area conveyed
or otherwise dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, Board of
Education, State or County agency or other public body for recreational
or conservation uses.
PUBLIC PURPOSE — Shall mean the use of land and/or buildings by a
municipal, County, State or Federal agency or authority.
PUBLIC SEWERAGE SYSTEM — Shall mean any centralized system
that is operated by a municipality, governmental agency, or a public
utility for the collection, and off-site treatment and disposal of
wastewater, and shall not be deemed to include any on-site system or
package treatment plants no matter what type of entity shall operate
such a system.
PUBLIC VIEW — Shall mean visible from a public thoroughfare, public
lands or buildings or navigable waterways.
QUADRUPLEX — Shall mean a 1 1/2 story residential structure
consisting of four attached dwelling units.
QUORUM — Shall mean the majority of the full authorized membership
of a municipal agency.
RAINWATER GARDEN — Shall mean an infiltration basin that is
extensively landscaped with shrubs and woody plants.
RECHARGE — Shall mean the amount of water from precipitation that
infiltrates into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
RESERVATION AREA — Shall mean essentially undeveloped land that
is intended for a range of activities such as recreation, farmland and
farm buildings, stormwater management and the maintenance,
restoration and enhancement of natural systems.
Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational
areas.
1.
2. Other public open spaces.
3. Scenic and historic sites.
4. Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
§ 30-3 HOLMDEL § 30-3
1:572
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — Shall mean an area to be developed as a
single entity according to a plan containing residential housing units
which has a common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — Shall mean the number of dwelling units
per gross acre of residential land area, including streets, easements
and open space portions of a development.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING SITE AREA — Shall mean a delineated area
meeting the requirements of Section 30-58B, within a farm property to
which a farmland easement has been applied. A single-family residence
and structures accessory thereto shall be permitted within a delineated
residual dwelling site area in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
RESTAURANT — Shall mean a commercial establishment where food
and drink are prepared, served and consumed. As used in this chapter,
a "restaurant" shall not include a fast-food restaurant as defined herein.
RESUBDIVISION — Shall mean the further division or relocation of
lot lines of any lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and
approved or recorded according to law or the alteration of any streets
or the establishment of any new streets within any subdivision
previously made and approved or recorded according to law, but does
not include conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other
instrument.
RETIREMENT COMMUNITY CENTER — Shall mean a facility required
in a planned retirement community to be owned and operated by the
homeowners' association of the retirement community.
REVERSE GABLE — Shall mean a smaller section of pitched roof that
intersects perpendicularly to a larger section of roof.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean the total width and length of the course of
a street, watercourse, utility alignment or other way and within, under
or over which all improvements and rights of access are confined.
ROOMING HOUSE — Shall mean a dwelling unit in which a portion
of it is provided to one other than the owner or lessee, generally for
sleeping accommodation purposes, in return for the payment of rent
or other consideration, usually monetary in nature. A rooming house is
not a permitted use, accessory use, or conditional use permitted in any
zone.
SEDIMENT — Shall mean solid material, mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of
origin by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION — Shall mean the deposition of soil that has been
transported from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other
natural means as a product of erosion.
SETBACK LINE — Shall mean a line parallel to a street line or lot
line beyond which a building shall not project. The minimum yard
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:573
requirements shall be the minimum required setbacks. On flag lots, the
minimum yard requirements shall exclude the access drive. All setbacks
from public streets shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way
as shown on the adopted Master Plan.
SHOPPING CENTER — Shall mean a tract comprehensively planned
for two or more retail businesses, whether the building(s) are erected
in one development stage or over a period of time, but where the offstreet
parking is shared and the access, parking, buildings, utilities and
lots and/or tenants' parcels are set forth for the entire tract prior to
construction of any portion of the tract. Where there is more than one
building, each building shall be spaced as if it were to be on a separate
lot in order to establish conformance with this chapter for such matters
as building setbacks, buffers, driveway locations and distance between
buildings.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — Shall mean a triangular area at the quadrants of
street intersections where unobstructed visibility is maintained along
the intersecting street.
SIGN — Shall mean any announcement, display or illustration placed to
be seen from any street or public way.
SIGNIFICANT TREE — Shall mean any tree with a DBH greater than
18 inches and including any American Holly with a DBH greater than
10 inches.
SITE — Shall mean the lot or lots upon which a development is to occur
or has occurred.
SITE PLAN — Shall mean a development plan for one or more lots
on which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot,
including, but not necessarily limited to, topography, vegetation,
drainage, floodplains, marshes and waterways; the location of all
existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways,
means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility services,
landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and screening devices; and
other information that may be reasonably required in order to make
an informed determination pursuant to an ordinance requiring review
and approval of site plans by the Planning Board adopted pursuant to
Article IV of this chapter.
SITE PLAN REVIEW — Shall mean the examination of the specific
development plans for a lot. The term "site plan approval" means a
requirement that the minor or major site plan be approved by the
approving authority prior to the issuance of a building permit or a
certificate of occupancy.
SITE PLAN, EXEMPT — Shall mean accessory buildings to agricultural
and horticultural uses, including temporary farm stands, are exempt
as are single-family and two-family dwellings and their accessory uses,
including swimming pools and tennis courts, unless such dwellings
involve a home occupation. Building or site alterations which do not
involve a change in use or additional parking or additional building
§ 30-3 HOLMDEL § 30-3
1:574
and/or paving area shall be exempt. Changes in use, other than for
conditional uses, which do not require additional parking shall be
exempt. These exemptions shall not apply whenever three or more
dwelling units are proposed to be constructed under common
ownership or control on contiguous lots or on lots within the same
subdivision under building permits issued during the same period of 12
months beginning with the date of the first permit issued.
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — Shall mean all site plans for new developments,
and those site plans not defined as minor or exempt.
SOIL — Shall mean all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of
any origin.
SPECIMEN TREE — Shall mean a tree in good health of unusual or
exceptional form, size, age or shape for its species and/or occupying
a significant position within the landscape. A specimen tree would
necessarily include, but not by way of limitation, any tree included on
the "Big Tree List" of the New Jersey Bureau of Forestry, Community
Forestry Program; any endangered species of tree; any tree with a DBH
greater than 75% of the DBH of the State or County record tree for the
same species; or any tree that has been identified on a list maintained
by the Shade Tree Committee as being notable because of its age, size,
placement on the property, rarity, uniqueness or historical significance.
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE — Shall mean standards adopted
by ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65d, regulating noise levels,
glare, earthborne or sonic vibrations, heat, electronic or atomic
radiation, noxious odors, toxic matters, explosive and inflammable
matters, smoke and airborne particles, waste discharge, screening of
unsightly objects or conditions and such other similar matters as may
be reasonably required by the municipality, or standards required by
applicable Federal or State laws or municipal ordinances.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
METROPOLITAN PLANNING AREA (PA1) — Shall mean an area
delineated on the State Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State
Planning Commission that is intended to be the focus for much of the
State's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Shall mean the geographic application of
the State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide
policies, and the official map of these goals and policies.
STONE WALL — Shall mean a wall constructed of stones with or
without mortar.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation
(including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted
to the subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other
sewage or drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — Shall mean an excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:575
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Shall mean any
structural or nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process,
program, or other method intended to control or reduce stormwater
runoff and associated pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration
or groundwater recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal
non-stormwater discharges into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Shall mean water flow on the surface of the
ground or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
STORY — Shall mean that portion of a building included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or, if there
be no floor above it, then the surface between the floor and the ceiling
next above it.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parking,
viaduct, drive or other way which is an existing State, County or
municipal roadway or which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law or which is approved by official action as provided by
the Municipal Land Use Law or which is shown on a plat duly filed
and recorded in the office of the County recording officer prior to
the appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of
the power to review plats, and includes the land between the street
lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement,
shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas
within the street lines.
STREET LINE — Shall mean the edge of the existing or future street
right-of-way, whichever is wider, as shown on an adopted Master Plan
or Official Map or as required by this chapter, forming the dividing line
between the street and the lot.
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean the division of a lot, tract or parcel of
land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for
sale or development. The following shall not be considered within the
meaning of this Act, if no new streets are created: division of land found
by the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee thereof appointed by
the Chairman to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels
are five acres or larger in size: divisions of property by testamentary or
intestate provisions; divisions of property upon court order, including
but not limited to judgments of foreclosure; consolidation of existing
lots by deed or other recorded instrument; and the conveyance of one
or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land, owned by the same
person or persons and all of which are found and certified by the
administrative officer to conform to the requirements of the municipal
development Regulations and are shown and designated as separate
lots, tracts or parcels on the tax map or Atlas of the municipality. The
term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
§ 30-3 HOLMDEL § 30-3
1:576
SUBDIVISION, EXEMPT — (See Section 30-32.)
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any repair
reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either before the
improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged
and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
SWALE — Shall mean a linear low-lying or depressed area which
functions as an intermittent drainage way and dries out between
precipitation events.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Shall mean a flood hazard area, which
may be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
TOWNHOUSE — Shall mean one dwelling unit in a line of three or
more attached dwelling units with each dwelling unit extending from
the ground to the roof and having individual outside access and no
interior rooms or hallways shared with another dwelling unit.
TRACT — Shall mean one or more lots. Existing streets shall not be
included in calculating the area of the "tract." When used in connection
with a planned retirement community, the term shall refer to all
portions of a single development scheme under one ownership or
control for purposes of a development application.
TRAIL — Shall mean a right-of-way containing an established path for
use by pedestrians and such nonmotorized vehicles and/or animals as
may be allowed by ordinance or law.
TRANSCRIPT — Shall mean a typed or printed verbatim record of the
proceedings or reproduction thereof.
TREAD — Shall mean the portion of a trail right-of-way intended for
pedestrians and, where allowed, nonmotorized vehicles and/or animals.
TREAD, NATURAL — Shall mean a tread which consists of natural
materials, such as wood chips or the earth or rock in place prior to the
trail's construction.
TREE — Shall mean any self-supporting woody perennial plant, usually
having a main stem or trunk and branches, that at maturity normally
attains a trunk diameter (DBH) greater than six inches and a height of
over 20 feet. This includes deciduous, evergreen, and multi-stem trees.
TRUCK APRON — Shall mean a raised area of concrete or stone paving
material provided within a portion of the sight triangle at an
intersection with a narrow curb return radius to allow for safe turning
movements by vehicles with wide turning radii.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT
NEIGHBORHOOD — Shall mean a neighborhood given priority access
to State resources through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:577
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE — Shall mean a zone designated by the
New Jersey Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey
Urban Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Shall mean previously developed
portions of areas: (1) Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM)
as the Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores
or Nodes; (2) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores of Nodes; (3)
Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and (4) Designated as Urban
Coordinating Council Empowerment Neighborhoods.
UTILITY — Shall mean services, such as, but not limited to, sewage
treatment, water supply, gas, electric, telephone and cable television.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries,
all springs, streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or groundwater,
whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New
Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
WET POND — Shall mean a constructed stormwater facility with an
outlet structure that creates a permanent pool. A wet pond promotes
pollutant removal through sedimentation and biological processes and
also attenuates peak rates of runoff.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — Shall mean an area that is inundated
or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances
does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS — Shall mean commercial
mobile services, unlicensed wireless services and common carrier
wireless exchange access services, but not including direct-to-home
satellite services.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS, EQUIPMENT AND/
OR TOWERS — Shall mean buildings and/or structures for the delivery
of wireless telecommunications.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT COMPOUND —
Shall mean a fenced-in area which houses wireless telecommunications
buildings, antennas, equipment and/or towers.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Shall mean a vertical
structure designed to support wireless telecommunications antennas,
which may be of monopole or self-supporting or guyed lattice
construction.
YARD — Shall mean an open space extending between the closest point
of any building and a lot line or street line. In an apartment, townhouse,
industrial or office park, shopping center or other development where
more than one building may be erected on a lot, "yards" shall also be
the open space extending between structures and between structures
and interior streets. All "yard" dimensions shall be measured
horizontally and at right angles to either a straight street line, lot line or
§ 30-3 HOLMDEL § 30-3
1:578
building facade or perpendicular to the point of tangent of curved lines
and facades. The minimum distance between buildings in developments
where there is more than one building on a lot shall be the sum of
the two yards of the structures, and in no event shall two structures
be closer to one another than the sum of both side yards. Where an
interior street passes between buildings, the required "yards" shall be
in addition to the street width.
YARD, FRONT — Shall mean the area extending across the full width
of a lot between the street line and the building and, for apartments,
townhouses, industrial or office park, shopping center or other
development where more than one building may be erected on a lot, the
front yard shall be measured from the designated front of the building
to an imaginary line a designated distance away from the front of the
building.
YARD, REAR — Shall mean the open space extending across the full
width of the lot between the rear lot line and the building, and for
apartments, townhouses, industrial or office park, shopping center or
other developments where more than one building may be erected on a
lot, the "rear yards" shall be measured from the designated rear of the
building to an imaginary line a designated distance away from the rear
of the building.
YARD, SIDE — Shall mean an open space extending from the front yard
to the rear yard and lying between each side lot line and the building.
The "side yard" for apartments, townhouses, industrial or office park
complex, shopping center or other developments where more than one
building may be erected on a lot shall be measured from the designated
side of the building to an imaginary line a designated distance away
from the side of the building.
ZONING OFFICER — Shall mean the individual appointed by the
Township Committee to issue zoning permits.
ZONING PERMIT — Shall mean a document by the Zoning Officer
(1) which is required hereunder as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion and installation of a structure or building and (2)
which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with
the provisions of the Township development regulations ordinances or
a variance therefrom duly authorized by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:579

ARTICLE II
Administrative Provisions
§ 30-4. CONSTRUAL OF PROVISIONS. [1976 Code § 78-4; Ord. No.
3-82]
These rules, regulations and standards shall be used in conjunction with the
Holmdel Development Design Manual and shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Township. Any action taken under the terms of this
chapter shall give primary consideration to such interests in the entire
community. Appropriate subdivision and/or site plan approvals are required
prior to the sale of new lots or the issuance of building permits or
certificates of occupancy.
§ 30-5. AMENDMENTS. [1976 Code § 78-5; Ord. No. 3-82]
All provisions of this chapter may be amended in accordance with
applicable laws.
§ 30-6. (RESERVED)99
§ 30-7. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 30-7.1. Establishment; Composition. [1976 Code § 78-7; Ord. No.
3-82]
a. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq., consisting of seven regular members and two
alternate members, all of whom shall be residents of the Township of
Holmdel and all appointed by the Mayor. Regular members shall serve
for terms of four years, and alternate members shall serve for two
years, all from January 1 of the year of their appointment. The terms of
the regular members first appointed shall be so determined that, to the
greatest practicable extent, the expiration of such terms shall be
distributed evenly over the first four years after their appointment,
provided that the initial term of no member shall exceed four years.
Thereafter the term of each member shall be for four years. The terms
of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not more than
one alternate member shall expire in any one year. Nothing in this
chapter shall, however, be construed to affect the term of any present
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, all of whom shall continue
in office until the completion of the term for which they were appointed.
No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective
office or position under the municipality. A vacancy occurring otherwise
than by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
99.Editor's Note: Former Section 30-6, Appeals Generally, previously codified herein and
containing portions of 1976 Code § 78-6 and Ordinance Nos. 3-82, 85-12, 90-40 and 91-1,
was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2013-13.
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-7.1
1:581
§ 30-7.2. Board of Adjustment Authority. [1976 Code § 78-7; Ord.
No. 3-82; Ord. No. 85-12]
§ 30-7.3. Appeals and Applications. [1976 Code § 78-7; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 20-82]
b. Alternate members shall be designated by the Mayor at the time of their
appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." Both alternate
members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not
vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A
vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote
instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall
vote.
c. No member of the Board of Adjustment may hold any elective office or
position in the Township.
d. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
a. No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
section unless granted without substantial detriment to the public good
and not substantially impairing the intent and purpose of the Zone Plan
and Zoning Ordinance.
b. The Board of Adjustment shall have powers to:
1. Hear and decide appeals pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a.
2. Hear and decide requests for interpretations or decisions upon
other special questions pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b.
3. Grant upon application or appeal, relief for variances pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
4. Grant variances to allow departure from regulations pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
5. Where the Planning Board cannot act on an application because it
does not involve a subdivision, site plan or conditional use, direct
issuance of a permit for a building or structure in the bed of a
mapped street or public drainageway, flood control basin or public
area reserved on the Official Map and direct issuance of a permit
for a building or structure not related to a street.
a. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party within 20 days of the action by the officer from whom the appeal
was taken. Eight copies of the application, plans, maps, supporting
documents, fee and the notice shall be filed with the administrative
officer specifying the grounds for the appeal. The officer from whom the
appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board all the papers constituting
§ 30-7.1 HOLMDEL § 30-7.3
1:582
§ 30-7.4. Power to Reverse or Modify Decisions. [1976 Code § 78-7;
Ord. No. 3-82]
The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from
and make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made, and to that end have all the powers of the administrative officer from
whom the appeal was taken.
§ 30-7.5. Time for Decision. [1976 Code § 78-7; Ord. No. 3-82]
Unless a longer period is consented to by the applicant, the Board of
Adjustment shall render its decision not later than 120 days after the
date an appeal is taken from the decision of an administrative officer, or
not later than 120 days after the submission of a complete application
for development without prior application to the administrative officer.
If the developer elects to submit separate consecutive applications for a
variance pursuant to subsection 30-7.2b4, followed by subdivision, site plan
or conditional use applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to the
application for approval of the variance. The period for granting or denying
any subsequent approval(s) shall be as otherwise provided in this chapter
and State statute. Failure of the Board to render a decision within the
period prescribed or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
the record. Where a subdivision and/or site plan is to be acted upon, the
submission shall include all data required in Article III.
b. Applications to the Board of Adjustment without prior application to an
administrative officer shall be filed with the administrative officer. Eight
copies of the application shall be filed along with all plot plans, maps,
fee and other papers required by this chapter or rule of the Board of
Adjustment. Where a subdivision and/or site plan is to be acted upon,
the submission shall include all data required in Article III.
c. An appeal stays all proceedings unless the officer from whom the
appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not
be stayed other than by an order of the Superior Court of New Jersey
upon notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due
cause shown.
d. Any application may be referred to any person or agency for its report,
provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time within
which the Board of Adjustment shall act.
§ 30-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-7.6
1:583
§ 30-7.6. Expiration of Variance. [1976 Code § 78-7; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 85-12]
In the granting of hardship and use variances, a time limit of one year from
the date of the variance approval shall be set within which time the owner
shall secure a building permit; otherwise the variance granted shall be null
and void. The approving authority may for good cause shown extend the
period for securing a building permit for an additional period not exceeding
six months.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this subsection,
whenever such variance shall be granted in conjunction with a final
approval of a site plan or major subdivision the validity of such variance
shall be extended for the initial two-year time period and any subsequent
one year extensions that the applicant may obtain under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52.
§ 30-7.7. Additional Provisions. [1976 Code § 78-7; Ord. No. 3-82]
See Section 30-19.
§ 30-8. PROCEDURES FOR COMPLETE APPLICATION. [1976 Code
§ 78-7.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord. No. 90-11; Ord. No.
99-1; Ord. No. 2004-12 § I]
a. An application for development shall be complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by a municipal
agency when so certified by the administrative officer. The
administrative officer shall be authorized to reject an application as
incomplete. In the event that the administrative officer does not certify
the application to be complete within 45 days of the date of its
submission, the application shall be deemed complete upon the
expiration of the forty-five-day period for purposes of commencing the
applicable time period unless a) the application lacks information
indicated on the Township of Holmdel Development Plan Checklist100
adopted herein and annexed hereto, a copy of which checklist shall be
provided to the applicant upon request for an application, and b) the
administrative officer has notified the applicant, in writing, of the
deficiencies in the application within 45 days of the submission of the
application. The applicant may request that one or more of the
submission requirements be waived, in which event the agency or its
authorized committee shall grant or deny the request within 45 days.
Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's
obligation to prove in the application process that he is entitled to
approval of the application. The municipal agency involved may
subsequently require correction of any information found to be in error
and submission of additional information not specified in this chapter or
any revisions in the accompanying documents, as are reasonably
necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
100. Editor's Note: The Development Plan Checklist referred to herein can be found as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 30-7.6 HOLMDEL § 30-8
1:584
§ 30-9. COMPLIANCE REQUIRED. [1976 Code § 78-8; Ord. No. 3-82]
All requirements of this chapter shall be met at the time of any erection,
enlargement, moving or change in use.
§ 30-10. (RESERVED)101
§ 30-11. ENFORCING OFFICERS. [1976 Code § 78-11; Ord. No.
3-82]
requirements necessary for approval of the application for development
have been met. The application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack
of any such additional information or any revisions in the accompanying
documents so required by the municipal agency.
b. No application for final subdivision or final site plan approval shall be
accepted for submission unless it is submitted within three years, plus
any granted extensions, from the date of memorialization of preliminary
approval.
a. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to administer and enforce the
zoning provisions of this chapter. No zoning permit shall be issued
unless the proposal is in compliance with this chapter. In cases
involving the new use of an existing structure, no certificate of
occupancy for the new tenant shall be issued until a zoning permit has
been issued. (See Section 30-16.)
b. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Engineer to enforce the provisions
of subdivision and site plan approvals.
c. Permits in Floodplains. The Construction Official shall:
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
2. Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level, of the lowest habitable floor, including basement, of all new
or substantially improved structures and whether or not the
structure contains a basement.
3. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level, to which the structure has been floodproofed.
(b) Maintain floodproofing certifications.
4. Notify adjacent communities within 200 feet of a proposed
development and notify the New Jersey Department of
101. Editor's Note: Former Section 30-10, Conditional Use Approval, previously codified herein
and containing portions of 1976 Code § 78-9 and Ordinance Nos. 3-82 and 85-12 was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17. For requirements pertaining to
conditional use approval see Section 30-155.
§ 30-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-11
1:585
§ 30-12. FEES.
§ 30-12.1. Time of Filing. [1976 Code § 78-12; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 20-82; Ord. No. 90-40; Ord. No. 94-29]
The developer shall, at the time of filing a submission, pay the following
nonrefundable fees to the Township. Proposals requiring a combination of
approvals, such as subdivision, site plan and/or variance, shall pay a fee
equaling the total of the fees for each component.
§ 30-12.2. Testing. [1976 Code § 78-12; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
20-82; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord. No. 90-40; Ord. No. 94-29]
The Board of Health, Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment may
require such experts as the respective Board may designate, at the
applicant's expense to conduct such tests or additional tests, studies or any
other action which may be deemed necessary or prudent in the performance
of its duties.
§ 30-12.3. Plat Resubmission. [1976 Code § 78-12; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 20-82; Ord. No. 90-40; Ord. No. 91-23; Ord. No. 94-37]
Any plat returned to the applicant for revisions at any stage shall, when
resubmitted, be accompanied by a fee equal to no more than 1/2 of the
original fee for that stage, but may be less as determined by the approving
authority.
§ 30-12.4. Other Fee Requirements.
See also Sections 30-13 and 3-16 for other fee requirements.
§ 30-12.5. Fee Amounts. [1976 Code § 78-12; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 20-82; Ord. No. 21-82; Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord. No.
86-22; Ord. No. 87-16; Ord. No. 89-1; Ord. No. 90-40; Ord. No. 91-2;
Ord. No. 94-37; Ord. No. 95-26 § I; Ord. No. 97-3 § I; Ord. No. 98-11
§ 10; Ord. No. 2012-15; Ord. No. 2013-13]
Fees shall be as follows:
Environmental Protection, Division of Water Resources prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of
such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
5. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
6. Based on recommendations of the Municipal Engineer, show the
exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards where there may be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field condition.
§ 30-11 HOLMDEL § 30-12.5
1:586
a. Subdivision.
1. Informal submission fee:
(a) Minor application: $100.
(b) Major application: $500.
(c) In the event an informal concept plan is later submitted for
formal review, the informal fee hereunder shall be credited
toward the formal review fee.
2. Minor subdivision: $350, plus $250 per lot, together with an escrow
deposit as set forth hereinafter.
3. Preliminary plat: $750, plus $60 per lot if a Planned Retirement
Community application; otherwise, $250 per lot, together with an
escrow deposit as set forth hereinafter.
4. Final plat: $350, plus $60 per lot if a Planned Retirement
Community application; otherwise, $250 per lot, together with an
escrow deposit as set forth hereinafter.
b. Site Plan.
1. Informal submission:
(a) Minor application: $100.
(b) Major application: $500.
(c) In the event an informal concept plan is later submitted for
formal review, the informal fee hereunder shall be credited
toward the formal review fee.
2. Preliminary. The total fee shall equal the sum of the fees under
paragraphs (a) and (b) below:
(a) Fee based on site area.
(1) For the first 20,000 square feet or fraction thereof of lot
area of the subject site: $500.
(2) For each 10,000 square feet or fraction thereof of lot area
over 20,000 square feet and up to 40,000 square feet:
$150.
(3) For each acre or fraction thereof of lot area over 40,000
square feet: $100.
(4) In addition to the total sum due and owing under
paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) above an escrow deposit as set
forth hereinafter.
(b) Fee based on building area.
§ 30-12.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-12.5
1:587
(1) For the first 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof of floor
area of the proposed construction: $425.
(2) For each 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof of floor area
over 1,000 square feet and up to 10,000 square feet: $175.
(3) For each 10,000 square feet or fraction thereof of floor
area over 10,000 square feet: $125.
(4) In addition to the total sum due and owing under
paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) above an escrow deposit as set
forth hereinafter.
3. Final. One-half of the preliminary site plan fees, together with an
escrow deposit as set forth hereinafter. If the preliminary and final
site plans are filed simultaneously, the fee shall be the sum of the
preliminary and final site plan fees; however, the escrow deposit
required herein under such circumstances shall only be as required
for preliminary approval. In the event, however, the appropriate
board only grants preliminary approval, then a separate escrow
deposit must be posted at the time that final approval is considered.
Any funds remaining in the escrow deposit posted as part of the
preliminary approval fee may be credited to the escrow deposit
required for final approval.
4. Signs not included in site plans: $50 per application.
5. Inspection fees shall be paid prior to starting construction,
installation of any public improvements permitted by law, or site
clearing, whichever occurs the earliest. (See subsection 30-13.3.)
6. Waiver of site plan approval: $500.
c. Variances and Other Appeals.
1. Appeals for expansion of single-family residence: $25.
2. All other appeals: $75.
3. Conditional uses: $125.
4. Interpretation of the Zoning Map: $75.
5. Hardship variance: $150.
6. Use variance: $1,000.
7. Building permit in conflict with Official Map or building permit for
lot not related to a street: $125.
8. Interpretation of Zoning Ordinance: $200.
9. In addition to the total sum due and owing, an escrow deposit as set
forth hereinafter. (The escrow deposit will be required for variance
applications paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 8)
§ 30-12.5 HOLMDEL § 30-12.5
1:588
d. Decision Fee. Every applicant to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment at the time of filing an application shall pay to the Township
of Holmdel a fee of $25 for each decision to be rendered to defray the
cost of publishing the decision(s). Once any application is disapproved,
a new submission must include a new decision fee.
e. Reproduction Fee.
1. Minor subdivision: $125, plus $15 per supplemental sheet.
2. Preliminary plat: $75, plus $15 per supplemental sheet.
3. Final plat: $125, plus $15 per supplemental sheet.
4. Preliminary site plan: $75, plus $15 per supplemental sheet.
5. Final site plan: $75, plus $15 per supplemental sheet.
f. (Reserved)
g. Copies of Records. Copies of minutes, decisions or other public
documents at page size shall be available at a cost in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 47:1 A-1 et seq.
h. List of Property Owners. The Township Clerk, upon written request,
shall make and certify a list from the current tax duplicates of names
and addresses of owners of property within 200 feet of the property.
The fee for this shall be $10 or $0.25 per name, whichever is greater,
for each list.
i. Lower Income Housing Developments. Lots subdivided for lower
income housing and those portions of site plans including lower income
housing shall be exempt from subdivision and site plan fees.
j. Resubmission Fee. The fee required will be 1/2 of the original fee for
such type of application unless the work involved is minor. In that event,
the Board can consider a reduction of the resubmission fee upon the
recommendation of the administrative officer that the fee proposed for
the resubmission is excessive in light of the work involved in reviewing
the resubmission.
k. Request for extensions of preliminary or final site plan or subdivision
approvals: $100.
l. Tax Map Revision Fees. A fee of $50 or $10 per lot, whichever is greater,
shall be charged for minor subdivisions and final plats of major
subdivisions to the Township Tax Map.
m. Stenographic Fee. An initial fee of $175 per application shall be paid as
reimbursement to the appropriate board for stenographic services. In
the event additional stenographic fees are incurred, the fees will be
billed against the escrow deposit on an as-billed basis.
n. Escrow Deposits.
§ 30-12.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-12.5
1:589
1. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment, whichever an
applicant is before and/or the Township Committee as to revenues
and inspections outside the application process, shall require, in
addition to any other fees required herein, escrow deposits in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such escrow shall
be utilized to reimburse the Township for professional charges for
review of applications, review and preparation of documents,
inspections of developments under construction and review of
applications by outside consultants when an application is of a
nature beyond the scope of the expertise of the professionals
normally utilized by the Township.
2. Each applicant shall, prior to the application being ruled complete
pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Act, submit
the following sum(s) to be held in escrow in accordance with the
provisions hereof:
Residential Development Escrow To Be Posted
1 unit $200
2-3 units $1,500
4-25 units $2,500
26 units and above; or $7,500
Planned Retirement Community $20,000
Application Not Involving
Structures Escrow To Be Posted
Lots 0-3 $3,500
4-9 $5,000
10+ $7,500
Application Involving
Structures Escrow To Be Posted
Total Floor Plan
0 to 1,249 square feet $1,000
1,250 to 2,499 square feet $2,500
2,500 to 20,000 square feet $5,000
20,000 square feet and up $7,500
$1,000
3. Upon request by an applicant, or upon recommendation of the
Township Engineer, the Planning Board and/or the Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, may consider the adequacy of the
escrow amount set forth above. The review may consider either the
inadequacy of the proposed escrow or the excessiveness of the
§ 30-12.5 HOLMDEL § 30-12.5
1:590
amount. In conducting such review, the following criteria shall be
considered:
(a) The presence or absence of public water and/or sewer
servicing site.
(b) Environmental considerations, including but not limited to
geological, hydrological and ecological factors.
(c) Traffic impact of the proposed development.
(d) Impact of the proposed development on existing aquifer and/or
water quality.
(e) Impact on improvements which might require off-tract or offsite
contribution agreements.
Upon completion of the review, the Board shall adopt a motion
specifying whether the escrow amount specified above is sufficient.
In the event the Board shall determine the amount is excessive, it
shall under motion specify the amount that shall be deemed sufficient,
including a specification, if appropriate, that no escrow be posted. In
the event the Board shall determine the amount specified above is
insufficient, it shall so specify and shall further set forth the amount
required to be posted in light of the criteria specified herein.
4. The Chief Financial Officer shall deposit all funds, when required
by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1, in an interest bearing account. In the event
that a refund is to be made to the applicant/developer, the
Township shall refund said sum, with interest, minus administrative
fees, according to law.
5. The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1, 53.2 and 53.2a as may be
supplemented or amended hereafter and as clarified in paragraph
6 below, are incorporated by reference herein.
6. No zoning permits, building permits, certificates of occupancy or
any other types of permits or certifications may be issued with
respect to any approved application for development until all bills
for reimbursable services have been received by the municipality
from professional personnel rendering services in connection with
such application and payment has been made. Further, if after the
Chief Financial Officer has notified an applicant/developer that
insufficient funds exist in the escrow account to fully reimburse the
Township for all outstanding bills for reimbursable professional
services, no further action shall be taken in reference to such
applicants' case, nor shall any further reviews or inspections be
undertaken by the Township's professionals in regard to the
development for which the deficiency exists until the applicant/
developer has, not only fully funded reimbursement for the
applicable outstanding professional services, but also replenished
the escrow account to a positive balance, the amount of which is
§ 30-12.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-12.5
1:591
§ 30-13. GUARANTIES AND INSPECTIONS.
§ 30-13.1. Requirements. [1976 Code § 78-13; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 12-83; Ord. No. 94-12]
agreed upon by the approving agency/Township and the applicant/
developer. However, if necessary to protect the public, health and
safety inspections may be performed and charged back against the
escrow account.
o. If an escrow balance falls below 25% of the original amount deposited,
the applicant shall be required to restore the escrow to its original
balance.
p. Site plan application fees and escrows for wireless telecommunications
installations:
Application Fee Escrow
If no new tower $400 $2,000
If a new tower is
proposed
$1,000 $5,000
q. Fees for Developer Requested Advance Informal Technical Review.
Prior to the submission of any development application, a technical
review of a development proposal may be conducted by the Township
staff and planning and engineering professionals, upon the request of
the potential developer. Prior to the conduct of any such review, the
appropriate technical review fee shall be paid to the Township as set
forth below:
1. For a review of a proposed development deemed administrative in
nature: $200.
2. For initial review of all other proposed or conceptual development:
$500.
3. For subsequent or "follow-up" reviews: $350.
a. No zoning permit shall be issued for the erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or
building until a performance guaranty, as detailed in subsection
30-13.2b below, has been posted and approved as to all improvements
set forth in subsection 30-13.1c hereunder.
b. No final subdivision or site plan plat shall be approved until a
developer's agreement has been accepted and all items required to be
bonded (on site, off site, on-tract and off-tract) have been either
installed, and approved by the Municipal Engineer and accepted by the
Governing Body and a maintenance guaranty has been filed and
accepted by the Governing Body or their installation shall have been
provided for by a performance guaranty accepted and approved by the
§ 30-12.5 HOLMDEL § 30-13.1
1:592
§ 30-13.2. Performance Guaranty. [1976 Code § 78-13; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 2014-15]
The applicant shall submit the performance guaranty and developer's
agreement to the Municipal Engineer, Attorney and Governing Body for
review and approval by resolution. Final plat submission shall not be made
until the performance guaranty has been accepted and approved by the
Governing Body. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections, the
provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or section.
Governing Body. No maintenance bond shall be accepted for any item
that has further stages of work or which will need to be altered or
reworked. Any improvements installed prior to final plat application
that do not meet required standards shall be added to the performance
guaranty.
c. Items to be guaranteed shall include at least those outlined in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53a(1), as well as others that might be identified during the
plan review process that relate to the public health, safety and welfare.
In the case of site plans, on-site improvements to be bonded shall
include those outlined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-33A(1), plus, but not limited
to, driveway and parking improvements, lighting and landscaping. The
approving authority may waive bonding for on-site improvements for
minor and major site plans, provided that the on-site improvements that
are waived do not directly or indirectly affect other public facilities or
the general health, safety and welfare of the Township.
a. In any performance bond, the developer shall be principal, and the
surety shall be either an acceptable surety company licensed to do
business in New Jersey and/or cash or certified check which shall be
deposited with the Township Treasurer. Any performance bond
submitted to the Governing Body by a developer which is obtained from
a surety company shall be issued in the name of and executed by a
representative of the developer on its behalf. In addition, at least one
corporate officer, partner or member of a joint venture or other similar
entity shall also sign the bond in his individual capacity. The Treasurer
shall issue a receipt for such deposits. If the improvements have not
been completed in accordance with the standards or within the
stipulated time, but no longer than two years, the obligor and surety
shall be liable thereon for the reasonable cost of completing the
improvements. The Township may, either prior to or after receipt of the
proceeds thereof, complete such improvements.
b. The performance guaranty shall equal 120% of the cost of installing the
improvements. 90% of this total shall be either a certified check, bank
money order or surety bond of a bonding company approved by and at
the option of the Governing Body. The remaining 10% shall be
equivalent to cash, such as a certified check, bank money order or other
security acceptable to the Township Attorney, payable to the Township.
In the event of default, the cash fund 10% shall be first applied to
complete the requirements, and the cash, certified check or surety bond
§ 30-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-13.2
1:593
§ 30-13.3. Prior to Construction. [1976 Code § 78-13; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 87-21; Ord. No. 88-42; Ord. No. 91-42; Ord. No. 92-18]
Prior to construction, the developer shall arrange for a preconstruction
conference among the developer, contractor and Municipal Engineer. The
Municipal Engineer shall be notified by registered mail by the developer
at least 72 hours in advance of the start of construction. The cost of
inspection shall be the responsibility of the developer, who shall reimburse
the Township for all reasonable inspection fees by submitting a check
to the Township Clerk. For those developments for which the reasonably
anticipated fees are less than $10,000, fees may, at the option of the
developer, be paid in two installments. The initial amount deposited by a
developer shall be 50% of the reasonably anticipated fees as established
by the Township Engineer. When the balance on deposit drops to 10%
of the reasonably anticipated fees because the amount deposited by the
developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the Municipal Engineer
for inspection, the developer shall deposit the remaining 50% of the
anticipated inspection fees. For those developments for which the
reasonably anticipated fees are $10,000 or greater, fees may, at the option
shall thereafter be resorted to, if necessary. Where the cash, check or
other acceptable security is used, the developer shall be notified, in
writing, that it shall be replaced within 30 days, and the developer
shall do so. The Municipal Engineer's certification that the principal
has satisfactorily installed the improvements or has defaulted shall be
the basis for the Governing Body's action which accepts or rejects the
improvements, withholds approval or may extend the time allowed for
installation of the improvements. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guaranty shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation as determined as of the time of the passage of
the resolution.
c. If the property or any part of same is sold, or otherwise conveyed to a
successor developer prior to the completion and acceptance of all
improvements, an Assignment of Developer's Agreement, and new
performance or maintenance guaranty shall be required from the new
owner or successor developer. Upon the transfer of ownership of
property that is the subject of a construction permit, and prior to
beginning or continuing work authorized by the construction permit,
the new owner or successor developer shall file with the Building
Department an application for a permit update to notify the Building
Department of the name and address of the new owner or successor
developer and of all other changes to information previously submitted
to the Building Department. The Building Department shall not approve
the application for a permit update until it receives notification from the
Governing Body or its designee that the new owner or successor
developer has furnished adequate replacement performance or
maintenance guaranty and Assignment of Developer's Agreement.
§ 30-13.2 HOLMDEL § 30-13.3
1:594
of the developer, be paid in four installments. The initial amount deposited
by a developer shall be 25% of the reasonably anticipated fees.
When the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the reasonably anticipated
fees because the amount deposited by the developer has been reduced by
the amount paid to the Municipal Engineer for inspection, the developer
shall make additional deposits of 25% of the reasonably anticipated fees.
The Municipal Engineer shall not perform any inspections if sufficient funds
to pay for those inspections are not on deposit. The above specified fees
shall be paid prior to the commencement of any preparatory site work,
including but not limited to clearance of the property, grading or excavation.
These inspection fees shall be in addition to the amount of the performance
guaranty and all application fees as specified in this chapter.
Upon completion of the development and all inspections and at the request
of the developer, the developer shall receive an accounting of the expended
funds, and any unspent funds shall be returned to the developer with
the exception of an amount not exceeding 1% of the cost of the required
improvements, which shall be held and used for inspection during any
applicable maintenance periods regarding the improvement. Any of the
funds remaining at the time of release of the maintenance bond shall be
returned to the developer.
§ 30-13.4. Inspection by Municipal Engineer. [1976 Code § 78-13;
Ord. No. 3-82]
No work shall be done without permission from and inspection by the
Municipal Engineer. No underground installation shall be covered until
inspected and approved. The Municipal Engineer's office shall be notified
after each of the following phases of the work has been completed so that
he may inspect the work: road subgrade; curb and gutter forms; curbs and
gutters; road paving (after each coat, in the case of priming and sealing);
drainage pipes and other drainage structures before backfilling; shade trees
and planting strips; street name signs; and monuments.
§ 30-13.5. Utility Installations. [1976 Code § 78-13; Ord. No. 3-82]
All utility installations installed by utility companies shall not be subject to
the inspection requirements or bonding.
§ 30-13.6. Occupancy Permits. [1976 Code § 78-13; Ord. No. 3-82]
Occupancy permits will be issued only when required fire alarms, curbs,
aprons, utilities, functioning water supply and sewage treatment facilities,
gutters and other necessary storm drainage to ensure proper drainage of
the lot and surrounding land, fine grading of lots, clearing of sight triangles,
soil stabilization, including topsoil and seeding, and the base course for the
street and sidewalks are installed to serve the lot and structure for which
the permit is requested. Streets shall not receive surface course paving
§ 30-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-13.6
1:595
until all heavy construction is completed. Shade trees shall not be planted
until all grading and earth-moving is completed.
§ 30-13.7. Street Improvements; Inspection and Report by Township
Engineer. [1976 Code § 78-13; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 91-42]
Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements (except for
the top course) and appurtenant utility improvements, and the connection
of same to the public system, the obligor may request of the Township
Committee in writing, by certified mail addressed in care of the Township
Clerk, that the Township Engineer prepare, in accordance with the itemized
cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee, a list of all uncompleted or unsatisfactorily
completed improvements. If such a request is made, obligor shall send a
copy of the request to the Township Engineer. The request shall indicate
which improvements have been completed and which improvements remain
uncompleted in the judgment of the developer. Thereupon the Township
Engineer shall inspect all improvements covered by the obligor's request
and shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, with the Township
Committee and shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to the obligor not
later than 45 days after receipt of the obligor's request.
The list prepared by the Township Engineer shall state, in detail, with
respect to each improvement determined to be incomplete or
unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the incompleteness of each
incomplete improvement or the nature and extent of, and remedy for,
the unsatisfactory state of each completed improvement determined to
be unsatisfactory. The report prepared by the Township Engineer shall
identify each improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory
together with the recommendation as to the amount of reduction to be
made in performance guarantee relating to the completed and satisfactory
improvement, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by
the Township Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee.
§ 30-13.8. Approval by Township Committee. [1976 Code § 78-13;
Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 91-42]
The Township Committee, by resolution, shall either approve the
amendments determined to be complete and satisfactory by the Township
Engineer, or reject any and all of these improvements upon the
establishment and the resolution of cause for rejection, and shall approve
and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the performance
guarantee relating the approvements accepted, in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and appended
to the performance guarantee. This resolution shall be adopted not later
than 45 days after receipt of the list and report prepared by the Township
Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the Township Committee,
the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its performance
guarantee with respect to those approved improvements, except for that
portion adequately sufficient to secure completion or correction of the
§ 30-13.6 HOLMDEL § 30-13.8
1:596
improvements not yet approved; provided that 30% of the amount of the
performance guarantee posted may be retained to insure completion and
acceptability of all improvements.
§ 30-13.9. Rejection of Required Improvements. [1976 Code
§ 78-13; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 91-42]
If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete or correct such improvements
and, upon completion or correction, the same procedure of notification, as
set forth in subsection 30-13.7 shall be followed.
§ 30-13.10. Maintenance Guaranty. [1976 Code § 78-13; Ord. No.
3-82]
No improvement shall be accepted by the governing body unless and until
all of the following conditions have been met:
a. The Municipal Engineer shall have certified, in writing, that all the
improvements are complete and they comply with this and other
applicable ordinances.
b. The developer has provided a maintenance guaranty to the governing
body in an amount equal to 15% of the cost of improvements and
running for two years after final acceptance of the improvement by the
governing body. The maintenance guaranty shall provide a guaranty to
replace all work performed and all materials furnished found defective
and make good any defects thereof which become apparent during the
two-year period. In addition, the developer shall accomplish regular
maintenance, such as curb replacement and repair, cleaning out catch
basins and other matters. The maintenance guaranty shall be in a form
acceptable to the governing body, Municipal Engineer and Attorney. In
the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities will own
the utilities or the improvements are covered by a guaranty to another
governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guaranty, as the
case may be, shall be required by the Township for such utilities or
improvements.
c. To obtain release of the maintenance bond, the developer shall, after all
required maintenance has been completed, submit an inspection fee of
0.5% of the cost of constructing the improvements by certified check or
money order and apply to the governing body, in writing, by certified
mail, with a copy to the Municipal Engineer, for final inspection of the
work. The Municipal Engineer shall, within 30 days of receipt of request
for inspection, report, in writing, to the governing body indicating
either approval, partial approval or rejection of the improvements, with
a statement of reasons for any rejection.
d. The governing body shall either approve or reject the improvements
and release of the maintenance bond or reduce the amount of the
§ 30-13.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-13.10
1:597
§ 30-13.11. Recording Fees. [1976 Code § 78-13; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 24-83]
Upon acceptance by the Township of deeds submitted in conjunction with
any development, the developer shall either cause the deeds to be recorded
in the County Clerk's office and shall pay the costs of having the deeds
recorded, or the developer shall, upon billing, reimburse the Township for
the cost of recording the deeds, if the recording is done by the Township of
Holmdel or its agents.
§ 30-13.12. Detention/Retention Basin Maintenance Fee. [Ord. No.
96-29]
Whenever the Township is requested to accept dedication of properties to
be maintained for detention or retention basin purposes which will result
in the Township having to expend funds in the future for the maintenance
of such properties, the Township shall, unless otherwise determined by the
Township Committee, require the property owner dedicating such property
post with the Township funds which will defray the estimated costs of
maintenance for a ten-year period.
The estimated cost for maintenance shall be determined as set forth below.
The estimated cost reflects the 1996 prices and shall be increased 5% per
year for each year beyond 1996. The estimated costs shall be for a ten-year
period and shall be 10 times the sum which results from adding the fixed
costs to the variable costs, the calculation of which are as follows:
§ 30-14. REPEALER. [1976 Code § 78-14; Ord. No. 3-82]
All previously adopted subdivision, site plan and zoning ordinances and
their amendments, together with all other ordinances or parts thereof
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.
maintenance bond, following the same procedures for performance
bonds.
a. The fixed annual cost per detention basin lot, regardless of size, shall be
$432 and no cents. For each year beyond 1996, the fixed annual cost
shall be increased 5% per year.
b. The variable cost is calculated based upon the size of the detention
basin rounded to the nearest acre, except that in no circumstance shall
the calculation be based on less than one acre. The variable annual cost
per acre is $360 and no cents.
The Township Engineer shall calculate the maintenance cost based upon the
foregoing.
The estimated maintenance cost contribution for the ten-year period shall be
deposited with the Township Clerk prior to any signing of the final development
maps by the appropriate municipal officials.
§ 30-13.10 HOLMDEL § 30-15
1:598
§ 30-15. INSPECTIONS. [1976 Code § 78-15; Ord. No. 3-82]
See Section 30-13, Guaranties and Inspections.
§ 30-16. PERMITS.
§ 30-16.1. Noncompliance; Flood Hazard Area. [1976 Code § 78-16;
Ord. No. 3-82]
No zoning permit, building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be
issued where improvements to a property, sale of land, use of property
or subdivision(s) were undertaken in violation of this chapter. No zoning
permit, building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any
parcel of land or structure located in any flood hazard area until all plans
have been reviewed for compatibility with the floodplain regulations of this
chapter. Prior to issuing a permit in a flood hazard area, all necessary
permits shall have been obtained from Federal, State or local authorities
from which prior approval is required, and it shall be determined whether or
not there is an adverse effect on the flood-carrying capacity of the drainage
course. If there is no adverse effect, the permit may be granted. If there is
an adverse effect, then flood damage mitigation measures shall be made a
condition of the permit.
§ 30-16.2. Zoning Permit. [1976 Code § 78-16; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 94-12]
A zoning permit shall be issued simultaneously with or before the issuance
of any building permit or certificate of occupancy.
§ 30-16.3. Building Permit. [1976 Code § 78-16; Ord. No. 3-82]
Building permits and procedure. Every application for a building permit
shall be submitted in accordance with the State Uniform Construction
Code.102
§ 30-16.4. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. [1976 Code § 78-16;
Ord. No. 3-82]
The Construction Official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for
a use related to the development of a permitted use for a reasonable period,
but not to exceed six months. No more than one one-month extension may
be granted.
§ 30-16.5. New Lots or Buildings; Change of Use and/or Tenancy.
[1976 Code § 78-16; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 2010-18]
Any new lot or building or a change in use and/or tenancy shall require
a zoning commencement of use permit and a certificate of occupancy
inspection prior to its use. No certificate shall be issued unless the land,
102. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. and State Uniform Construction Code.
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-16.5
1:599
building and use comply with this subsection; all matters incorporated on
the approved subdivision or site plan, such as streets, drainage, parking and
water and sewer service, shall be completed comply with the Building and
Health Codes.
§ 30-16.6. Fees. [1976 Code § 78-16; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 94-18;
Ord. No. 2010-18; Ord. No. 2010-26; Ord. No. 2011-09]
The fee for a zoning permit shall be as follows:
a. Residential.
Minimum Fee $60
1. Utility Uses:
Solar Panels, Oil Tanks, Generators, Propane Tanks,
Sprinklers
$60
2. Accessory Uses:
Minor detached improvements up to 200 square feet
(shed, flag pole, fence, pergola, swing set, etc.
$60
Major detached improvements over 200 square feet
(detached garage, gazebo, shed, swing set, etc.)
$120
Driveways and sidewalks $60
Sports courts with lighting $100
Sports courts without lighting $60
Patios $60
Decks $80
Retaining walls:
Wall or walls in a single slope less than a cumulative
height of 3 feet
$60
Wall or walls in a single slope greater than a
cumulative height of 3 feet
$360
Pools:
Above ground $60
In-ground $100
Additions, alterations, or reconstruction (sunrooms,
porches, bedrooms, finished basements, baths, or
creation of any enclosed space or area covered by a
roof)
$60 up to
$30,000 of
cost and
$420 for
every
$5,000
thereafter
§ 30-16.5 HOLMDEL § 30-16.6
1:600
Renovation $60 up to
$10,000 of
cost and
$20 for
every
$5,000
thereafter
New 1- and 2-family homes $600
Mobile home replacement $80
Temporary tents $60
Processing fee $40
Revisions
First revision submitted within 60 days from date of
denial
No charge
First revision submitted after 60 days from date of
denial
$40
Revision to existing zoning permit $40
Any second revision Must
resubmit as
a new
application
b. Nonresidential.
New nonresidential construction: $200 up to
$50,000 of
cost and
$20 for
every
$50,000
thereafter
Construction trailer $100
Commencement or change of use with tenant fit out $200
Commencement or change of use with continuing
certificate of occupancy inspection:
$300
Nonresidential less than 12,000 square feet $300
Nonresidential greater than 12,000 square feet $400
Industrial factory $700
Each additional reinspection $60
Signs:
Sign less than 15 square feet $100
Sign greater than 15 square feet $160
Revisions:
§ 30-16.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-16.6
1:601
First revision $60
Second revision Must
resubmit as
a new
application
Building permit and certificate of occupancy fees shall be in accordance
with Revised General Ordinances, Chapter 10, Construction, subject to the
State Uniform Construction Code.103
§ 30-16.7. Overdue or Delinquent Taxes. [1976 Code § 78-16; Ord.
No. 3-82]
No zoning permit, building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued
for approval granted by the approving authority, if taxes or assessments
for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property for which
application is made.
§ 30-16.8. Compliance. [1976 Code § 78-16; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
94-12]
A zoning permit shall be required as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building and shall
acknowledge that such use, structure or building complies with the
provisions of the Township development regulations or with a variance
therefrom duly authorized by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
§ 30-16.9. Additional Regulations. [1976 Code § 78-16; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 12-83; Ord. No. 91-24; Ord. No. 94-12]
a. When applying for permits as set forth herein, there shall also be filed
in duplicate a plot plan showing to scale the size and location of all new
construction and all existing structures on the site, distances from lot
lines and the established street grades; and it shall be drawn in
accordance with an accurate boundary line survey; except that for farm
and farm residential applications wherein the farm is an existing and
continuing enterprise at the time of application, the plot plan shall only
be required to show to scale the size and location of all new
construction in relationship to two main structures; and it shall be
sufficient to indicate the distances from the lot line rather than submit a
plot diagram of the entire tract. In the case of demolition, the plot plan
shall show all construction to be demolished and the location and size of
all existing buildings and construction that are to remain on the site or
plot; except that for farm and farm residential demolition applications
wherein the farm is an existing and continuing enterprise at the time of
application, the plot plan shall show all construction to be demolished
in relationship to two main structures which are to remain in the site.
103. Editor's Note: See State Uniform Construction Code.
§ 30-16.6 HOLMDEL § 30-16.9
1:602
§ 30-16.10. Moving of Building on Public Streets. [1976 Code
§ 78-16; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 12-83; Ord. No. 94-12]
Any person securing a permit for the removal or moving of a building or
structure over, upon or across a public street, in addition to any other
prescribed fees, shall file with the Township Clerk a bond with good and
sufficient sureties to the Township of Holmdel as obligee, in the sum of
$25,000 or such additional amount as recommended by the Township
Engineer, conditioned upon the proper removal or moving of the building
or structure without damage to the public streets, sidewalks, curbs or other
public property and saving the Township and the public of the Township
harmless from any and all damage that may be caused to any property or
person by reason of the removal or moving of the building or structure, and
agreeing to reimburse the Township for any moneys expended by it or by
its public for repairs or damages. No permit shall be issued until such bond
shall be filed as aforesaid.
§ 30-17. (RESERVED)
§ 30-18. PLANNING BOARD.
b. Subsequent to the issuance of a building permit, but prior to the
framing or installation of any structure, including but not limited to a
dwelling, building, septic tank, etc., the holder of the building permit or
his duly designated servant, agent or employee shall file with the
Construction Official a foundation survey showing the boundaries of the
premises in question and the actual location of the foundation of the
structure being constructed.
c. After completion of a building or structure, except nonresidential farm
buildings or structures, two copies of a final survey certified by a
licensed land surveyor, showing the locations of the buildings on the
property, with all front, side and rear setback distances, individual
water supply and sewerage facilities and driveways, shall be filed with
the Construction Official prior to a request for final inspections and the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy will not
be issued nor may the premises be occupied until such final surveys
have been submitted to and accepted by the Construction Official.
d. All foundation, surveys and final surveys required under subsection
30-16.9 paragraphs a, b and c shall be prepared by, signed and sealed
by, a New Jersey licensed land surveyor.
§ 30-16.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-18.1
1:603
§ 30-18.1. Established; Membership. [1976 Code § 78-17; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 20-82]
There is hereby established pursuant to P.L. 1975, c.291,104 a Planning
Board of nine members, consisting of the following four classes, and two
alternate members:
§ 30-18.2. Terms. [1976 Code § 78-17; Ord. No. 3-82]
a. Class I: the Mayor.
b. Class II: one of the officials of the municipality other than a member of
the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that, if
there is an Environmental Commission, the member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board
as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the Class II
Planning Board member, if there is both a member of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education among the Class
IV or alternate members of the Planning Board.
c. Class III: a member of the governing body to be appointed by the
governing body.
d. Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed as
regular members and two other citizens of the municipality to be
appointed as alternates, all such appointments to be made by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one regular member may be a member of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and one may be a member of the Board of Education. A
member of the Environmental Commission who is also a member of the
Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a Class IV
Planning Board member unless there be among the Class IV or
alternate members of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education, in which
case the member of the Environmental Commission shall be deemed to
be the Class II member of the Planning Board.
a. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his
official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class
III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II
member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission. The
term of a Class II or Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at the
completion of his term of office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever comes first. The term of a Class IV member who
is also a member of the Board of Adjustment or the Board of Education
shall terminate whenever he is no longer a member of such other body
or at the completion of his Class IV term, whichever occurs first. The
104. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 30-18.1 HOLMDEL § 30-18.2
1:604
§ 30-18.3. Vacancies. [1976 Code § 78-17; Ord. No. 3-82]
If a vacancy of any class, including alternate members, shall occur
otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment for
the unexpired term.
§ 30-18.4. Powers and Duties. [1976 Code § 78-17; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 2010-22 § I]
The Planning Board shall exercise the following powers and duties:
terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this chapter
shall be so determined that, to the greatest practicable extent, the
expiration of such terms shall be evenly distributed over the first four
years after their appointment as determined by resolution of the
governing body; provided, however, that no term of any member shall
exceed four years, and further provided that nothing herein shall affect
the term of any present member of the Planning Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of the terms for which they
were appointed. Thereafter all Class IV members shall be appointed for
terms of four years except as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall
run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
b. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment by
the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the
alternate members shall be for two years, except that the terms of the
alternate members shall be such that the term of not more than one
alternate member shall expire in any one year; provided, however, that
in no instances shall the terms of the alternate members first appointed
exceed two years. No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which he has either, directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest. An alternate member may, after a public hearing if he
requests one, be removed by the governing body for cause. Alternate
members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not
vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of
any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote.
a. To make, adopt and amend a Master Plan for the physical development
of the municipality pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
b. To administer the provisions of the subdivision and site plan provisions
of this chapter.
c. To approve conditional use applications.
d. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by State or Federal law or regulations.
§ 30-18.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-18.4
1:605
§ 30-18.5. Applications. [1976 Code § 78-17; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
90-11]
Applications to the Planning Board shall conform to the appropriate
provisions in Article III or, if none of these are applicable, then shall conform
to subsections 30-7.3, 30-7.4, 30-7.5 and 30-7.6. (See also Section 30-12,
Fees.) Procedures for a determination of a complete application shall be as
set forth in Section 30-8.
e. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
f. To consider and report to the governing body within 35 days after
referral of any proposed development regulation submitted to it
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a and to pass upon
other matters referred to it by the governing body pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
g. In reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site plans or
conditional uses, the Board shall have the power to grant variances
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 and 40:55D-70c with the same power to
grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Board of Adjustment and direct the issuance of a permit for a building
or structure either not related to a street (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36), or in the
bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood control basin or
public area reserved on the Official Map (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32).
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of the
hearing on the application for development shall include reference to
the application for a variance or direction for issuance of a permit, as
the case may be. Whenever an application for approval of a subdivision
plat, site plan or conditional use includes a request for a variance or the
issuance of a permit, the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of
the application within 95 days after submission of a complete
application to the administrative officer or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to
act within this period shall constitute approval of the application.
h. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution for the aid and assistance of the governing body or other
municipal agencies or officers.
i. To review and make recommendations on such matters as the location,
character or extent of capital projects in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55-31 to the governing body or other public agency having
jurisdiction on capital projects necessitating the expenditure of public
funds.
j. To hear appeals pursuant to Section 30-158, Riparian Zone Ordinance.
§ 30-18.4 HOLMDEL § 30-18.6
1:606
§ 30-18.6. Referrals. [1976 Code § 78-17; Ord. No. 3-82]
In reviewing plats or any other matters referred to it, the Board may submit
the data to any agency or individual for review and comment.
§ 30-19. PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO BOTH BOARD OF
ADJUSTMENT AND PLANNING BOARD.
§ 30-19.1. Organization of Board. [1976 Code § 78-18; Ord. No.
3-82]
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV. The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and
Vice Chairman from its membership. Both Boards shall elect a Secretary
who may or may not be a member of the Board or a municipal employee.
§ 30-19.2. Attorney. [1976 Code § 78-18; Ord. No. 3-82]
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney and the
office of Attorney to the Board of Adjustment. Each Board may annually
appoint, fix the compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation
of its respective Board Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the
Municipal Attorney or anyone in his office.
§ 30-19.3. Experts and Staff. [1976 Code § 78-18; Ord. No. 3-82]
Both Boards may employ or contract for the services of experts and other
staff and services as they may deem necessary, including a professional
engineer. Neither Board shall authorize expenditures which exceed,
exclusive of the gifts or grants, an amount appropriated by the governing
body for its use.
§ 30-19.4. Rules and Regulations. [1976 Code § 78-18; Ord. No.
3-82]
Each Board shall adopt such rules and regulations necessary to carry out
their duties.
§ 30-19.5. Conflicts of Interest. [1976 Code § 78-18; Ord. No. 3-82]
No member shall act on any matter in which he has, either directly or
indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Whenever any member shall
disqualify himself, he shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing
of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
§ 30-19.6. Meetings. [1976 Code § 78-18; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
85-12]
a. Meetings shall be scheduled no less than once a month, and any
meeting shall be held as scheduled unless cancelled for lack of
applications for development to process.
§ 30-18.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-19.6
1:607
§ 30-19.7. Minutes. [1976 Code § 78-18; Ord. No. 3-82]
Minutes of regular and special meetings shall be kept and shall include
the names of persons appearing and addressing the Board and of persons
appearing by attorney, the action taken, the findings, if any, and reasons
therefor. The minutes shall be made available for public inspection during
normal business hours at the office of the Township Clerk. Any interested
party shall have the right to compel production of the minutes and be
charged a fee for their reproduction.
§ 30-19.8. Hearings. [1976 Code § 78-18; Ord. No. 3-82]
b. Special meetings may be called by the Chairman or on request of any
two Board members, provided that there is notice to the members and
public in accordance with all applicable legal requirements.
c. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present. All actions shall be by majority vote of the Board present at the
meeting, except where a specified portion of the full authorized
membership is required. See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9, 40:55D-26, 40:55D-34
and 40:55D-70d.
d. All meetings shall be conducted pursuant to the Open Public Meetings
Law, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.105
a. Rules. Both Boards may make rules governing the conduct of hearings.
The rules shall be consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and this
chapter. The approving authority may waive the required notices and
hearing for minor and exempt subdivisions and minor and exempt site
plans, except where a variance or conditional use is part of the
application.
b. Oaths. The presiding officer or such person as he may designate shall
have power to administer oaths or issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant evidence,
including witnesses and documents presented by the parties, and the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953
(N.J.S.A. 2A.67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
c. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses shall be taken under oath or
affirmation by the presiding officer and the right of cross examination
shall be permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if
represented, or indirectly, if not represented, subject to the discretion
of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as to time and
number of witnesses.
d. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable, but
irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
105. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 30-19.6 HOLMDEL § 30-19.8
1:608
§ 30-20. PUBLIC HEARINGS. [1976 Code § 78-19; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 12-83; Ord. No. 85-12]
All public hearing dates shall be set by the approving authority. The
approving authority shall hold a public hearing on each application for
development, except that the approving authority may waive the required
notices and hearing for minor and exempt subdivisions and minor and
exempt site plans unless a variance or conditional use is part of the
application. No public hearing shall be required for final site plan or
subdivision approval. All public hearings conducted on subdivisions, site
plans or variances before either the Board of Adjustment or Planning Board
shall follow the requirements of the Municipal Land Use Law as
summarized below. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-11 and 55D-12.)
e. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
Each Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense. The charge
for a copy of the transcript shall not be more than the maximum
permitted in N.J.S.A. 2A:11-15, and the transcript shall be certified, in
writing, by the transcriber to be accurate.
f. Certified Court Reporter. Where a certified court reporter is not
otherwise retained by the Township and an applicant desires a certified
court reporter, the cost of taking testimony and transcribing it and
providing a copy of the transcript to the approving authority shall be at
the expense of the applicant, who shall also arrange for the reporter's
attendance.
g. When any hearing before either Board shall carry to two or more
meetings, a member of the Board who was absent for one or more of the
meetings shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing
was conducted, notwithstanding his absence from one or more of the
meetings, provided that such Board member has available to him a
transcript or recording of the meeting from which he was absent and
certifies, in writing, to the Board that he has read such transcript or
listened to such recording.
a. Any maps and documents submitted for approval shall be on file and
available for public inspection at least 10 days before the hearing date
during normal business hours in the office of the administrative officer.
b. The Planning Board or Zoning Board shall include findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon in each decision on any application for
development and shall reduce the decision to writing. The Planning
Board or Zoning Board shall provide the findings and conclusions
through:
1. A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in the act for action by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board on the application for development; or
§ 30-19.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-20
1:609
2. A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the municipal
agency voted to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the
Planning Board or Zoning Board who voted for the action taken
may vote on the memorializing resolution, and the vote of a
majority of such members present at the meeting at which the
resolution is presented for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the
resolution. An action pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9 resulting from
the failure of a motion to approve an application shall be
memorialized by resolution as provided above, with those members
voting against the motion for approval being the members eligible
to vote on the memorializing resolution. The vote on any such
resolution shall be deemed to be a memorialization of the acts of
the Planning Board or Zoning Board and not to be an action of the
municipal agency; however, the date of the adoption of the
resolution shall constitute the date of decision for purposes of the
mailings, filings and publications required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.
c. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the approving authority within
10 days of the date of the decision to the applicant of, if represented by
an attorney, then to the attorney, and a copy shall also be filed in the
office of the administrative officer. A brief notice of the decision shall
also be published in the official newspaper of the Township, the
publication of which shall be arranged by the Secretary of the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment, as applicable. The period of time in
which an appeal of the decision may be made shall run from the first
publication of the decision.
d. All notices shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature
of the matters to be considered and an identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers and the location and time(s) at which any maps
and documents are available for public inspection.
e. All hearing notices shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall
be given at least 10 days prior to the hearing date established by the
approving authority.
1. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper
of the Township, if there is one, or in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality.
2. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on
the current tax duplicate located in the State and within 200 feet in
all directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing,
provided that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice
to a condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose
unit has a unit above or below it, or to a horizontal property regime,
in the case of any co-owner whose apartment has an apartment
above or below it. This notice shall be given by either serving a
copy thereof on the property owner as shown on the current tax
§ 30-20 HOLMDEL § 30-20
1:610
§ 30-21. EFFECT ON PENDING PROCEEDINGS. [1976 Code § 78-20;
Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 20-82]
These regulations shall not abate or modify any action, penalty, liability
or right pending under any ordinance repealed by the adoption of this
chapter, except as expressly provided in this chapter. (See Sections 30-14
and 30-78.)
duplicate or his agent in charge of the property or mailing a copy
thereof, by certified mail, to the property owner at his address on
the current tax duplicate.
3. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized
by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowners' association,
because of its ownership of common elements or areas located
within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the hearing,
may be made in the same manner as to a corporation without
further notice to unit owners, co-owners or homeowners on
account of such common elements or areas.
4. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall
be given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality.
5. Where a public hearing is required by this chapter, a notice shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the County Planning
Board where the hearing concerns a property adjacent to an
existing county road or proposed road shown on the Official County
Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other county land or
situated within 200 feet of a municipal boundary; to the
Commissioner of Transportation where the hearing concerns a
property adjacent to a State highway; to the Director of the
Division of State and Regional Planning where the hearing
concerns a property which exceeds 150 acres or exceeds 500
dwelling units, and the notice to the Director shall include a copy of
any maps or documents required to be on file with the
administrative officer.
f. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the municipal
agency holding the hearing. Any notice made by certified mail shall be
deemed complete upon mailing.
§ 30-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-22
1:611
§ 30-22. USE VARIANCE APPLICATIONS. [1976 Code § 78-21; Ord.
No. 3-82]
Any appeal for a variance to allow a structure or use in a district restricted
against such structure or use shall have one copy forwarded to the Planning
Board by the administrative officer, together with a notice of the hearing
date. The Planning Board shall review the material and may make
recommendations at the public hearing. The Planning Board's
recommendations may contain, among other things, its opinion as to the
compatibility of the proposal to the Master Plan; applications which may
have been or are currently being processed by the Planning Board for
similar uses elsewhere in the Township; land use, traffic and other data
considered by the Planning Board to be relevant to the application; and
what conditions, if any, it would recommend be imposed on the applicant to
improve compatibility with the Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance should
the Board of Adjustment grant the variance.
§ 30-23. through §30-28. (RESERVED)
§ 30-29. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [1976 Code § 78-23; Ord.
No. 3-82; Ord. No. 91-21; Ord. No. 2006-07 § IX]
a. In case of any violation of this chapter, the Township or an interested
party may institute appropriate action to prevent such violation; to
restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of
the structure or land, and to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business
or use in or about such premises. Any person, firm or corporation found
guilty in the Municipal Court of the Township of Holmdel or a violation
of any provision or section of the Code shall be subject to the penalties
stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation
of any provision of this chapter exists, shall constitute a separate
violation. In addition, each violation of this chapter shall be considered
a separate offense upon each and every day in which a violation exists.
Any person who is convicted of violating an ordinance within one year
of the date of a previous violation of the same ordinance and who was
fined for the previous violation, shall be sentenced by a court to an
additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by
the court upon a person for a repeated offense shall not be less than
the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed for a violation of the
ordinance, but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for
the violation of the ordinance.
b. If before final subdivision approval any person as owner or agent
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, any
land which forms a part of a subdivision for which municipal approval is
required, such persons shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed
§ 30-22 HOLMDEL § 30-29
1:612
$2,000 and each lot disposition so made may be deemed a separate
violation.
c. In addition, the Township may institute and maintain a civil action for
injunctive relief and to set aside and invalidate any conveyance made
pursuant to such a contract of sale if a certificate of compliance has not
been issued in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56, but only if the
municipality has a Planning Board and has adopted by ordinance
standards and procedures in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38.
d. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the developer
or his assignees or successors, to secure the return of any deposits
made or purchase price paid and, also, a reasonable search fee, survey
expense and title closing expense, if any. Any such action must be
brought within two years after the date of the recording of the
instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of the land or within six
years, if unrecorded.
e. See Sections 30-11 and 30-16.
§ 30-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-29
1:613

ARTICLE III
Development Review Procedures; Plat Details
§ 30-30. CONDITIONAL APPROVAL. [1976 Code § 78-24; Ord. No.
3-82]
The applicant shall comply with reasonable conditions laid down by the
approving authority for design, dedication, improvements and the use of
the land to conform to the physical and economical development of the
municipality and to the safety and general welfare of the future residents/
owners in the development and the community at large. Where County
Planning Board review or approval is required on a subdivision or site
plan, the approving authority shall condition any approval it grants upon
either timely receipt of a favorable report from the County Planning Board
or approval by the County Planning Board due to its failure to submit a
report within the required time period. If the county's report is timely
and is negative or attaches mandatory conditions, the original conditional
approval by the municipal approving authority shall be void, and the
application shall be denied, and a new resolution shall be adopted which
considers the County Planning Board's report.
§ 30-31. GRANT OF EXCEPTIONS FROM SUBDIVISION AND SITE
PLAN REQUIREMENTS. [1976 Code § 78-25; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
84-7]
The approving authority, when acting upon applications, shall have the
power to grant such exceptions from the subdivision and site plan
requirements of this chapter as may be reasonable and within the general
purpose and intent of the provisions for subdivision/site plan review and
approval if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter
is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the land in question.
The approving authority, when acting upon an application which includes
provisions for lower income housing, may waive those portions of the design
standards that do not create health and safety concerns for the Township
or for the future residents of a development, provided such exemption from
these standards will reduce construction costs so that the savings therefrom
shall be passed on to the buyers and renters of lower income housing in the
form of reduced housing costs.
§ 30-32. EXEMPTIONS. [1976 Code § 78-26; Ord. No. 3-82]
The approving authority may waive required notices and hearings for minor
and exempt subdivisions and site plans, except where a variance or
conditional use is part of the application. Divisions of land not considered
a subdivision as defined in this chapter shall be exempt from compliance
with the requirements of this chapter only after affirmative action by the
approving authority. Such action shall be taken following submission of
documentation to the approving authority showing the division of land for
§ 30-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-32
1:615
agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in
size, divisions by testamentary or intestate provisions, divisions of property
by court order and conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deeds or
other instrument, as the case may be. Until exempted from the subdivision
regulations by the approving authority, a court of competent jurisdiction or
administrative officer, as appropriate, no person can transfer, sell or agree
to transfer or sell, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a
subdivision for which approval is required. Until exempted from the site
plan regulations by the approving authority, no alterations or improvements
shall be made nor permits issued.
§ 30-33. SIMULTANEOUS REVIEW AND APPROVAL. [1976 Code
§ 78-27; Ord. No. 3-82]
The approving authority shall have the power to act upon subdivisions,
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously without the developer making
further application or the approving authority holding further hearings. The
longest time period for action by the approving authority, whether it is for
subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply. Whenever
approval of a conditional use is requested by the developer in conjunction
with a site plan or subdivision, notice of the hearing on the plat shall
include reference to the request for such conditional use. See Section 30-10,
Conditional Use Approval.
§ 30-34. SITE PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED. [1976 Code § 78-28;
Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 12-83; Ord. No. 84-7]
A site plan approval is required for all residential and nonresidential
developments which do not meet the definition of "site plan exempt" in
Section 30-3. All site plans shall adhere to the design and zoning provisions
of this chapter and shall provide performance and maintenance guarantees
for the improvements as outlined in Section 30-13.
§ 30-35. USE VARIANCE APPLICATIONS WHERE APPLICANT IS
SEEKING SIMULTANEOUS REVIEW AND APPROVAL. [1976 Code
§ 78-29; Ord. No. 3-82]
Where an applicant is seeking simultaneous subdivision and/or site plan
review and approval as part of a use variance, all applications shall be
accompanied by plats plus other supporting documents as required for
subdivision and site plan approval. (See also Section 30-22.)
§ 30-36. INFORMAL PLAT FOR MINOR AND MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS. [1976 Code § 78-30; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
85-12]
a. An informal review of a concept plan is optional. At the request of the
developer, the Planning Board shall grant an informal review of a
concept plan for development for which the developer intends to
prepare and submit an application for development. No decisions will
§ 30-32 HOLMDEL § 30-36
1:616
§ 30-37. PRELIMINARY PLAT FOR MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS. [1976
Code § 78-31; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 85-12]
Preliminary plats are required for all major site plans and major
subdivisions. Where any remaining portion of the original tract is sufficient
to be developed or subdivided further, the developer may be required to
submit an informal plat of the remaining portion to indicate a feasible
plan whereby the proposed development, together with subsequent
development, will not create, impose, aggravate or lead to any adverse
effect(s).
§ 30-37.1. Filing Procedure. [1976 Code § 78-31; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 85-12; Ord. No. 92-6]
be made, no hearings held and no formal action taken. Neither the
developer nor the approving authority shall be bound by this informal
review.
b. Filing Procedure. The developer shall file with the administrative
officer, at least seven calendar days prior to the workshop meeting at
which it will be discussed, three copies of the informal plat which shall
include topography of the property in question.
c. Action by the Approving Authority.
1. The approving authority shall classify the application as a minor or
major development within 45 days of the date of submission or such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. If classified
as a minor or exempt subdivision or a minor or exempt site plan, no
public hearing need be required except if a variance or conditional
use is part of the application. If the approving authority requires
any changes prior to resubmitting the plat as a preliminary or final
plat, such changes and/or conditions shall be in writing and shall be
sent to the applicant.
2. If the approving authority determines the development may,
directly or indirectly, create an adverse effect on either the
property being developed or nearby property, the approving
authority may require the developer to revise the plat.
a. The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer, at least five
weeks prior to the first regularly scheduled meeting of the month of the
approving authority, 10 black-on-white copies of the preliminary plat
along with 15 copies of the plat, first sheet only (not cover sheet) folded
so that the title sheet block is showing or, if more than 10 sheets, shall
be submitted in individually rolled sets, one translucent reproducible
copy of each sheet of the plan, together with microfilm copies of each
sheet of the drawings as specified in subsection 30-38.1; 10 completed
copies of the application form for preliminary approval; four copies of
any protective covenants, deed restrictions and easements applying to
the land being developed either existing or proposed or a statement
§ 30-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-37.1
1:617
that none exists or are proposed; 10 copies of the drainage calculations
and soil erosions and sediment control data as required in Article IV
of this chapter; certification from the Township Engineer that he has
assigned block and lot numbers; the applicable filing fee; 10 copies
of the completed checklist revised to April 30, 1992, incorporated by
reference heretofore; and 10 copies of the certification by the Tax
Collector that all taxes or assessments for local improvements that are
due are paid to date (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39(E)) and 10 copies of all other
supplementary documentation submitted by applicant or requested by
the Board.
b. Reduced Copies of Plat. Reduced copies of the initial submission of the
preliminary plat plan sheet and 18 reduced copies of subsequent
resubmissions involving modifications to the road layout shall be
submitted. Each plan sheet shall show the entire tract with all proposed
lots, easements and public improvements. This reduction shall not
exceed 11 inches in height and shall be at least 8 1/2 inches in width.
The resulting scale shall be a multiple of one inch equals 100 feet and
shall result in a map with a final scale no smaller than one inch equals
500 feet. If it is necessary to reduce the scale below one inch equals 500
feet, the applicant should seek guidance from the approving authority.
The intent of this reduction is to provide municipal agencies with a copy
of the entire subdivision, in legible form, on one sheet of paper for their
information and use. A sample reduction is available for review at the
office of the Township Clerk.
c. A corporation or partnership applying for permission to subdivide a
parcel of land into six or more lots or for a variance to construct a
multiple dwelling of 25 or more family units or for approval of a site to
be used for commercial purposes shall list the names and addresses of
all stockholders or individual partners owning at least 10% of its stock
of any class or at least 10% of the interest in the partnership, as the
case may be. If a corporation or partnership owns 10% or more of the
stock of a corporation or 10% or greater interest in a partnership,
subject to the above disclosure, that corporation or partnership shall
list the names and addresses of its stockholders holding 10% or more of
its stock or 10% or greater interest in the partnership, as the case may
be, and this requirement shall be followed by every corporate
stockholder or partner, in a partnership, until the names and addresses
of the noncorporate stockholders and individual partners exceeding the
10%-ownership criterion established in this Act have been listed. No
Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or municipal governing body shall
approve the application of any corporation or partnership which does
not comply with this requirement of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1. The penalty
for concealment by a corporation or partnership shall be as outlined in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1.
d. The application shall include a complete environmental impact report
(Section 30-59b), as those requirements may have been modified by
data submitted at the informal plat stage or a written request for a
§ 30-37.1 HOLMDEL § 30-37.1
1:618
§ 30-37.2. Action by the Approving Authority. [1976 Code § 78-31;
Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 20-82; Ord. No. 21-82; Ord. No. 85-12]
waiver of any or all of its requirements. If a waiver is requested, the
approving agency shall either approve, approve in part or disapprove
the request. The applicant shall provide any required data within 15
days or at least 15 days prior to the date the approving authority is
required to act, whichever comes first.
a. The administrative officer shall be authorized to reject an application as
incomplete. The approving authority may accept the submission as a
complete application upon recommendation(s) from the administrative
officer. Such action shall be taken in compliance with the provisions of
Section 30-8 of this chapter.
b. Public Hearing. If accepted as an application, a public hearing date
shall be set by the approving authority and notice given.
c. Upon submission of a plat, the administrative officer shall submit two
copies to the Planning Board and one copy of the plat and supporting
data to the County Planning Board, Municipal Engineer, Planning Board
Engineer and Board of Health, Township Clerk, Environmental
Commission, Fire Hydrant Examiner, Police Department and any other
agency or person as directed by the approving authority for review and
action. In addition, copies of the reduced plat shall be distributed to the
First Aid Squad, Board of Education, Board of Recreation
Commissioners, Construction Official and Administrator. Each shall
have not more than 30 days from receipt of the plat to report to the
approving authority. In the event of disapproval, such report shall state
the reasons therefor. If any agency or person fails to submit a report
within 30 days, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved by
them. Upon mutual agreement between the County Planning Board and
the approving authority, with approval of the developer, the thirty-day
period for a County Planning Board report may be extended for an
additional 30 days, and any extension shall so extend the time within
which the approving authority is required to act.
d. A subdivision of 10 or fewer lots shall be granted or denied within 45
days of the date of a complete submission or within such further time as
may be consented to by the developer. With more than 10 lots, the
approving authority shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95
days of the date of a complete submission or within such further time as
may be consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the approving
authority shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval to the
subdivision.
e. The approving authority shall grant or deny preliminary site plan
approval within the following time periods, unless some further time
has been consented to by the developer in writing:
§ 30-37.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-37.2
1:619
1. A site plan which involves 10 acres or less and 10 dwelling units or
less: within 45 days of the date of a complete submission.
2. A site plan which involves more than 10 acres or more than 10
dwelling units: within 95 days of the date of a complete submission.
f. If the approving authority required any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements in either a site plan or subdivision and that plan
had been the subject of a hearing, an amended application shall be
submitted and proceeded upon as in the case of the original application
for development. The approving authority shall, if the proposed
development complies with this chapter, grant preliminary approval.
g. The approving authority may approve or disapprove the application,
including action on the environmental impact report (Section 30-59).
The decision shall be in writing and shall be sent to the applicant and
the newspaper as required by Section 30-20, Public Hearings. If the
approving authority grants preliminary approval, its Chairman and
Secretary, or the Vice Chairman in the Chairman's absence, and
Municipal Engineer shall sign each page of the plat indicating the
approval.
h. Distribution of Approved Preliminary Plat. The administrative officer
shall transmit the signed reproducible copy to the Municipal Engineer
for reproduction of the required number of copies. Upon receipt of the
copies, the administrative officer shall distribute one signed copy to
each of the following:
1. Municipal Engineer.
2. Construction Official.
3. Tax Assessor.
4. Planning and/or Zoning Board.
5. Board of Health.
6. County Planning Board.
7. Official issuing certification as to approval of subdivisions as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
8. Planning Board Engineer.
9. Police Department.
10. Applicant.
11. Township Clerk.
i. Preliminary approval of a subdivision or site plan shall, except as
provided in paragraph 4 below, confer upon the applicant the following
§ 30-37.2 HOLMDEL § 30-37.2
1:620
§ 30-38. FINAL PLAT FOR MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS.
§ 30-38.1. Filing Procedure. [1976 Code § 78-32; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 12-83; Ord. No. 13-83; Ord. No. 84-83; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord. No.
2004-12 § I]
rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary approval;
otherwise the approval shall be void.
1. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements; and any requirements peculiar to site plan
approval, except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent
the Township from modifying by ordinance such general terms and
conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public health and
safety.
2. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary plat.
3. That the applicant may apply for and the approving authority may
grant extensions on such preliminary approval for additional
periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total extension of
two years, provided that if the design standards have been revised
by ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
4. In the case of a development for an area of 50 acres or more, the
approving authority may grant the rights referred to in paragraphs
1, 2 and 3 above for such period of time, longer than three years, as
shall be determined by the approving authority to be reasonable,
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval
and the potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area of the section(s) awaiting final approval, economic conditions
and the comprehensiveness of the development, provided that, if
the design standards have been revised, such revised standards
may govern.
j. If improvements are to be installed prior to final approval, engineering
inspection fees as determined by the Township Engineer shall be posted
prior to the commencement of any work. In addition, the Township
Engineer shall be notified at least two working days prior to the start of
any work.
a. Within three years, plus any granted extensions, of the memorialization
of preliminary approval, the developer shall file with the administrative
officer at least two weeks prior to the meeting of the approving
authority at which it seeks final approval for all or a portion of the
§ 30-37.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-38.1
1:621
proposed development, the following items: one reproducible copy of
each sheet, 10 black-on-white paper prints of the plat folded so that the
title block is showing, or, if more than 10 sheets, shall be submitted
in individually rolled sets, 10 completed copies of the application form
with supporting exhibits and final plat checklist, three copies of the
developer's agreement along with the performance guaranty, including
off-tract improvements, if any, any maintenance guaranties, the
applicable fees, including engineering inspection fees, certification by
the Tax Collector that all taxes and assessments for local improvements
are paid to date (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39(E)), and that all lot and block
numbers have been assigned by the Municipal Engineer; and
certification of the plan by the Soil Conservation District pursuant to
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. Each
filing shall include a translucent reproducible copy of each sheet of
the development plan. Each filing shall also include one 35 millimeter
microfilm standard aperture card from safety-base, permanent record
film with a gelatin-silver halide emulsion developed to a black-andwhite
image and meeting the standards of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) PH 1.28, PH 1.29 and PH 1.41, and shall be
provided for each sheet of submission. Each aperture card shall contain
the following information:
1. Name and number of subdivision or site plan.
2. Name, title and address of the applicant.
3. Date and number of the sheet shown on the microfilm.
4. Tax Map block and lot number(s).
5. One 35 millimeter microfilm strip made from safety-base,
permanent record film with a gelatin-silver halide emulsion
developed to a black-and-white image and meeting the standards of
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) PH 1.28, PH 1.29
and PH 1.41, as amended and supplemented, shall also be provided
for each submission. The strip shall meet all of the requirements of
the New Jersey State Records Committee Microfilm Standards —
Counties, Municipalities, School Districts, adopted July 1981, and
as amended and supplemented, including but not limited thereto,
the following:
(a) All roll film must have the following targets at the beginning of
the reel: density targets; National Bureau of Standards'
resolution target; certificate of authenticity; and title target
containing title of records filmed, filmed start file and end file
(if known), reduction ratio, camera type, film type, and
department or agency having custody of the records.
(b) All roll film will have the following targets at the end of each
reel: density targets; National Bureau of Standards' resolution
target; and operator's certificate.
§ 30-38.1 HOLMDEL § 30-38.1
1:622
(c) For most documents, optimum density should read 1.0 to 1.20
for original first-generation camera film. Acceptable standards
will fall between a minimum of 0.80 and a maximum of 1.35.
The supervisor must use judgment to determine the most
suitable density within this range for the documents being
filmed. To permit a more accurate reproduction of the original
roll, each image should maintain, as far as possible, a specific
density throughout the roll. Since the color of the original
documents will affect the density of the image and not all
documents in a particular record series may have the same
color, an average-density aim point should be chosen.
(d) A density minimum reading taken from the non-image or clear
area of the film will not exceed a reading of 0.12 or
manufacturer's specifications using automatic retrieval
systems. Readings should be made close to the center of the
film strip to avoid edge fog interference. (NOTE: Both
background density and D-min density must be taken with a
transmission densitometer.)
(e) A microscope having a magnification of 50X to 150X with
achromatic objectives must be used to read the resolution from
the National Bureau of Standard's microcopy resolution test
chart. The line direction method will be used in making the
determination of resolution. A minimum resolution of 80 lines
per millimeter on rotary cameras and 110 lines per millimeter
on planetary cameras must be obtained on first-generation
camera film.
(f) Thiosulfate residual content should be tested at least once a
month. Only the methylene blue test method will be considered
sufficiently reliable to determine archival quality. American
National Standards Institute PH 1.28 of 1973 states the
following levels of thiosulfate concentration that must be
observed for archival microfilm:
Limits for Thiosulfate Concentration
Classification of Films
According to Graininess of
Developed Image
Maximum Permissible
Concentration of
Thiosulfate Ion (SO)
(micrograms per square
centimeter)
Class 1: fine-grain copying,
duplication and printing films
(includes ordinary microfilms)
0.7
Class 1: medium-grain
continuous-tone camera films
(negative and reversal) and
coarse-grain X-ray films
2
§ 30-38.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-38.1
1:623
(g) All film must be processed to meet National Bureau of
Standards PH 4.8. Dry-chemical processing will not be
acceptable. Film failing to meet the specified limits for
thiosulfate concentration will not be acceptable.
(h) All film must be inspected for proper indexing, density,
resolution and for residual thiosulfate. Film should be free of
scratches, abrasions, blemishes or other defects.
b. Staging Plan. For any area that will be developed in stages, the
approving authority may require the developer to submit a total
development plan in such detail as required by the approving authority.
Developers of large uses may request and the approving authority may
approve the construction of such uses in stages, provided that the plan
is accompanied by a sectionalization and staging plan showing the
following:
1. The anticipated date for commencing construction of each stage.
The staging of development on the site shall be such that if
development of the site were discontinued after the completion of
any stage, the developed portion of the site would comply in all
respects to the requirements of this chapter and be provided with
adequate drainage and utility systems.
2. Those improvements that will be completed in each stage prior to
application for certificate of occupancy. The plan shall demonstrate
that the staging of construction will minimize adverse effects upon
occupied buildings in the site and adjoining properties.
3. Written descriptions of the proposed operation in sufficient detail
to indicate the effects of the use in producing traffic congestion,
noise, glare, air pollution, fire hazards or safety hazards. For
nonresidential uses, the written description shall also include the
hours of operation of the use, the number of shifts to be worked,
the number of employees in each shift, the number of vehicles to be
stored or parked on the site and provisions to be made for site
maintenance.
c. Where utility services are to be extended to the development, the final
plat shall be accompanied by letters directed to the Chairman of the
approving authority and signed by a responsible officer of the sewer
authority and utility which provides gas, telephone and electricity that
has jurisdiction in the area. Such letter shall approve each proposed
utility installation design and state who will construct the facility. In
addition, a signed contract with the water company which has
jurisdiction for providing water under its franchise for the area in
question shall be required.
d. The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the Municipal
Engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all utilities and other
improvements, both in the development and off-tract improvements, in
exact location and elevation, that he has examined the street, drainage,
§ 30-38.1 HOLMDEL § 30-38.1
1:624
erosion, stormwater control and excavation plans and found that the
interests of the Township and of nearby properties are fully protected
and identifying those portions of any improvements already installed
and that the developer has either:
1. Installed all improvements in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter and the preliminary plat approval with a maintenance
guaranty accompanying the final plat. (See Section 30-13); or
2. Posted a performance guaranty that has been approved by the
governing body.
e. The final plat shall be approved only if all improvements have been
installed to the satisfaction of the Board in accordance with the
approved preliminary plat or a revision thereof approved in accordance
with this chapter and maintenance guaranties have been posted with
the Township Clerk or, if such improvements have not been so installed,
performance guaranties have been posted with the Township Clerk for
all on-tract, off-tract, on-site and off-site improvements and the
applicant signs an agreement with the Township, which includes among
other things:
1. Approval by the applicant of the terms of the performance guaranty
to be posted with the Township Clerk;
2. Certification that the applicant agrees to comply with the
provisions of this chapter and a delineation of the specific
conditions of such compliance which shall be met prior to
permitting the occupancy of any dwelling unit or lot or selling any
lot in the subdivision; provided, however, that no provision of this
chapter shall prohibit the sale of the entire tract comprising the
subdivision or portion thereof, for which final approval has been
obtained, nor the transfer of the agreement to a purchase of the
entire tract, or any portion thereof; and
3. Certification that the applicant understands that all construction in
the subdivision, except as may be required by the following, may be
stopped by the governing body if he fails to correct damage to
adjoining or nearby properties resulting from the development of
the subdivision and all conditions causing such problems within 10
days from the date of notification by the Township Engineer that
unreasonable damage has or is being caused and that he
understands that, if he fails to complete such corrective action as
may be required within an additional 10 days, the governing body
may instruct the Township Engineer to cause such corrective action
to be taken at the subdivider's expense, the cost of such action to
be deducted from the cash bond deposit with the Township Clerk.
The Township Clerk shall thereafter require the applicant to post
additional funds to replenish the deposit.
§ 30-38.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-38.2
1:625
§ 30-38.2. Action by the Approving Authority. [1976 Copy § 78-32;
Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord. No. 2004-12 § II]
a. The approving authority shall grant final approval if the application is
complete and if it conforms to the chapter, the conditions of previous
reviews and the standards prescribed by the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq. In the case of a planned development the approving
authority may permit minimal deviations from the conditions of
preliminary plat approval necessitated by change of conditions beyond
the control of the developer since the date of preliminary approval.
Minimal deviations shall not require the developer to submit another
application for preliminary approval. The administrative officer shall be
authorized to reject an application as incomplete. In the event that the
administrative officer does not certify the application to be complete
within 45 days of the date of its submission, the application shall be
deemed complete upon the expiration of the forty-five-day period for
purposes of commencing the applicable time period unless (a) the
application lacks information indicated on the Township of Holmdel
Development Plan Checklist dated Revised April 19, 1985, incorporated
herein by reference and adopted herein, a copy of which shall be
provided to the applicant upon request for an application and (b) the
administrative officer has notified the applicant, in writing, of the
deficiencies in the application within 45 days of the submission of the
application.
b. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. An
approved final plat shall be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of
the approving authority, or the Vice Chairman in the Chairman's
absence. Failure of the approving authority to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute final approval and a certificate of the
administrative officer as to the failure of the approving authority to act
shall be issued on request of the applicant. Such certificate shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval herein required and shall be so accepted by the County
Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
c. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3 or 40:27-6.6, the approving
authority shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt
of a favorable report from the County Planning Board or upon its failure
to submit a report within the required time period.
d. (Reserved)
e. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer. The
approving authority may for good cause shown extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date
§ 30-38.2 HOLMDEL § 30-38.2
1:626
of signing of the plat. No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing
by the County Recording Officer until it has been approved by the
approving authority as indicated on the instrument by the signature
of the Chairman and Secretary of the approving authority, or the Vice
Chairman or Assistant Secretary in their absence, respectively, or a
certificate has been issued as to the failure of the approving authority
to act within the required time. The signatures of the Chairman and
Secretary shall not be affixed until the developer has posted the
required performance and maintenance guarantees. If the County
Recording Officer records any plat without such approval, such
recording shall be deemed null and void, and, upon request of the
municipality, the plat shall be expunged from the official records. It
shall be the duty of the County Recording Officer to notify the Planning
Board, in writing, within seven days of the filing of any plat, identifying
such instrument by its title, date of filing and official number.
f. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted to a site plan or a major subdivision and all other rights
conferred upon the developer pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of
two years after the date of final approval, provided that, in the case of a
subdivision, the approved final subdivision plat has been filed with the
County Recording Officer. If the developer has followed the standards
prescribed for final approval, the approving authority may extend such
period of protection for extensions of one year, but not to exceed three
extensions. Upon granting of final approval, the rights conferred upon
the applicant by the granting of preliminary approval shall be
terminated upon final approval. Final site plan approval and/or final
subdivision approval, and all rights conferred thereby, shall expire after
two years, plus any granted extensions, from the date of
memorialization of final approval, unless a building permit has been
issued.
g. Provided that the approved final plat or a deed of the approved minor
subdivision has been filed with the County Recording Officer, the zoning
requirements and general terms and conditions, whether conditional or
otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was granted shall
not be changed for a period of two years after the date of minor
subdivision approval.
h. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development of 50
acres or more or conventional subdivision or site plan of 150 acres or
more, the approving authority may grant the rights referred to in
paragraphs f and g above for such period of time, longer than two years,
as shall be determined by the approving authority to be reasonable,
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development. The
developer may apply for and the approving authority may thereafter
grant an extension of final approval for such additional period of time as
§ 30-38.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-38.2
1:627
§ 30-39. GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS. [Ord. No. 98-30 § I]
shall be determined by the approving authority to be reasonable, taking
into consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under final approval, the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area remaining to be developed, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development.
i. Distribution of Approved Plat. The administrative officer shall arrange
to have copies of the signed final plat reproduced and shall file the
master copy in the office of the Township Clerk. The administrative
officer shall send one copy, except as noted, of the signed final plat to
each of the following:
1. Municipal Engineer.
2. Construction Official.
3. Tax Assessor.
4. Planning or Zoning Board.
5. Board of Health.
6. County Planning Board.
7. Official issuing certification as to approval of subdivisions as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
8. Planning Board Engineer.
9. Tax Collector.
10. Board of Education.
11. Board of Recreation Commissioners.
12. Applicant, one copy, one translucent tracing cloth copy equivalent
of the master copy and one cloth print.
a. General Development Plans, Submission and Time for Decision.
1. Submission. Any developer of a parcel of land greater than 100
acres in size for which the developer is seeking approval of a
planned development pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C. 40:55D-1 et
seq.) may submit a general development plan to the Planning Board
prior to the granting of preliminary approval of that development
by the Planning Board pursuant to Section 34 of P.L. 1975, c. 291
(C. 40:55D-46) or Section 36 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C. 40:55D-48).
2. Time for Decision. The Planning Board shall grant or deny general
development plan approval within 95 days after submission of a
complete application to the administrative officer, or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
§ 30-38.2 HOLMDEL § 30-39
1:628
Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute
general development plan approval of the planned development.
b. Contents of the General Development Plan. The general development
plan shall set forth the permitted number of dwelling units, the amount
of nonresidential floor space, the gross residential density, and the
nonresidential floor area ratio for the planned development, in its
entirety, according to a schedule which sets forth the timing of the
various sections of the development in a chronological sequence of
events as described in paragraph b11 below.
The planned development shall be developed in accordance with the
general development plan approved by the Planning Board,
notwithstanding any provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C. 40:55D-1 et
seq.), or an ordinance or regulations adopted pursuant thereto after the
effective date of the approval.
A general development plan shall include, but is not limited to, the
following:
1. A general land use plan at a scale of not less than one inch equals
100 feet or such other scale permitting the entire site to be shown
on one sheet. Enlargement of portions of the plan may be submitted
on separate sheets of the same size. The plan shall indicate the
tract area and general locations of the land uses to be included in
the planned development. The total number of dwelling units and
amount of nonresidential floor area to be provided and proposed
land area to be devoted to residential and nonresidential uses to be
included in the planned development shall be set forth, and the
land area to be occupied by each proposed use shall be estimated.
The gross density and intensity of use of the entire planned
development shall be set forth, and a residential density and a
nonresidential floor area ratio shall be provided.
2. A circulation plan showing the general location and types of
transportation facilities, including a general description of
proposed improvements for pedestrian access within the planned
development and any proposed improvements to the existing
transportation system outside the planned development. The
circulation plan shall be accompanied by a traffic impact report and
the applicant shall be responsible for off-site traffic improvements
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42 and municipal ordinances
that govern same. In addition, the plan shall incorporate
appropriate traffic demand management.
3. An open space plan showing the proposed land area and general
location of parks and any other land area to be set aside for
conservation and recreational purposes and a general description
of improvements proposed to be made thereon, including a plan for
the operation and maintenance of parks and recreational lands.
The open space plan shall be accompanied by a timing schedule
§ 30-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-39
1:629
evidencing when open space areas will be set aside and when
construction of recreational amenities will commence and be
completed.
4. A utility plan showing the need for and showing the proposed
location of sewage and water lines, any drainage facilities
necessitated by the physical characteristics of the site, proposed
methods for handling solid waste disposal, and a plan for the
operation and maintenance of proposed utilities.
5. A stormwater management plan setting forth the proposed method
of controlling and managing stormwater on the site and off-site (if
applicable).
6. An environmental inventory and assessment in accordance with the
Township's Environmental Impact Report requirements (Section
30-59), including a general description of the vegetation, soils,
topography, geology, surface hydrology, climate, and cultural
resources of the site, existing or man-made structures or features
and the probable impact of the development on the environmental
attributes on the site.
7. A community facility plan indicating the scope and type of
supporting community facilities which may include, but not be
limited to educational or cultural facilities, historic sites, libraries,
hospitals, firehouses, municipal buildings, and police stations.
8. A housing plan outlining the number of housing units to be
provided and the extent to which any housing obligation assigned
to the municipality pursuant to P.L. 1985, c. 222 (C. 52:27D-30) et
seq.) will be fulfilled by the development.
9. A local service plan indicating those public services which the
applicant proposes to provide and which may include, but not be
limited to, water, sewer, cable, solid waste disposal, including
separation and recycling of recyclable materials. The plan shall
also indicate anticipated ownership and responsibilities for these
facilities.
10. A fiscal report describing the anticipated demand on municipal
services to be generated by the planned development and any other
financial impacts to be faced by the municipality or school district
as a result of completion of the planned development. The fiscal
report shall also include a projection; of property tax revenues
which will accrue to the County, municipality and school district
according to the timing schedules provided under paragraph b11
below, and following completion of the planned development in its
entirety.
11. A proposed development schedule in the case of a planned
development where construction is contemplated over a period of
years, including any terms or conditions which are intended to
§ 30-39 HOLMDEL § 30-39
1:630
protect the interests of the public and of the residents who occupy
any section of the planned development prior to the completion of
the project in its entirety.
The development schedule referred to herein need not be a
schedule of specific dates but can be a series of sequential events
that provides for a logical progression of the build-out and
completion of the project in coordination with any on-site and
off-site improvements required by the Planning Board of the
municipality; and
12. A municipal development agreement, which means a proposed
written agreement between the municipality and the applicant
relating to the planned development.
c. Terms and Duration of Approval.
1. The term and effect of the general development plan approval shall
be determined by the Planning Board using the guidelines set forth
in paragraph c2 below, except that the term of the effect of the
approval shall not exceed 10 years from the date upon which the
developer receives final approval of the first section of the planned
development pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C. 40:55D-1 et seq.);
2. In making its determination regarding the duration of the effect of
approval of the development plan, the Planning Board shall
consider the number of dwelling units or amount of nonresidential
floor area to be constructed, prevailing economic conditions, the
timing schedule to be followed in completing the development and
the likelihood of its fulfillment, the developer's capacity of
completing the proposed development, and the contents of the
general development plan and any conditions which the Planning
Board attaches to the approval thereof. However, the Planning
Board, in establishing the timing schedule pursuant to paragraph
b11 hereof, and the municipality in negotiating the development
agreement pursuant to paragraph b12 hereof, may allow for
application for preliminary approval for section(s) of the planned
development subsequent to the five year limitation of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-45.7(b). The municipality shall not have cause to terminate
the general development plan approval as long as the timing
schedule and the development agreement allowing section by
section preliminary approvals subsequent to the five-year period
are being met.
d. Modification of Proposed Development Schedule. In the event that the
developer seeks to modify the proposed development schedule, such
modification shall require the approval of the Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall, in deciding whether or not to grant approval of
the modification, take into consideration prevailing economic and
market conditions, anticipated and actual needs for residential units,
and nonresidential space within the municipality and the region, and
§ 30-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-39
1:631
the availability and capacity of public facilities to accommodate the
proposed development.
The developer shall gain the prior approval of the Planning Board if,
after approval of the general development plan, the developer wishes
to make any variation in the location of land uses within the planned
development or to increase the density of residential development or
the floor area of nonresidential development in any section of the
planned development; provided, however, that the Planning Board, in
approving the location of land uses, density, and floor area ratio in any
section, may allow reasonable variations from the development plan
within specific ranges incorporated in the approved development plan
which changes are in accordance with the zoning ordinance and do not
adversely affect the proposed infrastructure or other basic elements of
the development plan.
e. Amendments, Revisions, and Allowable Reductions.
1. Except as provided in paragraph e2 below, once a general
development plan has been approved by the Planning Board, it may
be amended or revised by the Planning Board upon application of
the developer.
2. Without violating the terms of the general development plan
approval granted by the Planning Board, a developer may, in
undertaking any section of the planned development, reduce the
number of residential units or amounts of nonresidential floor
space in the section in question by no more than 15%; provided,
however, that a developer may not reduce the number of residential
units to be provided pursuant to P.L. 1985, c. 222 (C. 52:27D-30 et
seq.) without prior municipal approval.
f. Notice of Completion; Nonfulfillment, Termination of Approval.
1. Upon the completion of each section of the development as set
forth in the approved general development plan, the developer
shall notify the administrative officer of the municipality, by
certified mail, as evidence that the developer is fulfilling his
obligations under the approved plan. For purposes of this section,
"completion" of any section of the development means that the
developer has acquired a certificate of occupancy for every
residential unit or every nonresidential structure as set forth in the
approved general development plan and pursuant to Section 15 of
P.L. 1985, c. 217 (C. 52:27D-133). If the municipality does not
receive such notification at the completion of any section of the
development, the municipality shall notify the developer, by
certified mail, in order to determine whether or not the terms of the
approved plan are being complied with.
2. If the developer does not complete any section of the development
within the time required in the Planning Board's approval of the
general development plan, or if at any time the municipality has
§ 30-39 HOLMDEL § 30-39
1:632
§ 30-40. through §30-41. (RESERVED)
§ 30-42. MINOR SUBDIVISION/SITE PLAN DEVELOPMENTS.
§ 30-42.1. Filing Procedure. [1976 Code § 78-32.1; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 85-12; Ord. No. 92-6]
cause to believe that the developer is not fulfilling his obligations
pursuant to the approved plan, the municipality shall notify the
developer, by certified mail, and the developer shall have 10 days
within which to give evidence that he is fulfilling his obligations
pursuant to the approved plan. The municipality shall thereafter
conduct a hearing to determine whether or not the developer is
in violation of the approved plan. If, after such a hearing, the
municipality finds good cause to terminate the approval, it shall
provide written notice of same to the developer and the approved
plan shall be terminated 30 days thereafter.
3. In the event that a developer who has a general development plan
approval does not apply for preliminary approval for the planned
development which is the subject of the general development plan
approval within the time provided in the Developer's Agreement or
within five years of the date upon which the general development
plan has been approved by the Planning' Board (whichever is later),
the municipality shall have cause to terminate the approval, unless
an extension is agreed upon by the mutual consent of the applicant
and the municipality.
g. Termination of Approval Upon Completion. In the event that a
development plan is completed before the end of the term of approval,
the approval shall terminate upon the completion of the development.
For purposes of this section, a development shall be considered
complete on the date upon which certificate of occupancy has been
issued for the final residential or nonresidential structure in the last
section of the development in accordance with the timing schedule set
forth in the approved general development plan and the developer has
fulfilled all of his obligations pursuant to the approval.
a. The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer, at least five
weeks prior to the first regularly scheduled meeting of the month, the
following items relating to a minor subdivision/site plan: one
reproducible copy of each sheet of the minor subdivision/site plan 10
black-on-white paper prints of the plat along with 15 copies of layout
sheet folded so the title block is showing or, if more than 10 sheets,
shall be submitted in individually rolled sets, one translucent
reproducible copy of each sheet of the plan, together with microfilm
copies of each sheet of the drawings as specified in subsection 30-38.1;
10 completed copies of the application form for approval; four copies of
any protective covenants, deed restrictions and easements applying to
the land being developed either existing or proposed or a statement
§ 30-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-42.1
1:633
§ 30-42.2. Action by the Approving Authority. [1976 Code § 78-32.1;
Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord. No. 92-6]
that none exists or are proposed; 10 copies of the drainage calculations
and soil erosion and sediment control data as required in Article IV
of this chapter; certification from the Township Engineer that he has
assigned block and lot numbers; the applicable filing fee; 10 copies
of the completed checklist revised to April 30, 1992, incorporated by
reference heretofore; and certification by the Tax Collector that all
taxes and assessments for local improvements that are due and paid to
date (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39(E)),; and 10 copies of all other supplementary
documentation submitted by applicant or requested by the Board.
b. Each filing shall also include one 35 millimeter microfilm standard
aperture card from safety-base, permanent record film with a gelatinsilver
halide emulsion developed to a black-and-white image and
meeting the standards of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) PH 1.28, PH 1.29 and PH 1.41, and shall be provided for each
sheet of submission. Each aperture card shall contain the information
set forth in subsection 30-38.1 paragraphs a1 through a5.
c. The minor subdivision/site plan plat shall be accompanied by a
statement by the Municipal Engineer that he is in receipt of a map
showing all utilities and other improvements, both in the development
and off-tract improvements, in exact location and elevation, that he has
examined the street, drainage, erosion; storm water control and
excavation plans and found that the interests of the Township and of
nearby properties are fully protected and identifying those portions of
any improvements already installed and that the developer has either:
1. Installed all improvements in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter and has posted a maintenance guaranty for same. (See
Section 30-13); or
2. Posted a performance guarantee that has been approved by the
governing body.
a. The approving authority shall grant approval of the minor subdivision/
site plan plat if the application is complete and if it conforms to the
chapter, the conditions of previous reviews and the standards
prescribed by the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.).
b. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of
municipal approval unless a plat in conformity with such approval,
including any conditions imposed by the approving authority, and in
conformity with the provisions of the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9
et seq.) or a deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivision as
filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer, the Municipal
Engineer and the Township Tax Assessor. Such plat or deed accepted
for such filing shall have been signed by the Chairman and Secretary of
the approving authority or the Vice Chairman in the Chairman's
§ 30-42.1 HOLMDEL § 30-42.2
1:634
§ 30-43. SUBDIVISION PLAT DESIGN STANDARDS.
§ 30-43.1. Plat Conformity. [1976 Code § 78-33; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 84-7]
All applications shall be submitted in plat form, and all plats shall conform
to the submission requirements as well as the design and zoning regulations
of this chapter and other regulations referred to in this chapter, such as
the Holmdel Development Design Manual. All plats shall be drawn by a
land surveyor, and all drawings of improvements shall be prepared by
a professional engineer, and all such drawings shall bear the signature,
embossed seal, license number and address of the preparer.
§ 30-43.2. Informal Subdivision Plat for Review and Classification.
[1976 Code § 78-33; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 84-7]
absence. In reviewing the application for development for a proposed
minor subdivision the approving authority may accept a plat not in
conformity with the Map Filing Law, provided that if the developer
chooses to file the minor subdivision by plat rather than deed, such plat
shall conform with the provisions of the law.
c. Distribution of Approved Minor Subdivision/Site Plan Plat. The
administrative officer shall arrange to have copies of the signed minor
subdivision/site plan plat reproduced and shall file the master copy in
the office of the Township Clerk. The administrative officer shall send
one copy, except as noted, of the signed minor plat to each of the
following:
1. Municipal Engineer.
2. Construction Official.
3. Tax Assessor.
4. Planning and/or Zoning Board.
5. Board of Health.
6. County Planning Board.
7. Official issuing certification as to approval of subdivisions as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
8. Planning Board Engineer.
9. Police Department.
10. Applicant.
11. Township Clerk.
a. Clearly and legibly drawn.
§ 30-42.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-43.2
1:635
§ 30-43.3. Preliminary Subdivision Plat/Minor Subdivision Plat.
[1976 Code § 78-33; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 20-82; Ord. No. 12-83;
Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord. No. 90-16; Ord. No. 91-15]
b. Graphic scale not less than one inch equals 100 feet.
c. Existing and proposed street and lot layout, with dimensions, showing
that portion proposed for development in relation to the entire tract and
identifying the location and number of units proposed for lower income
housing.
d. Existing lot lines to be eliminated.
e. Area of original tract and of each proposed lot.
f. Basic intent for water and sewage treatment.
g. Contours based on Township-owned topographic maps.
h. Existing structures and uses.
i. All setback lines as well as the shortest distances between buildings
and proposed or existing lot lines.
j. All streams, lakes and drainage rights-of-way, including the direction of
flow of all streams, brooks and drainage rights-of-way; the location of
all drainage structures; private cemeteries; and the approximate
location of wooded areas, flood hazard areas and floodway lines, steep
slopes, wetlands and swamps based on Soil Conservation Service data
and the Township's natural resource inventory. Percolation tests and
soil logs are not required. However, where the slope and soil conditions
indicate problems may be encountered, percolation tests and soil logs
as required for the preliminary plat may be advisable.
k. Existing and proposed rights-of-way and easements within and
adjoining the tract with sight triangles shown. Proposed access points
and parking areas shall be included on site plans.
l. The Tax Map sheet, block and lot number for the tract and all adjacent
lots; a title including the words "Informal Plat for Review and
Classification"; North arrow; space for the application number; the date
of the original drawing; and the date and substance of each revision.
m. Zoning District(s).
n. The name, address, signature and phone number of the owner,
developer and person preparing the plat.
o. A key map with North arrow showing the entire development and its
relation to surrounding areas.
a. Clearly and legibly drawn.
b. Graphic scale not less than one inch equals 50 feet.
§ 30-43.2 HOLMDEL § 30-43.3
1:636
c. Based on certified boundary survey not more than five years old.
d. Sheet sizes of 30 by 42 inches; 24 by 36 inches; 15 by 21 inches; or 8 1/
2 by 13 inches. If more than one sheet is required to show the entire
subdivision, one composite map shall show the entire subdivision with
reference to the sheets on which the various sections are shown.
e. Key map with North arrow showing the entire subdivision in relation to
surrounding areas, including the names of principal roads, and at a
scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet.
f. Title block, including the words "Preliminary Plat, Major Subdivision,"
or "Minor Subdivision Map", as appropriate, with the name of the
subdivision; the name of the municipality; the most recent tax map
sheet, block and lot number and the date of the tax map sheet used;
date of preparation and most recent revision; meridian; North arrow,
graphic scale; the names, addresses, phone numbers and signatures of
the owner, developer and person(s) who prepared the plat(s), including
the seal of the latter; and space for the application number.
g. The names of all property owners within 200 feet of the limits of the
development as disclosed on the most recent municipal tax records.
h. Tract acreage to nearest 0.01 of an acre; the number of new lots
specifying those lots proposed for lower income housing; each lot line
dimension scaled to the nearest foot; and each lot area to the nearest
square foot.
i. Existing and proposed topographic data shall be shown at one inch
equals 100 feet for comparison to Township-owned topographic maps.
Existing and proposed contours at two foot intervals shall be shown for
areas with less than 10% slope and five foot intervals for areas with
10% or greater slopes. For tracts containing slopes in more than one
category, the developer shall show every ten-foot contour with a wider
line. In instances where there is more than one slope category, the
approving authority may allow some other satisfactory contour
intervals and topographic data to meet the objectives of this section. All
elevations shall be related to a bench mark noted on the plan and,
wherever possible, shall be based on United States Geological Survey
mean sea level datum. The approving authority may waive contour
requirements on portions of lots greater than three acres if, because of
terrain or the absence of any proposed improvements or other
conditions, the information would not contribute to its determination.
j. The borders of areas of proposed cuts and fills, exclusive of excavations
for basements.
k. Location of existing natural features showing soil logs, slopes
exceeding 10%, wooded areas, views within the development and the
location of individual trees outside wooded areas having a diameter of
six inches or more measured five feet above ground level. Soil borings
shall be taken in locations at the direction of the approving authority
§ 30-43.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-43.3
1:637
engineer, and a report on soil types and recommendations based on the
data shall be submitted as part of the application.
l. Existing and proposed streams, lakes and marsh areas accompanied by
the following maps and drawings:
1. When a running stream is proposed for alteration or when a
structure or fill is proposed in or along such a stream, approval of
the New Jersey Division of Water Resources shall accompany the
plat.
2. Cross sections and profiles of watercourses at an appropriate scale
showing the extent of the flood fringe area, top of bank, normal
water level and bottom elevations at the following locations:
(a) Where a watercourse crosses a lot line (profile and cross
sections) and at 100-foot intervals, but at not less than two
locations, along each watercourse which runs through or
adjacent to the development (cross sections).
(b) At fifty-foot intervals for a distance of 300 feet upstream and
downstream of any existing or proposed culvert or bridge
within the development (cross sections).
(c) When watercourses are to be altered the method of controlling
erosion and siltation during construction as well as typical
ditch sections and profiles shall be shown on the plan or
accompany it.
3. The total upstream acreage in the drainage basin of any
watercourse running through or adjacent to a development,
including a small-scale watershed map developed from United
States Geological Survey sheets.
4. The total acreage in the drainage basin to the nearest downstream
drainage structure and the acreage in that portion of the
development which drains to the structure.
5. All existing or proposed drainage and conservation easements and
flood hazard areas.
6. The location, extent and water level elevation of all existing or
proposed lakes or ponds within or no farther than 300 feet from the
development.
7. Plans and computations for any storm drainage systems, including
the following:
(a) Existing or proposed storm sewer lines within or adjacent to
the development and all required off-site and off-tract drainage
improvements, showing size, profile and slope of the lines,
direction of flow and the location of each catch basin, inlet,
manhole, culvert and headwall.
§ 30-43.3 HOLMDEL § 30-43.3
1:638
(b) The location and extent of any proposed dry wells,
groundwater recharge basins, detention basins, flood control
devices, sedimentation basins or other water conservation
devices.
m. Plans, cross sections, center-line profiles, tentative grades and details
of proposed and existing utilities and all improvements within street
rights-of-way in the tract, including the type and width of street
pavement, curbs, sidewalks, bike routes, shade tree planting, all
utilities, including water, sewer, gas, electric, telephone and cable TV,
and facilities, such as storm drainage facilities, detention ponds and
erosion control. At intersections, the sight triangles, radii of curblines,
crosswalks, curb ramps and street sign locations shall be shown. Where
the slope and/or soil conditions indicate problems may be encountered,
soil logs may be required as outlined in paragraph r below. Final street
naming may be deferred.
n. The names, locations, widths and purpose(s) of existing and proposed
easements, streets and other rights-of-way in the development and
within 200 feet of the development. The text of any deed restriction in
the development shall be included, including those deed restrictions
related to future control over the rerent and resale prices of lower
income housing units. Construction access shall be specified for those
developments to be constructed over a period of years.
o. The locations and description of all monuments, existing and proposed.
p. All lot lines that exist and will remain, those proposed, and those to be
eliminated. All setback lines with dimensions and municipal boundaries
if within 200 feet shall be shown. Any lot(s) to be reserved or dedicated
to public use shall be identified, as well as any lots to be set aside for
lower income housing purposes. Each block and the lots within each
block shall be numbered as assigned by the Municipal Engineer.
q. Locations of all existing structures and their use(s) in the tract and
within 200 feet, showing existing and proposed front, rear and side yard
setbacks, structures of historic significance, private cemeteries and an
indication of existing structures and uses to be retained and those to be
removed.
r. Utility Plans.
1. Utility plans shall show feasible connections to any existing or
proposed utility systems. If private utilities are proposed, they shall
comply fully with all Township, County and State regulations. If
service will be provided by an existing utility company, a letter from
that company shall be submitted stating that service will be
available before occupancy of any proposed structures. When onlot
water or sewage disposal is proposed, the proposed location of
the well and the location and results of percolation tests shall be
submitted. Where on-lot sewage disposal is proposed, the plat shall
show the results of an acceptable percolation test, as well as all
§ 30-43.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-43.3
1:639
failures, and soil logs on each proposed lot at a site appropriate for
the location of a septic filter field. If the percolation test is doubtful,
the approving authority may require additional percolation test(s).
The plat shall show the following data: the date of the test(s),
the location of each test, slope of the land, cross section of the
soil to a depth of at least 15 feet below the bed of the septic
field, groundwater level, the rate of percolation and the weather
conditions prevailing at the time of each test as well as for the
preceding 48 hours. The test(s) shall be performed at the
applicant's expense by a licensed professional engineer in the
presence of an authorized Township representative.
2. If existing land drainage structures, such as French drains, are
encountered during the course of construction of any subdivision
and such drainage structures are removed or altered, no septic
system or any part thereof shall be installed on any lot within 400
feet thereof without the prior approval of the Holmdel Township
Board of Health. Such approval shall only be granted if new
percolation tests, taken at least two months after such drainage
structures are removed, show satisfactory soil conditions to exist
and that installation of such septic system in the area affected by
the removal of the drainage structures will not be detrimental to
the health of Township residents or cause pollution of any of its
waters.
s. Zoning District(s) and Zoning District Lines.
t. An itemization of all improvements to be made on-site, off-site, on-tract
and off-tract in accordance with the standards specified in Article IV.
u. Documentation that the subdivision plat is in conformity, where
applicable, with the following:
1. The State Highway Access Management Code adopted by the
Commissioner of Transportation under Section 3 of the "State
Highway Access Management Act" P.L. 1989, c. 32(C.27:7-91), with
respect to any State highways within the municipality.
2. Any access management code adopted by the County of Monmouth
under R.S. 27:16-1, with respect to any County roads within the
municipality.
3. Any municipal access management code adopted under R.S.
40:67-1, with respect to municipal streets.
v. Compliance with siting, performance or other standards or guidelines
adopted by the Department of Environmental Protection for the
purpose of protection of potable water supply reservoirs from pollution
or other degradation of water quality resulting from the development or
other uses of surrounding land areas.
§ 30-43.3 HOLMDEL § 30-43.3
1:640
§ 30-43.4. Final Subdivision Plat. [1976 Code § 78-33; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 20-82; Ord. No. 91-15]
w. Location of All Existing and Proposed Easements. In addition, a
notation shall be placed on the map or in the deed to be filed with the
County Clerk's office and on the soil erosion plan filed with the Freehold
Soil Conservation District and the Township of Holmdel indicating that
prior to any soil disturbance or issuance of any permits, the applicant,
its servants, agents, employees or successor and assigns shall be
required to install snow fencing along any easement area on the lot or
lots that are part of the subdivision. Monuments shall be installed as
required under Section 30-58 of the Code of the Township.
a. The plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn.
b. There shall be a graphic scale not less than one inch equals 50 feet,
unless a larger scale is approved by the Municipal Engineer that is
large enough to contain legibly written data on dimensions, bearings
and all other details of the boundaries.
c. The plat shall be drawn by a licensed land surveyor in compliance with
the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.).
d. Sheet sizes of 30 inches by 42 inches; 24 inches by 36 inches; 15 inches
by 21 inches; or 8 1/2 inches by 13 inches. If more than one sheet is
required to show the entire subdivision, a separate composite map shall
be drawn showing the entire subdivision on one sheet and the sheets on
which the various sections are shown.
e. The submission for final plat approval shall show the following, except
that the plat to be filed with the County Recording Officer need only
contain the data required for filing with the County, and all other data
may be submitted on separate sheets:
1. Signature blocks for the approving authority, Municipal Engineer
and other endorsements required by law.
2. Tract boundary lines; municipal boundary line, if within 200 feet of
the tract being subdivided; street names; all lot lines and other site
lines with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflection angles and
radii, arcs and chord bearings, with the distances of all curves, all
based on an actual survey by a land surveyor licensed to practice in
the State of New Jersey; minimum building setback lines; and the
area of each lot shown to the nearest square foot. All dimensions,
both linear and angular, of the exterior tract boundaries shall be
based on and calculated from surveyed traversing which shall have
an apparent error of field closure of one to 10,000 or better and
shall be corrected by accepted balancing methods to final errorless
closure. All final exterior and lot boundaries shall be similarly
balanced to final errorless closure.
§ 30-43.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-43.4
1:641
§ 30-44. SITE PLAN DESIGN STANDARDS.
§ 30-44.1. Plat Conformity and Waivers. [1976 Code § 78-34; Ord.
No. 3-82]
All applications shall be submitted in plat form, and all plats shall conform
to submission requirements as well as the design and zoning regulations
of this chapter and other regulations referred to in this chapter, such as
the Holmdel Development Design Manual. All plats shall be drawn by a
licensed New Jersey land surveyor and shall bear the signature, embossed
seal, license number and address of the land surveyor, except that plats
submitted under the informal discussion provisions and sketch plats of
minor site plans are exempt from this requirement. All drawings showing
improvement designs shall bear the signature and embossed seal, license
number and address of a licensed professional engineer of the State of New
Jersey. Where the application is classified a minor site plan, the approving
authority may waive any or all requirements for a preliminary plat
submission and may waive those portions of a final plat submission that are
found not applicable to the proposed development and would not contribute
to the approving authority's decision.
3. Block and lot numbers in accordance with established standards
and in conformity with the Township Tax Map as approved, in
writing, by the Municipal Engineer, and all street numbers where
appropriate shall be designated as specified by the approving
authority.
4. Title of plat, name of Township, date of survey, date of original plat
and all revisions and application number.
f. The final plat shall be accompanied by the following:
1. A copy of the preliminary plat revised to show all conditions and
changes required by the approving authority at the time of
preliminary approval.
2. That the applicant is agent or owner of the land or that the owner
has given consent to the development.
3. Appropriate local, County and State approvals.
g. Location of All Existing and Proposed Easements. In addition, a
notation shall be placed on the map or in the deed to be filed with the
County Clerk's office and on the soil erosion plan filed with the Freehold
Soil Conservation District and the Township of Holmdel indicating that
prior to any soil disturbance or issuance of any permits, the applicant,
its servants, agents, employees or successor and assigns, shall be
required to install snow fencing along any easement area on the lot or
lots that are part of the subdivision. Monuments shall be installed as
required under Section 30-58.
§ 30-43.4 HOLMDEL § 30-44.2
1:642
§ 30-44.2. Informal Site Plan Review. [1976 Code § 78-34; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 84-7]
Informal site plan for review and classification shall include the same
data as required in subsection 30-43.2, plus lot lines, proposed building(s),
proposed use(s), lower income housing units, parking, loading, on-site
circulation, driveways, wooded areas, approximate onsite or on-tract storm
water detention facilities, and water and sewer service.
§ 30-44.3. Preliminary Site Plan Plat. [1976 Code § 78-34; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 20-82; Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 90-16; Ord. No. 91-15]
a. Every preliminary site plan shall be at a minimum graphic scale of one
inch equals 10 feet, 20 feet, 30 feet, 40 feet, or 50 feet, certified by a
New Jersey licensed architect or engineer, including accurate lot lines
certified by a New Jersey licensed land surveyor, submitted on one of
four of the following standard sheet sizes: 8 1/2 by 13 inches; 15 by 21
inches; 24 by 36 inches or 30 by 42 inches. The following data shall be
shown on the site plan or accompany it. If one sheet is not sufficient to
contain the entire territory, one composite map shall show the entire
development with references to the sheets on which the various
sections are shown; all lot lines and the exterior boundaries of the tract;
North arrow; zone district(s) in which the tract is located; date of
original drawing and each subsequent amendment; existing and
proposed streets and street names; existing and proposed contours at
two foot intervals throughout the tract and within 100 feet of any
building or paved area under review shall be included on two separate
maps, one at the site plan scale and a separate map at one inch equals
100 feet for comparison to Township-owned topographic maps; title of
the plan; streams; total area to one square foot; total number of parking
spaces; all dimensions, areas and distances needed to confirm
conformity with the ordinance, such as but not limited to building
lengths, building coverage, lot lines, parking spaces, loading spaces,
setbacks and yards; a small key map giving the general location of the
parcel within the Township; and a separate map showing the site in
relation to all remaining lands in the present owner's ownership.
b. Site Plan Information for Preliminary and Final Approval. Each site plan
shall include the following information and be designed to comply with
Articles III, IV and V, the Holmdel Development Design Manual and be
accompanied by an environmental impact report. (See Section 30-59.)
1. Building and Use Plan. The plan shall show the size, height,
location, arrangement and use of all proposed structures and signs,
including the architect's scaled elevation of the front, side and rear
of any structure and sign (existing structures shall be identified
either to remain or to be removed) and written description of the
proposed use(s) of nonresidential buildings including the number
of employees or members, the proposed number of shifts to be
worked and the maximum number of employees on each shift,
expected truck and tractor-trailer traffic, emission of noise, glare,
§ 30-44.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-44.3
1:643
vibration, heat, odor, air and water pollution, safety hazards, and
anticipated expansion plans incorporated in the building design.
Floor plans shall be submitted. In apartment and townhouse
projects, the number of dwelling units, by type, including the
location and number of lower income units, shall be shown.
2. Circulation Plan. This plan shall show access streets by name,
acceleration/deceleration lanes, curbs, sight triangles, traffic
channelization, traffic signs, easements, fire lanes, driveways,
parking and loading spaces, pedestrian walks, bikeway and related
facilities for the movement and storage of goods, vehicles and
persons. Sidewalks shall be shown along expected paths of
pedestrian travel, such as but not limited to access from buildings
to parking lots, driveways and other buildings on the site. Any
building expansion plans shall show feasible parking and loading
expansion.
3. Natural Resources and Landscaping Plan. This plan shall show
existing and proposed wooded areas, buffer areas, including the
intended screening devices and buffers (Section 30-54), seeded
and/or sodded areas, ground cover, retaining walls, fencing, signs,
recreation areas, shrubbery, trees and other landscaping features.
These plans shall show the location and type of man-made
improvements and the location, number, species and caliper of
plant material and trees to be located on the tract. All portions of
the property not utilized by buildings or paved surfaces shall be
landscaped utilizing combinations, such as landscaped fencing,
shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, rock formations, contours,
existing foliage and the planting of coniferous and/or deciduous
trees native to the area in order to maintain or reestablish the tone
of the vegetation in the area and lessen the visual impact of the
structures and paved areas. The established grades and
landscaping on any site shall be planned for aesthetic, drainage
and erosion control purposes. The grading plan, drainage facilities
and landscaping shall be coordinated to prevent erosion and
siltation as outlined under Sections 30-57, 30-67 and 30-101, as
well as assuring that the capacity of any natural or man-made
drainage system is sufficient to handle the water from the site and
contributing upstream areas.
4. Facilities Plan. This plan shall show the existing and proposed
locations of all drainage and stormwater runoff; open space;
common property; fire, gas, electric, telephone, sewerage and
water line locations; lighting; and solid waste collection and
disposal methods, including proposed grades, sizes, capacities and
materials to be used for facilities installed by the developer.
Installations by utility companies need only show their locations on
the plat. All easements acquired or required on-tract and off-tract
shall be shown and copies of legal documentation that support the
granting of an easement by the owner of an off-tract lot shall be
§ 30-44.3 HOLMDEL § 30-44.3
1:644
§ 30-44.4. Final Site Plan Plat. [1976 Code § 78-34; Ord. No. 3-82]
The final plat shall follow preliminary site plan requirements and shall
include all changes required as a condition of preliminary approval.
§ 30-45. RECYCLABLE MATERIALS STORAGE. [1976 Code
§ 78-34.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 89-30]
included. All proposed lighting shall include the direction, angle
and height of each source of light. All utilities shall be installed
underground. All required State and Federal approvals for
environmental considerations shall be submitted prior to
preliminary approval or be a condition of approval. All public
services shall be connected to an approved public utilities system
where one exists.
5. Documentation that the site plan is in conformity, where applicable,
with the following:
(a) The State Highway Access Management Code adopted by the
Commissioner of Transportation under Section 3 of the "State
Highway Access Management Act" P.L. 1989, c. 32(C.27:7-91),
with respect to any State highways within the municipality;
(b) Any access management code adopted by the County of
Monmouth under N.J.S.A. 27:16-1, with respect to any County
roads within the municipality.
(c) Any municipal access management code adopted under
N.J.S.A. 40:67-1, with respect to municipal streets.
6. Location of All Existing and Proposed Easements. In addition, a
notation shall be placed on the site plan filed with the Freehold Soil
Conservation District and the Township of Holmdel indicating that
prior to any soil disturbance or issuance of any permits, the
applicant, its servants, agents, employees or successor and assigns,
shall be required to install snow fencing along any easement area
on the properties incorporated into the site plan. Monuments shall
be installed as required under Section 30-58 of the Code of the
Township.
a. Materials designed in the Township of Holmdel Recycling Ordinance
87-6106 shall be separated from other solid waste by the generator and a
storage area for recyclable material shall be provided as follows:
1. For all applications for single-family units, the applicant shall
provide a storage area of at least 48 cubic feet within each dwelling
unit to accommodate a four week accumulation of mandated
recyclables (including but not limited to: newspaper, glass bottles,
106. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 87-6 has been codified in Chapter 16, Solid Waste
Management.
§ 30-44.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-45
1:645
§ 30-46. (RESERVED)107
§ 30-47. through §30-50. (RESERVED)
aluminum cans, tin and bi-metal cans). The storage area may be
located in the laundry room, garage, basement or kitchen.
2. For all applications for multi-family units, the applicant shall
provide a storage area of at least 24 cubic feet within each dwelling
unit to accommodate a two week accumulation of mandated
recyclables (including but not limited to: newspaper, glass bottles,
aluminum cans, tin and bi-metal cans). The storage area may be
located in the laundry room, garage, basement or kitchen. Unless
recyclables are collected on a weekly basis from each dwelling unit,
one or more common storage areas must be provided at convenient
locations within the development.
3. For each site plan application for commercial and industrial
developments that utilize 1,000 square feet or more of land, the
applicant shall provide the Municipal Agency with estimates of the
quantity of mandated recyclable materials (including but not
limited to: newspaper, glass bottles, aluminum cans, tin and bimetal
cans, high grade paper and corrugated cardboard) that will
be generated by the development during each week. A separated
storage area must be provided to accommodate a one to four weeks
accumulation of recyclable material. The Municipal Agency may
require the location of one or more common storage areas at
convenient locations within the development.
107. Editor's Note: Former Section 30-46, Site Plan Application Requirements for the
Installation of Wireless Telecommunications Towers, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance No. 98-11 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
2002-17.
§ 30-45 HOLMDEL § 30-47
1:646
ARTICLE IV
Zoning Design and Performance Standards
§ 30-51. GENERAL PROVISIONS. [1976 Code § 78-35; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 41-96 § I; Ord. No. 42-96 § I; Ord. No. 2002-20 § II; Ord.
No. 2005-32 § II; Ord. No. 2005-39 § 2; Ord. No. 2010-22 § II]
§ 30-52. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS. [1976 Code § 78-36; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 2005-32 § III; Ord. No. 2006-19 § II; Ord. No.
2017-15]
a. All developments shall conform to design standards encouraging sound
development patterns within the Township. Where an Official Map or
Master Plan has been adopted, the development shall conform to it.
Improvements shall adhere to the Holmdel Development Design
Manual.
b. Character of the Land and Natural Features. Land identified in the
Master Plan and the Natural Resource Inventory as critical areas or
having severe or moderate soil characteristics particularly as the land
relates to flooding, improper drainage, shallow depth to water table,
steep slopes, utility easements or similar features shall not be used as
buildable areas, unless adequate and acceptable methods are
formulated by the developer and accepted by the approving authority to
solve the problems by methods meeting this chapter and all other
regulations. Trees, brooks, swamps, hilltops and views shall be
preserved whenever possible.
c. Riparian Zone Ordinance Compliance. Where applicable, there must be
compliance with Section 30-158, Riparian Zone Ordinance.
d. Construction Specifications. In conjunction with the design and zoning
principles of this chapter, all improvements shall be constructed in
accordance with the Holmdel Township Construction Specifications for
Subdivisions and Site Plans.
e. Relief. Relief from the Holmdel Development Design Manual and from
the provisions of Sections 30-53 (Bikeways), 30-56 (Curbs and Gutters),
30-59 (Environmental Impact Report), 30-66 (Fire Protection), 30-77
(Monuments), 30-79 (Off-Site and Off-Tract Improvements), 30-87
(Performance Standards), 30-93 (Shade Trees), 30-94 (Sidewalks),
30-95 (Sight Triangles), 30-101 (Soil Erosion; Sediment Control;
Topsoil), 30-102 (Streetlighting), 30-103 (Streets), 30-104 (Street
Signs), 30-112 (Trails), and 30-116.1 to 30-116.5, 30-116.8a, 30-116.8b,
30-116.9, and 30-116.11 to 30-116.13 (Resource Management
Regulations) shall be by way of exception pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-51.
Relief from any other provision of this Article shall be by way of
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
§ 30-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-52
1:647
§ 30-53. BIKEWAYS. [1976 Code § 78-37; Ord. No. 3-82]
Bikeways may be required, depending on the development's location in
relation to schools, recreation areas, shopping facilities and other populated
areas. Bicycle traffic shall be separated from motor vehicle and pedestrian
traffic as much as possible. Where bike paths intersect a street, the curbing
shall be ramped for access to the street grade. Where the Township's
bikeway plan proposes a bikeway within a tract proposed for development,
the development shall include the bikeway as part of its circulation system.
§ 30-54. BUFFERS. [1976 Code § 78-38; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
2004-09 § II]
Within any zone:
a. Any accessory building attached to a principal building is part of the
principal building and shall adhere to the yard requirements for the
principal building.
b. The minimum distance of any accessory building to a property line on
the same lot shall be equal to the standards set forth in the zoning
standards or equivalent to the building height, whichever is greater.
c. Height and Area. Accessory buildings in residential districts shall not
exceed 15 feet in height and may occupy no more than the equivalent of
25% of a required rear yard or a maximum of 900 square feet,
whichever is smaller, except that windmills and agricultural and
horticultural buildings shall adhere to the requirements of farm
buildings in the district in which they are located. Swimming pools,
tennis courts and paddle tennis courts shall adhere to Section 30-105.
d. Location. An accessory building may be erected in the side or rear yard
only.
e. No zoning permit shall be issued as set forth herein for an accessory
use or building, as defined in Section 30-3c, on property that has an
easement within its boundaries, unless a survey is obtained and filed
with the Zoning Officer, delineating the easement(s) and any setback(s)
required from the easement(s) in relation to the proposed accessory use
or building. For any improvements subject to the provisions of this
section, all setback(s) and easement(s) on the property shall be marked,
by a surveyor, as to be easily visible from the work area and remain so
until completion of the work. The Zoning Officer may withdraw or
suspend any zoning permits for failure to comply with this section. The
requirements of this section may be waived in part or in full by the
Zoning Officer.
a. Where a nonresidential development abuts a residential zone or PPublic
Land zone; or where bulk storage or trash collection points and
off-street parking and loading for six or more vehicles abut a street or
are visible from a residential use or zone; or where a multi-family
§ 30-52 HOLMDEL § 30-54
1:648
development abuts a single-family development or single-family zoning
district; or where reverse frontage design is required; or along all
residential lot lines abutting an arterial or collector road (see Section
30-103b); or
b. Where any residential use abuts a park with active recreation uses, the
following buffer area and landscaping requirements shall apply to the
applicant.
c. In all instances described in paragraph a above, a strip of land 20% of
the average width and depth of the property when a nonresidential use
abuts a residential or P-Public Land zone on the side or rear,
respectively, shall be designated as a buffer area and so indicated on
the plat. Buffer areas will be contiguous with residential or P-Public
Land property lines and shall be of uniform width. In no case should the
width of the buffer exceed 50 feet between two residential
developments nor exceed the widths established in Section 30-55b4(c)
for other uses. If the resulting buffer width calculated as a percentage
of the lot width is less than 20 feet wide, the applicant may be required
to erect and landscape a six-foot high, wooden stockade fence and/or a
solid visual barrier of plantings and/or a landscaped earthen berm
within the buffer area set back a distance appropriate for the
landscaping treatment in the buffer area. The buffer area between
parking and loading areas and street rights-of-way shall be at least 15
feet wide, except that where the buildings, parking/loading areas or
other improvements are at least 200 feet from a property line, the
buffer width may be reduced to 10 feet.
d. In all instances described in paragraph b above, the residential use
shall provide a strip of land 25 feet in width along the lot line as a buffer
between the residential use and the park. The approving authority shall
have the power to waive all or a portion of the buffer requirement,
taking into account circumstances such as, but not limited to, the
presence of a vegetated or wooded area on the park property. No buffer
shall be required if a conservation easement at least 25 feet in width
separates the park from the residential use. This exemption does not
apply to any other buffers that may be required in such instances
pursuant to paragraphs a and c of this section.
e. Buffer areas shall be maintained and kept clean of all debris, rubbish,
weeds, tall grass and dead trees by the owner. Any fences and screen
planting shall be maintained permanently, and any plant material which
does not live shall be replaced within one year or one growing season.
All plantings which do not survive the first 12 months following
certification shall be replaced by the builder/developer at no cost to the
Township within 60 days of written notification.
f. No structure, activity, storage of materials or parking of vehicles shall
be permitted in the buffer area, except access drives from public
streets, one unlighted directional sign per each direction of traffic per
access drive and permitted signs as specified in the district regulations.
§ 30-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-54
1:649
§ 30-54A. (RESERVED)108
g. Requirements for Planting in the Buffer Area.
1. A solid and continuous landscaped screen shall be planted and
maintained by the owner to conceal the parking and loading areas,
eliminate the glare of vehicle lights throughout the year and
camouflage the building from the abutting residential areas. In the
event that existing evergreens do not provide an adequate buffer,
supplemental plantings may be required. All plantings which do not
survive the first 12 months following certification shall be replaced
by the builder/developer at no cost to the Township within 60 days
of written notification.
2. In addition to the landscaped screen, shade trees shall be planted
by the applicant in accordance with the Holmdel Development
Design Manual.
3. The height and location of the landscaped screen shall be measured
in relation to the elevation of the edge of the parking and loading
area or other improvement being screened. Where the landscaping
is lower than the elevation of the area being screened, either the
required height of the screen shall be increased equal to the
difference in elevation, i.e., taller trees and shrubs and/or earthen
berms to raise the elevations or the area being screened, or the
landscaping shall be moved to allow the plantings to be located in
an area with a similar elevation as the area being screened.
4. If the buffer area includes existing growth of evergreen and
deciduous trees and shrubbery, but not enough to provide a
suitable screen as required above, existing specimen trees shall
remain and selected other trees and shrubbery may remain and
shall be supplemented by additional evergreen plantings approved
by the approving authority to provide the required landscape
screen. In the event that the approving authority finds that further
planting of evergreens will not grow satisfactorily in the buffer
areas, stockade fence(s), six feet high shall be erected in the buffer
area.
h. The approving authority shall have the power to waive any of the buffer
requirements if it determines an adequate buffer can be provided in
less than the required widths while maintaining the purposes of this
section. The approving authority shall review the proposed plat and the
standards and purposes for buffers, considering the location of
buildings, parking areas, outdoor illumination and topographic features
of the area and existing features, such as the density and maturity of
existing trees and vegetation; streams; the efficiency, adequacy and
safety of the proposed layout of driveways, streets, sidewalks and
paths; the adequacy and location of existing green areas and buffer
areas; the adequacy and location of screening and parking areas;
structures and uses; and similar features.
§ 30-54 HOLMDEL § 30-55
1:650
§ 30-55. CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT. [1976 Code § 78-39; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord. No. 86-28]
a. The purpose of this section is to provide flexibility in residential design
options mutually acceptable to the approving authority and the
developer, to preserve open space by permitting a reduction in
residential lot size without increasing the number of lots or permitted
number of dwelling units, to encourage energy conservation and the
use of renewable energy sources by reducing streets and by offering
more flexibility in designing a development, and to provide
opportunities to generate sites for lower income housing.
b. Cluster developments may be approved in accordance with the
following standards, provided that the tract size is at least 10 acres and
the approving authority finds:
1. All dwelling units shall be connected to approved and functioning
central water and central sanitary sewer systems.
2. The maximum number of lots or dwelling units shall be as set forth
in the zoning provisions of Article V.
3. In the R-40A District land area equal to a minimum of 20% of the
entire tract and in the R-40B District land area equal to a minimum
of 40% of the entire tract, shall be set aside for agriculture or for
open space or for recreation; buffer areas along arterial and
collector streets, railroads, or nonresidential uses; conservation
areas; floodplains; or common property, singly or in combination,
except that where the bonus densities are used as permitted under
subsection 30-127.6a, the portion of the tract so set aside may be
reduced to not less than 15% and 20% respectively, and except
further that land utilized for street(s), parking, drives and required
yards shall not be included as part of the above required setasides.
No more than 1/3 the required open space setaside may consist of
environmentally sensitive areas for which zero credit was given
toward the density calculations. Lands to be set aside shall either
be: (1) dedicated to the Township (at no cost) with the Township
having the option to accept the acreage being offered; (2) added to
abutting lots as a conservation easement following a logical pattern
of woodland, drainage corridors, slopes, wetlands, providing a
buffer, or other conditions warranting their placement in a
conservation easement. Where the open space set-asides are
placed in a conservation easement, each deed shall contain
language that complies with the applicable provisions of Section
30-58 in addition to language that prohibits the area within the
conservation easement from being used for temporary or
permanent improvements such as, but not limited to, structures,
108. Editor's Note: Former Section 30-54A, Conditional Use Standards for the Location of
Wireless Telecommunications Antennas and Towers, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 98-11, 2001-23 and 2001-25 was repealed in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
§ 30-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-55
1:651
paving, and parking. Areas accepted by the Township may be
dedicated for such public purposes as deemed appropriate by the
Township Committee.
4. With respect to areas to be deeded to the Township:
(a) Such areas will serve at least one of the purposes outlined
above.
(b) A stream or watercourse along which it is proposed to deed
open space shall be major enough that it has a clearly defined
floodplain. The width of the dedicated area shall be at least 200
feet and extend at least 10 feet beyond the floodplain limit. The
width, location and condition of the dedicated area should be
able to be left in its natural state with no regular maintenance
required. If the area is likely to become the general alignment
of a trunk sewer, proper location for the alignment shall be a
consideration.
(c) Buffers along major streets, railroads or nonresidential zone
boundaries shall contain sufficient natural vegetation or
proposed planting to become, within 10 years, a significant
buffer for sight and sound and have maximum widths as
follows:
Type
Maximum Width
(feet)
Railroad 150
Parkway or arterial or
collector street
100
Industrial or commercial zone 150
Other nonresidential zone 100
5. With respect to areas of conservation easements:
(a) Such easements shall meet the requirements of Section 30-58.
An open space easement may be established for the purpose of
conserving and protecting natural features and vegetation,
particularly trees in areas generally encompassing the rear of
lots. Such easements should be intended to provide, in
conjunction with areas deeded to the Township, strips of
undisturbed vegetation around the perimeter of the
development of groups of lots within the development. Access
by deed in fee or by easement shall be provided to the
Township to all areas deeded to the Township.
(b) Such easements shall include natural growth or proposed
plantings which will promote the aesthetic values of the
development. Such growth or plannings should include a
§ 30-55 HOLMDEL § 30-55
1:652
§ 30-56. CURBS AND GUTTERS. [1976 Code § 78-40; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 84-7]
minimum density of trees of one for each 500 square feet, each
having at least one-inch caliper one-foot above the ground,
except that no trees shall be required in the area within 10 feet
of a watercourse or within the floodplain of such a watercourse
where a well-defined floodplain exists or within marsh or pond
areas where trees cannot be maintained.
6. With respect to areas to be deeded to a homeowners' association:
(a) Such areas shall meet the requirements of Section 30-68.
(b) The requirements of paragraphs b4 and 5 above shall be
complied with where applicable.
7. No final plat containing common open space to be owned and
maintained by a homeowners' association shall be approved unless
and until the approving authority has reviewed and approved the
articles of incorporation of the association, model deeds, bylaws of
the association and such further documents deemed necessary and
the developer has made sufficient provision for the maintenance of
the common open space and transfer of title thereof to the
homeowners' association.
c. Lands offered to the Township and homeowners' association shall meet
the following requirements:
1. The minimum size shall be five acres and the maximum size shall be
eight acres, with no dimension being less than 200 feet if offered to
the Township.
2. Lands for recreation purposes shall be improved by the developer,
including grading, equipment, walkways and landscaping.
3. Dedicated land shall be an integral part of the development and
designed, improved and located to best suit the purpose(s) for
which it is intended.
4. Every parcel accepted by the Township shall be conveyed by deed
at the time final plat approval is granted.
d. Concurrence of Governing Body Procedure. A copy of the proposal to
dedicate land to the Township shall be transmitted to the governing
body. The acceptability of the land shall be subject to the approval of
the approving authority and the governing body. Both shall be guided
by the Master Plan, the ability to assemble and relate such lands to an
overall plan, the accessibility and potential utility of such lands to serve
the intended purpose and such existing features as topography, soils,
wetlands and tree cover as these features may enhance or detract from
the intended use of the land.
§ 30-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-56
1:653
§ 30-57. DRAINAGE. [1976 Code § 78-41; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
2006-06 § 4]
All streets shall be designed to accommodate storm drainage along streets.
Existing natural drainage patterns shall be preserved. Any system shall be
adequate to handle all stormwater runoff and groundwater seepage which
originates within the development and beyond. No water shall be diverted
as to overload existing drainage systems or create flooding or the need for
additional drainage structures on other lands without proper and approved
provisions being made for taking care of these conditions, including offtract
improvements. Piping of all stormwater is not required, but alternate,
equivalent methods shall be approved by the approving authority and
Municipal Engineer, considering safety, maintenance, aesthetics and the
ability of an alternate system to provide proper drainage. The overall
drainage plan shall consider ways in which groundwater recharge can be
encouraged along with consideration of flood control, erosion control and
having positive drainage, all in the interest of maximizing the utilization
of the renewable resource of water. All drainage systems shall also be
designed in accordance with the requirement of the Township's Stormwater
Management and Control Ordinances (Section 30-157).
a. Regular Curbs. Unless waived by the approving authority, Belgian Block
curb shall be installed along all streets and along all edges of pavement
within a site. Where installed, the standard curb section shall be set in
accordance with approved lines and grades. Radial curbs shall be
formed in a smooth curve. Chord segments are prohibited. The curbing
shall be designed to provide barrier-free curb ramps constructed in
accordance with the Design Standards for Curb Ramps for the
Physically Handicapped of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation. Where curbs are waived or where alternate curbs are
allowed, such as combination curb or rolled concrete curb, an
appropriate construction detail shall be submitted for approval and
other equivalent or better methods of stabilizing the edge of paving,
controlling erosion and managing stormwater shall be approved.
b. Rolled Concrete Curbing. Where required under provisions of this
chapter, rolled concrete curb shall be constructed of Portland Cement
which shall have a compression strength of 4,000 pounds per square
inch after 28 days. The maximum length of sections shall be 10 feet,
with a preformed bituminous expansion joint filler 1/2 inch thick
installed at a maximum spacing of 20 feet. The curb shall be 24 inches
wide, six inches deep on the pavement side, 10 inches deep on the lot
side, and shall have a one inch depression below the pavement side
located about 1/3 the distance from the pavement edge. The side
adjacent to the pavement shall be flush with the finished pavement
surface.
a. For storm curves used in computing stormwater runoff, see the
Holmdel Development Design Manual.
§ 30-56 HOLMDEL § 30-57
1:654
b. Where storm drainpipes are installed outside of streets, easements or
rights-of-way shall be required in accordance with Section 30-58.
Required drainpipes shall be laid to the exact lines and grades
approved by the Municipal Engineer.
c. Where piping of stormwater is required, drainage inlets shall be located
at required intervals with access manholes placed at maximum
specified intervals throughout the system and at pipe junctions, all as
specified in the Holmdel Development Design Manual.
d. Where open swales are approved, they shall have a bottom elevation no
higher than the bottom of the road base or such additional depth as may
be required by the Municipal Engineer. Swales shall be planted to
stabilize the soils along the sides and bottom according to the soil types
and be sloped to handle the rate of runoff while not eroding the soil.
Intersections shall be crowned to assure positive drainage into the
swales. Where pipes are installed at road/driveway crossings or other
required locations, the pipes shall be continuations of the swales.
e. Where development is traversed by a watercourse or drainage ditch, a
drainage right-of-way easement or conservation easement shall be
dedicated to the Township. The easement and right-of-way shall include
the provisions assuring the following: preservation of the channel of the
watercourse; prohibition or alteration of the contour, topography or
composition of the land within the easement and right-of-way except for
Township drainage improvements and maintenance; prohibition of
construction of plantings within the easement and right-of-way that will
interfere with the natural flow of water; and reservation to the public of
a right of entry for the purpose of maintenance work and of installing
and maintaining a storm or sanitary sewer system or other public utility.
The width of the easement along any watercourse shall be at least 50
feet from the center line in each direction or along the floodplain limit
(Section 30-67), whichever is greater. A minimum 25 feet beyond the
bank top on at least one side shall be provided for access to the
drainage right-of-way. (See Section 30-58.) Special water resource
protection areas shall be established along all waterways designated as
Category One in accordance with subsection 30-167-4g8 of this chapter.
f. When the amount of runoff determined by the approving authority
engineer is sufficient to justify detention of peak flow, one or more
detention basins or NJDEP Best Management Practices shall be
required. Where detention basins are required, the design shall result
in stormwater leaving the property at the same or lower rate, including
runoff during peak flows, that existed prior to the development. All
measures shall comply with the soil erosion, sediment control and
topsoil provisions in Section 30-101 and the Stormwater Management
and Control Ordinance provisions in Section 30-157. Grading shall
direct drainage away from all buildings, prevent the collection of water
in pools and avoid excess flow of stormwater from one lot to another.
§ 30-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-57
1:655
§ 30-58. OPEN SPACE AND EASEMENTS. [1976 Code § 78-42; Ord.
No. 3-82; Ord. No. 89-28; Ord. No. 91-15; Ord. No. 93-14; Ord. No.
95-28; Ord. No. 98-17 § I; Ord. No. 2001-28; Ord. No. 2005-32 § IV;
Ord. No. 2005-39 §§ 3, 4; Ord. No. 2006-19 § III; Ord. No. 2007-15
§ I; Ord. No. 2008-04 § I; Ord. No. 2018-16]
g. Developments may incorporate other on-site stormwater detention or
impound facilities in the following manner:
1. Shallow swales with no outlets, dry wells, seepage pits or similar
structures which will impound water drainage only from other
landscaped areas. The water will be left to evaporate and percolate.
The swales shall be seeded and maintained as lawn areas.
2. Impound/detention basins along streams that maintain steady flows
of water may be constructed, provided that they meet the
standards and have been approved by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection.
3. Detention of stormwater on roof surfaces may be designated.
4. Other stormwater management and control measures designed in
accordance with Section 30-157 and the NJDEP Best Management
Practices Manual.
a. Drainage and utility easements shall be conveyed to the Township by
deed and shall be approved by the Township Attorney and Engineer.
The easements shall be along side and/or rear property lines where
possible, shall not be less than 25 feet wide but shall be wider along
watercourses as set forth in Sections 30-57 and 30-67. All easements
shall be dimensioned on the plat, shall be marked on the land by iron
stakes wherever the lines of the easement change course or intersect
property lines and shall have the purpose of the easement identified as
follows on the plat "_____ easement granted to the Township as provided
for in the Holmdel Development Regulations Ordinance."
b. Landscape easements are intended to address those areas of a
development that do not require as severe restriction as conservation
easements. Generally a landscape easement would consist of 1) berm
areas that are used to screen developed areas from roads, railroads,
etc.; 2) man-made landscape areas that are intended to buffer different
uses or homes as part of a subdivision or site plan project; and/or 3)
existing stands of vegetation that are not environmentally sensitive. No
person, whether the owner of the property upon which the landscape
easement is located or not, would be permitted to remove any
vegetation. The owner or tenant of the property would be allowed to
perform regular maintenance on the vegetation and would be allowed
to supplement the existing landscaping with additional plants, including
ornamental species. The owner or tenant would also be permitted to
perform manicure-type maintenance, such as the planting and
maintenance of grass areas and ground covers. No structure of any
§ 30-57 HOLMDEL § 30-58
1:656
kind, including but not limited to swing sets, play houses, decks, pools,
patios, sheds would be allowed within the area of a landscape
easement. The only exception to the foregoing is that fencing would be
allowed to be constructed so long as its construction is consistent with
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection guidelines
for fencing in environmentally sensitive areas where NJDEP has
jurisdiction.
c. Sight Triangle Easements. (See Section 30-95.)
d. 1. Conservation easements may be required along drainage and
stormwater courses and around ponds, marshes, bogs, streams and
other watercourses, floodplains, along steep slopes or around
significant stands of trees. Such easements are intended to
preserve the stabilizing vegetation to prevent erosion and the
siltation of streams. Such easements shall be dimensioned on the
plat according to the limit of the natural conditions or such other
configuration appropriate to the area being placed in the easement
and the design of the development.
2. After an application for development has been made, the removal of
trees, plant materials and ground cover shall be prohibited within
any proposed conservation easement area prior to its legal
establishment. Any removal of dead or diseased trees, thinning of
trees or growth shall be prohibited until a plan showing these
proposed actions is submitted and approved in writing by the Code
Enforcement Officer, in consultation with the Township's
Environmental Officer, Environmental Commission, and/or
Landscape Architect. The removal of vegetation to provide
pathways, areas of recreation or similar open space improvements
shall be limited to the extent they are shown on the approved site
plan.
3. After an application for development has been made, the removal of
trash within any proposed conservation easement area prior to its
legal establishment is explicitly permitted and encouraged.
4. The following activities shall be specifically prohibited within the
conservation easement area once it has been legally established
except upon approval of application made pursuant to Code Section
30-58j as supplemented or amended.
(a) The cutting, mowing, trimming, removal or destruction of any
trees, shrubs or understory plant materials, including, but not
limited to, brush, shrubs, saplings, seedlings, undergrowth,
ground covers, and grasses.
(b) Any grading or other activities that would or might impair soil
or slope stability or alter drainage patterns on or off the site.
(c) Commercial timber cutting or harvesting of vegetative
products for commercial purposes.
§ 30-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58
1:657
(d) Maintenance or grazing of livestock.
(e) Excavation, grading, dredging or removal of topsoil, sand,
gravel, loam, rock or other materials.
(f) Composting, dumping of soil, grass clippings, garden waste,
household waste, sawdust, ashes, trash, construction materials
or other debris of any kind.
(g) Operation of any mechanical equipment of any kind, including
recreational vehicles such as ATVs and snowmobiles, except as
needed to undertake approved activities identified herein or in
the conservation easement deed itself.
(h) Construction, excavation, grading or the erection of retaining
walls, buildings or other structures, roads, driveways, fences
or utilities.
5. Diseased or hazardous trees or tree limbs may be removed from
within a conservation easement to prevent personal injury or
property damage provided written notice is served upon the Code
Enforcement Officer and the Township Administrator at least 10
business days prior to such removal. Where an emergency situation
renders the giving of notice impracticable, the tree or limb may be
removed without prior notice, but a signed statement from the
owner of the underlying title giving the reasons for such removal
shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer and the
Township Administrator within 10 business days thereof, along
with appropriate documentation of the reasons in the form of
photographs, corroborative letters or other evidence.
6. Non-native and invasive plants may be removed from within a
conservation easement provided written notice is served upon the
Code Enforcement Officer and the Township Administrator at least
10 business days prior to such removal.
7. New plantings may be installed within the conservation easement
area if needed to supplement existing vegetation or to replace dead
trees or other vegetation, provided such plantings are
characteristic of native growth and with the prior written consent
of the Code Enforcement Officer.
8. The conservation easement may provide for a municipally approved
forest stewardship program that may also be used to satisfy the
requirements for a Forest Stewardship Plan to be approved by the
State Forester.
9. The conservation easement language shall specifically provide for
the right of the Township of Holmdel through any of its officers or
agents to enter and inspect the conservation easement area to
determine that the terms of the conservation easement are being
adhered to and that necessary maintenance is being undertaken.
§ 30-58 HOLMDEL § 30-58
1:658
The Township of Holmdel shall have the right, and the conservation
easement shall so state, to issue citations for any violations of
the terms of the conservation easement or of this section or of
the development application approval pursuant to which the
conservation easement was established.
10. The conservation easement language shall specifically provide for
the right of the Township of Holmdel, the County of Monmouth and/
or the Monmouth County Mosquito Extermination Commission to
clean, remove silt or de-snag any stream channel, which may, in the
opinion of the Township of Holmdel or the County of Monmouth,
become necessary.
11. The conservation easement language shall specifically provide for
public access for pedestrians to those portions of the easement that
are shown in the Township's Master Plan as parts of the Township's
planned greenway network. The public trail within a conservation
easement shall be at least 50 feet if feasible from the necessary
footprint area as defined in Section 30-3.
12. A conservation easement shall not include any portion of the
necessary footprint area as defined in Section 30-3. Consequently,
the principal building shall be located at least 20 feet from a
conservation easement.
13. Any auxiliary building and structure inclusive of eaves, gutters or
overhangs shall be setback at least 10 feet from a conservation
easement, except that accessory structures less than 200 square
feet in total area including but not limited to fences, walls, patios,
sheds, and walkways shall be permitted to be installed up to the
boundary of the easement provided that the easement has been
delineated in accordance with subsection 30-58h, Open Space and
Conservation Easement Delineation and Notification and no part of
the structure encroaches into the easement area.
e. All property owners, tenants or any other person or entity is prohibited
from building any structures, walls or fences on any easement or any
part thereof, using the easement or any part thereof in such a way as to
interfere with the Township's immediate and unimpeded access to the
easement, clearing trees or vegetation from the easement or otherwise
interfering with the easement without the Township's approval in
writing. Notwithstanding the above, structures such as gazebos, kiosks,
benches, and trail signs for public use and associated with greenway
trails or public parks and recreation facilities that are shown in the
Master Plan or part of an approved development plan are permitted
within easements. Additionally, farm buildings and other structures
which are accessory to farm use shall be permitted within farmland
easements.
f. All existing easements or proposed easements acquired or required onsite
or off-site and on-tract or off-tract shall be shown on the subdivision
§ 30-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58
1:659
or site plan and copies of the legal documentation that support the
granting of an easement by the owner of the property shall be
submitted with the application for approval. Concrete or commercially
manufactured iron or aluminum monuments shall be installed in order
to define the easement area. Monuments shall be of a size and shape
required by N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11 and N.J.A.C. 13:40-5.1 and amendments
and supplements thereto, shall be placed in accordance with the
Statute and Administrative Code. In addition to the required
monuments after the grading is finished, the developer shall also install
monuments at all angle lines of discontinuities in easement lines where
such easements are not parallel to property lines.
g. Delineation of Conservation Easements During Construction. Prior to
the issuance of any permits or disturbance of any soil on any property
upon which an easement to the Township is located, the developer,
contractor, property owner or their servants, agents, employees,
successors or assigns shall install snow fencing along the easement
boundaries in order to protect the easement area during construction.
Warning signage indicating the existence of the conservation easement
inside of the fence, to be obtained from the Township Construction
Office, shall be attached to the fencing facing away from the easement
at fifty-foot intervals in the top third of the fencing. Fencing on each lot
shall remain in place until a certificate of occupancy is issued.
h. Open Space and Conservation Easement Delineation and Notification.
Open space and conservation easements shall be delineated on site by
installation of four inch square, thirty-inch long concrete monuments,
appropriately marked. The monuments shall be visible above ground
once installed, after final grading and the installation of mulch, sod or
ground cover. The proposed location of the concrete monuments
required by this section shall be shown on the preliminary and final site
plan or subdivision plats filed with development applications and the
proposed monuments must be installed prior to construction. The
monuments should be placed at each change in direction but in no case
more than 250 feet apart.
Additional monumentation, in the form of six-inch square, five-foot long
wolmanized (or approved equal) wood posts, shall be installed adjacent
to the concrete monuments. The posts shall be installed with concrete
footings. The posts shall protrude two feet above the finished grade.
The posts shall be marked with a metal tag in accordance with the
approved detail. The tag shall be attached to face outward from the
open space or conservation easement.
All deeds to property containing open space or conservation easements
shall recite the existence of the easement and explain the limitations
on use imposed by the easements. Copies of the proposed explanatory
language shall be submitted to the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment prior to final approval of a site plan or subdivision
application.
§ 30-58 HOLMDEL § 30-58
1:660
i. The owner of any land subject to a conservation easement, landscape
easement, or open space easement shall be responsible for the
easement area and for the health of the vegetation and the condition of
other natural features located therein, consistent with the provisions of
this section. The responsibility of the owner shall include the obligation
to inspect the premises on a regular basis and after storms for
hazardous conditions that may pose a threat to adjacent properties,
when necessary to obtain any required permission from the Township,
and to promptly correct such hazardous conditions. This obligation may
be reflected in the language of the easement itself, is applicable even if
not specified in the easement, and shall accompany any transfer of title
to the property.
j. Any person proposing to take any action, or has taken any action not
otherwise permitted by the easement document, within a Township held
easement, or seeks to change an easement shall submit a written
request to the Township Administrator together with a nonrefundable
review fee of $1,500, $350 of which will be nonrefundable. In the event
the expense to the Township for engineering, legal or planning review
paid to the Township's professionals exceeds the review fee, the
applicant shall reimburse the Township for any deficiency. The written
request must specifically detail the action proposed. The Township
Administrator shall review the request, may request additional
information from the applicant, and, after seeking such advice from the
Township Engineer, Township Attorney or other Township agencies,
employees or professionals as the Township Administrator deems
appropriate, shall present the request to the Township Committee
together with a recommended action. The Township Committee, shall,
by written resolution and within the bounds of authority possessed by
it, approve, disapprove, or approve with conditions the action proposed.
The application process provided herein is not one of right, the
Township having no obligation to permit any such action within a
Township easement, but is adopted as an accommodation to those
seeking permission to take such action within a Township owned
easement. No right of hearing before the Township Committee is
hereby created.
k. When it has been determined that the property owner, tenant or any
other person or entity has violated the provisions set forth in Section
30-58d, e, i or j, a written notification of the violation shall be sent by
certified mail-return receipt, from the Township to the owner or record.
The owner, within 10 business days shall respond in writing to the Code
Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer, in consultation
with the Township's Environmental Officer, Environmental Commission,
and/or Landscape Architect, will determine what corrective or remedial
action is appropriate. The owner shall within 10 business days of
written notification of corrective or remedial action, comply with the
provisions of paragraph j above. In addition, for violations of Section
30-58d4(a), the owner shall provide the following within an additional
15 business days as a supplement to the written request: A restoration/
§ 30-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58
1:661
revegetation plan submitted from a licensed, landscape architect. The
plan shall propose native plants of a species appropriate to the soil
and light conditions at the site. Trees shall be a minimum 1 1/2 inch
caliper, seven feet to eight feet tall, balled and burlapped, and shrub
containers-five-gallon minimum. Spacing and placement should render
a natural setting. Where appropriate, boundaries of the easement
should have reinforced plantings to visually establish the easement's
boundaries. Any plantings failing within two growing seasons shall be
replaced at the owner's expense.
l. Standards for Lands Qualifying as Open Space.
1. Open space may be improved with only those buildings, structures,
streets and off-street parking and other improvements that are
designed to be incidental to the natural openness of the land. Open
farmland may be counted as open space, but the footprint of any
structure shall not be counted as open space with the exception of
existing barns.
2. Open space shall include working farmland protected by a
farmland easement and any and all parcels or areas of land or
water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated
or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use
and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or
neighboring such open space. A residual dwelling site area shall
not be counted as open space.
3. Detention basins with related inlet and outlet structures, other
than rainwater gardens, are not considered incidental to the
natural openness of the land, nor conducive to the use and
enjoyment by others. Detention basins other than rainwater
gardens are not to be considered open space.
4. In the R-4H and R-4R Districts, rainwater gardens, wet ponds,
constructed stormwater wetlands and outlet structures permitted
by a municipal, County or State agency are permitted in open space
areas. Rainwater gardens and constructed stormwater wetlands
shall be limited to 10% of the open space on each tract.
5. Streets rights-of-way are not to be considered open space.
However, in the R-4H and R-4R Districts only, a portion of a street
right-of-way greater than 50 feet in width may be considered open
space in accordance with the following formula:
Open space = Total area of right-of-way – Area having a width of 50
feet and a depth equal to the length of the right-of-way.
If the cartway or cartways within the street right-of-way or a
portion of the street right-of-way occupy greater than 50 feet of
total width, the following formula shall apply in that area of street
right-of-way occupied by a cartway or cartways greater than 50
feet in width:
§ 30-58 HOLMDEL § 30-58
1:662
§ 30-58A. TREE PROTECTION. [Ord. No. 2001-28]
§ 30-58B. FARMLAND EASEMENTS AND RESIDUAL DWELLING
SITE AREAS. [Ord. No. 2006-19 § IV]
Open space = Total area of right-of-way – Total area occupied by all
cartways within the right-of-way.
Any portion of a street right-of-way considered as open space shall
be landscaped and accessible to the public.
a. Delineation of a Protected Root Zone (PRZ). Prior to the issuance of any
permits or disturbance of any soil, trees that are indicated to be saved
on approved site plans shall have snow fencing installed around them.
The fencing shall be installed around the trees at a distance determined
by the critical root radius (CRR). The CRR (in feet) shall be 1.5 times the
diameter of the tree (in inches) when measured 4.5 feet above the
ground. (For example, a tree with a diameter of four inches would have
a critical root radius of six feet.) Warning signage, to be obtained from
the Township Construction Office, shall be attached to the fence at tenfoot
intervals in the top third of the fencing. The PRZ shall remain
closed to any activity including the staging of materials. No fencing
shall be disturbed or removed from the lot until a certificate of
occupancy is issued or written approval is obtained from the Township
Engineer.
a. The following activities and structures shall be permitted within an area
subject to a farmland easement:
1. Farming and agricultural activities limited to growing crops and
horse breeding, grazing and training.
2. Farm buildings including greenhouses, barns, maintenance sheds
and similar facilities.
3. A driveway no less than 12 feet in width and no greater than 18 feet
in width connecting a residual dwelling site area to a public street.
4. All those activities and structures permitted in a landscape
easement.
b. Notwithstanding the above, to the extent that the regulations of the
State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC) or its successor
agencies governing activities on farmland that qualifies for State
Preservation Funds are more stringent than the standards in paragraph
a above, the State standards shall control.
c. A rider stipulating the activities permitted within the farmland
easement shall be attached to the deed of any land subject to a
farmland easement and shall run with the land.
§ 30-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58B
1:663
§ 30-59. ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT. [1976 Code § 78-43; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 2005-39 § 5]
d. Within any tract subject to a farmland easement, no more than one
residual dwelling site area shall be permitted subject to the following
requirements:
1. The maximum size of the residual dwelling site area shall be two
times the minimum lot size of a single-family residential dwelling
lot in the district in which the land is located. If the land to which
the farmland easement is applied is part of a cluster subdivision,
the minimum lot size applicable to the cluster subdivision shall be
used to calculate said maximum area.
2. The residual dwelling site area shall include no more than one
single-family dwelling unit and any structures accessory thereto
which are permitted for a residence in the zoning district in which
the residual dwelling site area is situated. A residual dwelling site
area may also include one or more structures accessory to a farm,
provided that such structures meet the bulk requirements for
accessory structures on a farm in the district in which the residual
dwelling site area is located.
3. The lot coverage and floor area ratio of the dwelling shall be
calculated based on the size of the residual dwelling site area. The
maximum lot coverage and floor area ratio, if applicable, shall be
the same as permitted for a residential dwelling lot in the district in
which the residual dwelling site area is located. If the land to which
the farmland easement is applied is part of a cluster subdivision,
the maximum lot coverage and floor area ratio applicable to an
individual dwelling lot in the cluster subdivision shall be applicable
to the residual dwelling site area.
4. The yard, setback and building requirements applicable to the
residual dwelling site area shall be the same as those for a singlefamily
residential dwelling in the district in which the area is
situated. Setbacks shall be calculated from the lot lines and not
from the boundaries of the residual dwelling site area. If the land to
which the farmland easement is applied is part of a cluster
subdivision, the yard, setback and building requirements
applicable to an individual estate house shall apply to the residual
dwelling site area.
5. The maximum driveway width in the farmland easement shall not
apply to the residual dwelling site area, where wider driveways
shall be permitted to facilitate vehicle maneuvering.
a. Each application for site plan or subdivision approval shall be
accompanied by an environmental resource survey documenting the
existing natural features on the site and an environmental impact
§ 30-58B HOLMDEL § 30-59
1:664
report that describes and evaluates the impact of the proposed
development. The purpose of these is to permit the approving authority
to evaluate the natural conditions and limitations of the site and to
guide the preservation of high priority natural resources, woodlands,
and ecosystems. The applicant should use these to guide the layout
of the proposed development so as to minimize the environmental
impacts. The environmental resource survey and the environmental
impact report shall be prepared by one or more qualified professionals
such as an engineer, forester, ecologist or landscape architect and shall
be site specific. The Township's Environmental Resource Inventory
(formerly Natural Resource Inventory) that is maintained by the
Environmental Commission may be used as a source document.
b. The environmental resource survey shall include a natural resource
survey map and an aerial photograph.
1. The natural resource survey map shall show the following on the
tract and within 200 feet of the tract boundary at a scale of one inch
equals 100 feet or larger and at the same scale as the rest of the
site plan or subdivision submission:
(a) Topography at two-foot contour intervals;
(b) A steep slope analysis showing areas of steep slopes in each of
the following ranges: under 8%, 8% to 14.99%, 15% to 24.99%
and greater than 25%, as well as areas of highly erodible soils
(based on the Natural Resources Conservation Service,
Monmouth County Soil Survey data);
(c) State-designated Forested Natural Heritage Priority Sites;
(d) Woodlands identified in the New Jersey Landscape Project as
either Forests or Forested Wetlands that create a habitat
having a ranking of 3, 4 or 5 for rare, threatened or
endangered species;
(e) Intermittent and perennial streams, lakes, and other water
bodies;
(f) 100-year floodplains;
(g) Wetlands, required wetlands transition areas, and vernal pools;
(h) Required stream corridor buffers (See subsection 30-116.7);
(i) Proposed landscape and conservation easements;
(j) Soils with a legend showing soil names and characteristics,
including the limitations and potential for forest growth and
the types of native forest species typically associated with each
soil type, based on the Natural Resources Conservation
Service, Monmouth County Soil Survey;
§ 30-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-59
1:665
(k) Areas of groundwater recharge equal to or greater than the
median groundwater recharge rate for the municipality as a
whole, based upon the New Jersey Geological Survey or
municipally-approved alternate data source, if available;
(l) Aerial extent of forest and tree cover which shall encompass
the outside perimeter of the canopy of individual trees;
(m) Forest stand data: the forested portions of the property shall be
divided into separate forest stands for the purpose of
describing the different forested areas of the tract as required
in paragraphs c1(1) and (m) below; stands smaller than five
acres shall be fully described; stands of five acres or larger
shall be sampled, and the stand shall be statistically described
based on the sample data.
(n) Locations, species, sizes, and condition of all specimen trees
and of all individual trees with DBH greater than six inches
that are not located in a delineated forest stand; and
(o) Existing man-made structures.
2. The most current and readily available aerial photograph of the
tract and the area within 1,000 feet thereof at a scale of one foot
equals 400 feet or larger and preferably at the same scale as the
natural resource survey map.
c. The environmental impact report shall include the following:
1. An inventory of the following on-site conditions and an assessment
of the probable impact of the development upon them:
(a) Water supply.
(b) Water quality.
(c) Flood plain protection.
(d) Soil erosion.
(e) Sewage disposal.
(f) Vegetation protection.
(g) Air quality.
(h) Historic landmarks, sites, and structures.
(i) Site aesthetics, e.g., viewsheds, views such as scenic views of
open space from public rights-of-way, terrain, mature wooded
areas, etc.
(j) Slopes in excess of 15%.
(k) Threatened and endangered species.
§ 30-59 HOLMDEL § 30-59
1:666
§ 30-60. MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING CHARACTERISTICS.
When making a determination whether a structure, either existing or
planned, is a single-family dwelling or a multi-family dwelling, the
appropriate Township official or agency shall give consideration to, among
other factors, the characteristics set forth in subsections 30-60.2 and
30-60.3.
§ 30-60.1. Decision Making Process. [Ord. No. 2000-11 § II]
It is recognized that in most instances when called upon to make a
differentiation between a single-family dwelling and a multi-family dwelling,
the Township official or agency will be confronted with a typical singlefamily
dwelling unit, but with additional characteristics which may be
indicative of the capacity to function as a multi-family dwelling unit. If, in
addition to the facilities that are normally associated with a single-family
dwelling, (full bath(s), full kitchen, living area, bedroom areas), a structure
exhibits some or all of the characteristics described in subsection 30-60.2,
(l) A description of each forest stand on the site including, for
each stand, the dominant and co-dominant species, understory
vegetation, range of sizes in diameter at breast height (DBH),
the health and condition of the trees in the stand, and the
extent and nature of invasive species within the stand; and
(m) Copies of the sampling point data sheets and summaries.
2. A description of the development and a description of how the
development proposal including any proposed subdivision and
streets and/or site plan works to preserve the natural resources
identified in the environmental resource survey. This should also
include a description of steps to be taken to avoid or minimize
adverse environmental impacts during construction and operation,
including maps, schedules and other explanatory data.
3. An evaluation of any adverse environmental impacts which cannot
be avoided, including air and water pollution, noise, sedimentation
and siltation.
4. Air and water quality shall be described with reference to
standards of the Department of Environmental Protection. Soils
shall be described with reference to Soil Conservation Service
categories and characteristics as they relate to such things as
erosion, sewage capability, floodplains and high water table.
d. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the approving authority may waive all
or part of an environmental impact report if sufficient evidence is
submitted to support a conclusion that the development will have a
slight or negligible environmental impact or that the complete report
need not be prepared to evaluate the environmental impact of the
development.
§ 30-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-60.1
1:667
the Township official or agency should give consideration that the structure
is, in actuality, a multi-family dwelling unit. The Township official or agency
must engage in a discretionary weighing process using the characteristics
listed in subsections 30-60.2 or 30-60.3 as guidelines only. The Township
official or agency is encouraged to consider all other relevant factors which
present themselves and which may not be set forth in subsections 30-60.2
or 30-60.3. The absence of one or more of the characteristics set forth in
subsections 30-60.2 or 30-60.3 is not determinative, but is to be considered
relevant in the weighing and decision making process.
§ 30-60.2. Characteristics Indicative of a Multi-Family Dwelling.
[Ord. No. 2000-11 § II]
The following are characteristics which may be indicative of a single-family
dwelling properly being determined to be a multi-family dwelling.
a. Facilities as described in paragraphs b, c and d below:
1. Being located in close proximity to each other; and
2. Being located separate from the main portion of the dwelling unit.
Separate as used herein can mean:
(a) Located in a portion of the structure, connected to the main
structure by an area not normally used for occupancy, i.e.
garage.
(b) Located in the same structure, but:
(1) On a different level, separated by stairs, or by stairs and a
door;
(2) On the same level, but separated by a wall with no access
between it and the main portion of the dwelling unit;
(3) On the same level, but separated by a door.
b. Full kitchen (stove, sink and refrigerator, at a minimum).
c. Full bath.
d. Room or area with a closet or other configuration which would
accommodate sleeping quarters.
e. Separate entry from outside the main portion of the dwelling unit, with
easy accessibility to garage, driveway, road or other such configuration
which would promote the independence and separateness of the unit.
f. Additional rooms or areas which would accommodate or serve as living
room, den, dining area, entertainment area, etc.
g. One or more separate utility facilities.
§ 30-60.1 HOLMDEL § 30-60.3
1:668
§ 30-60.3. Characteristics Not Indicative of a Multi-Family Dwelling
Unit. [Ord. No. 2000-11 § II]
The following are characteristics which may be indicative of a single-family
dwelling merely with enhanced facilities and not indicative of a multi-family
dwelling:
§ 30-60.4. Restrictive Covenant. [Ord. No. 2000-11 § II]
Only in the event that the Township official or agency, after having weighed
all characteristics and factors, finds that the preponderance of the evidence,
although by a small margin, supports a determination that the dwelling
is a multi-family dwelling, the Township official or agency may issue or
order the issuance of the requested permit or certificate as a single-family
dwelling provided the record title owner(s) will execute a deed containing
a restrictive covenant against using the dwelling for multi-family purposes.
Such deed must be in recordable form and shall be subject to the review
and approval by the Township attorney.
§ 30-61. BUILDING TYPES. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § V; Ord. No. 2005-38
§§ I, II, IV; Ord. No. 2006-19, § V]
a. No separate entrance into enhanced facility area from outside the
dwelling.
b. Only one separate entrance which opens onto pool area or other similar
outdoor entertainment area.
c. Partial kitchen or partial bath facilities.
d. No area to accommodate sleeping quarters.
e. Open connection (no walls or separating doors) with main portion of
dwelling unit.
f. On same level as main portion of dwelling unit.
a. Residential buildings in the R-4H and R-4R Districts must conform to
one of the following building types, in accordance with the list of
permitted building types and uses for each district and in accordance
with the locations for each building type shown in the Master Plan.
1. Hamlet Estate House.
2. Green Estate House.
3. Rural Estate House.
4. Individual Estate House.
b. Specifications for each of the building types are provided in this
section.
1. Specifications for Hamlet Estate House.
§ 30-60.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-61
1:669
Lot Attributes Minimum Maximum
Width 150 feet N/A
Depth 250 feet N/A
Area 52,500 square feet N/A
Yard Attributes.
Front Landscaping (optional): solid hedging, three feet installed
height; or maximum four feet high picket fence or stone wall. To
be installed or planted four feet from right-of-way.
Side Landscaping (optional): solid hedging, three feet installed
height, along one side property line. Each property shall provide
hedging on the side property line facing the north, west or
northwest.
Front yard: 40 feet minimum
Rear yard: 25 feet minimum
Side yards: 15 feet minimum (one side); 20 feet minimum
(driveway side). Minimum driveway setback from side property
line: five feet.
Minimum accessory structure setback; 20 feet from any lot line.
Accessory structures shall also be subject to the requirements in
Section 30-52.
Width of driveway: 12 feet minimum and maximum. (Note: The
portion of the driveway adjacent to a garage may be wider than
the maximum width specified here to facilitate vehicular
maneuvering.)
Maximum lot coverage: 30%. (Note: Coverage limit applies only to
the individual building lot and not to the zone district as a whole,
in which significant open space preservation is required.)
Building Attributes.
Maximum floor area ratio: 0.20
Heights Minimum Maximum
Floor to ceiling
height
8 feet 12 feet (except cathedral
space)
Floors 2 2.5
Maximum height to ridge: 40 feet.
Note: The developer is encouraged, but not required, to provide
the garage in the rear where feasible.
2. Specifications for Green Estate House.
§ 30-61 HOLMDEL § 30-61
1:670
Lot Attributes Minimum Maximum
Width 180 feet N/A
Depth 250 feet N/A
Area 60,000 square feet N/A
Yard Attributes.
Front Landscaping (optional): solid hedging, three feet installed
height; or maximum four feet high rail fence. To be installed or
planted four feet from right-of-way.
Side Landscaping (optional): solid hedging, three feet installed
height, along one side property line. Each property shall provide
hedging on the side property line facing the north, west or
northwest.
Side yards: 20 feet minimum (one side); 35 feet minimum
(driveway side). Minimum driveway setback from side property
line: five feet. If the garage is provided in the rear, minimum
driveway side setback is 20 feet.
Front yard: 60 feet minimum.
Rear yard: 25 feet minimum.
Minimum accessory structure setback: 20 feet from any lot line.
Accessory structures shall also be subject to the requirements in
Section 30-52.
Width of driveway forward of front building line: 12 feet minimum
and maximum. (Note: The portion of the driveway adjacent to a
garage may be wider than the maximum width specified here to
facilitate vehicular maneuvering.)
Maximum lot coverage: 25% (Note: Coverage limit applies only to
the individual building lot and not to the zone district as a whole,
in which significant open space preservation is required.)
Building Attributes.
Maximum floor area ratio: 0.20
Heights Minimum Maximum
Floor to ceiling
height
8 feet 12 feet (except cathedral
space)
Floors 2 2.5
Maximum height to ridge: 40 feet
3. Specifications for Rural Estate House.
Lot Attributes Minimum Maximum
Width 180 feet N/A
Depth 250 feet N/A
§ 30-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-61
1:671
Lot Attributes Minimum Maximum
Area 60,000 square feet N/A
Yard Attributes.
Front Landscaping (optional): Maximum four feet high rail fence.
To be installed four feet from right-of-way.
Side yards: 20 feet minimum (one side); 35 feet minimum
(driveway side). Minimum driveway setback from side property
line: five feet. If the garage is provided in the rear, minimum
driveway side setback is 20 feet.
Front yard: 60 feet minimum
Rear yard: 25 feet minimum
Minimum accessory structure setback: 20 feet from any lot line.
Accessory structures shall also be subject to the requirements in
Section 30-52.
Width of driveway forward of rear building line: 12 feet minimum
and maximum. (Note: The portion of the driveway adjacent to a
garage may be wider than the maximum width specified here to
facilitate vehicular maneuvering.)
Maximum lot coverage: 25% (Note: Coverage limit applies only to
the individual building lot and not to the zone district as a whole,
in which significant open space preservation is required.)
Building Attributes.
Maximum floor area ratio: 0.20
Height Minimum Maximum
Floor to ceiling
height
8 feet 12 feet (except cathedral
space)
Floors 2 2.5
Maximum height to ridge: 40 feet
4. Specifications for Individual Estate House.
Lot Attributes Minimum Maximum
Width 250 feet N/A
Depth 200 feet N/A
Area 4 acres N/A
Front landscaping: (optional) maximum four feet high; hedging,
picket or rail fence or stone wall along front property line. This
standard shall not be construed or enforced as a requirement.
Side yards: 40 feet minimum setback (each)
Front yard: 50 feet minimum setback
§ 30-61 HOLMDEL § 30-61
1:672
§ 30-62. through §30-63. (RESERVED)
§ 30-64. GENERATORS AND SIMILAR RESIDENTIAL APPLIANCES.
[Ord. No. 2014-04]
Whole house electric generators and similar externally located appliances
normally associated with detached single-family dwelling units, such as airconditioning
units, heat pump units and the like (hereafter "appliances"),
shall be permitted in conjunction with a detached single-family dwelling
unit use provided:
§ 30-65. FENCES AND WALLS.
§ 30-65.1. General Regulations. [1976 Code 78-44; Ord. No. 94-31;
Ord. No. 95-20]
All fences and fence installations shall comply with the following
regulations:
Rear yard: 50 feet minimum setback
Building and garage footprint:
Maximum area 15,000 square feet excluding barns and farm
buildings
Maximum gross floor area ratio: 0.15
Maximum lot coverage: 12% of lot area
Maximum height (feet): 40 feet to ridge of roof
Maximum height (stories): 2.5
a. The edge of the appliance nearest to the dwelling unit it is serving is
within six feet of the dwelling unit.
b. The edge of the appliance furthest from the dwelling unit it is serving is
more than 10 feet from the closest property line.
c. The entire appliance is located behind the setback line of the dwelling
unit.
a. All fences and walls must be erected entirely within the property line.
b. No fence shall be erected within any public right-of-way, sight triangle
or public easement.
c. When any fence is designed to have a "front" and a "back," the "front" of
the fencing shall face toward the closest property line, while the "back"
of the fencing shall face toward the interior of the property upon which
the fence is being erected.
d. All fences and walls shall be maintained in a safe, sound and upright
condition.
§ 30-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-65.1
1:673
§ 30-65.2. Residential Areas. [1976 Code 78-44; Ord. No. 94-31;
Ord. No. 98-26 § II]
Fences and walls on residential lots may be erected, altered or
reconstructed to a height not exceeding six feet above ground level when
located in other than the front yard and not exceeding four feet in height
when located in the front yard except for gate pillars. Gate pillars (including
lights, ornaments and any part of the structure) in the front yard shall not
exceed six feet in height. On a corner lot, the front yard referred to above
shall relate only to the street upon which the principal dwelling faces. Those
portions of the fence located in the front yard shall not have more than 60%
closed surface.
§ 30-65.3. Commercial and Industrial Areas. [1976 Code 78-44; Ord.
No. 94-31]
Fences and walls in commercial and/or industrial areas may be erected to
a height not to exceed six feet above ground level in any yard, except that
open wire fences may be erected to a height not to exceed eight feet above
ground level for security purposes.
e. No fence or wall shall be erected which is embedded with or made of
pieces of glass, sharpened metal, or sharp or otherwise hazardous
material, nor shall any fence or wall be erected which is intended to
injure persons or animals.
f. Fence height shall be measured from ground level at the fence post to
the highest portion of the fence, except when erected upon a man-made
berm or a nonretaining wall between single-family lots; the height shall
be measured from the base of the man-made berm or nonretaining wall.
g. Tennis and Basketball Courts. Fences on residential lots for tennis and
basketball courts may be erected to a height not to exceed 10 feet
above ground level. Fences on residential lots for tennis and basketball
courts shall be comprised of chain link material or material
substantially similar to chain link so as not to create a solid or closed
surface. Weaving of material between links, or otherwise creating a
closed fence surface is prohibited. Fences shall not be located in the
front yard of any residential lot.
h. Nonconforming Walls and Fences. Any fence or wall legally existing at
the time of the adoption of this ordinance even though not conforming
to the provisions of this section may be continued in existence upon the
lot as a nonconforming fence or wall. Any such fence or wall may be
restored or repaired in the event of partial destruction thereof. The
interpretation of rights conferred upon nonconforming structures
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68 shall apply to the rights conferred upon
nonconforming fences and walls pursuant to this section.
§ 30-65.1 HOLMDEL § 30-65.4
1:674
§ 30-65.4. Farm Areas. [1976 Code 78-44; Ord. No. 94-31]
On lots eligible for the keeping of farm animals, open wire fences may be
erected to a height not to exceed six feet within any part of the premises.
Any other type fence or wall may be erected to a height not to exceed four
feet when located within 25 feet of any street line, and six feet when located
more than 25 feet from a street line.
§ 30-65.5. Barbed Wire Fences. [1976 Code 78-44; Ord. No. 94-31]
Barbed wire fences shall not be permitted except on farms and on an
industrial lot to the extent not contravened by any State Statute or
regulation. When used in an industrial area, barbed wire may only be used
when needed for security purposes and must be mounted on top of a fence
having a minimum height of six feet above ground level.
§ 30-65.6. Electrically Charged Fences. [1976 Code 78-44; Ord. No.
94-31]
Electrically charged fences may be used only on farms. All electrically
charged fences shall be posted with signs designed to warn persons of their
presence and nature. This provision shall not prohibit the use of "Invisible
fences®" used to control domestic animals.
§ 30-65.7. Nonconforming Walls and Fences. [1976 Code § 78-44;
Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 94-31]
Any fence or wall legally existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter
even though not conforming to the provisions of this chapter may be
continued in existence upon the lot as a nonconforming fence or wall. Any
such fence or wall may be restored or repaired in the event of partial
destruction thereof. The interpretation of rights conferred upon
nonconforming structures pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68 shall apply to the
rights conferred upon nonconforming fences and walls pursuant to this
section.
§ 30-66. FIRE PROTECTION. [1976 Code § 78-45; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 97-16 § III]
Whenever a central water supply system serves a development, provision
shall be made for fire hydrants along streets and for fire department
standpipe connections on the walls of nonresidential structures. The
location of fire hydrants and standpipe connections shall be approved by the
designated representatives of the Holmdel Fire Department or fire hydrant
examiner in accordance with the standards set forth in NFPA 1141 (National
Fire Codes). The midpoint of all lots served by a central water supply shall
be within 500 feet of a functioning fire hydrant with the fire flow capability
required by NFPA 1141.
§ 30-65.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-67
1:675
§ 30-67. FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS. [1976 Code § 78-46; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 24-82; Ord. No. 2006-06 § 5]
Also see Sections 30-57, 30-58, 30-101 and 30-157.
a. Floodplains Shall Be Preserved and Not Built Upon. Where a property
containing a floodplain is proposed for development or other
improvements, no proposed development or structure except approved
drainage structures shall be located within a 100-year floodplain. The
uses permitted in the 100-year floodplain shall be limited to general
farming, overflow parking or areas serving peak parking and loading
demands, lawns, gardens, detention basins and ponds meeting other
State regulations and open space/recreation uses not requiring
structures. No septic systems shall be in the 100-year floodplain. The
100-year floodplain shall be at least as designated on the streams
identified by the adopted Federal Emergency Management Agency
Flood Insurance Study, flood insurance rate map, floodway and flood
boundary map prepared by the National Flood Insurance Program, or
such broader area on those streams as might result from on-site
evaluation. On streams not identified by the National Flood Insurance
Program, the 100-year floodplain shall be as delineated by a developer's
engineer and approved by the Township Engineer.
b. Purposes. The purposes of the floodplain regulations are as follows:
1. To prevent the encroachment of development into flood hazard
areas in order to protect human life and health.
2. To implement the rules and regulations promulgated by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
3. To guide construction, regrading and other encroachments that
might otherwise occur in flood hazard areas to other locations
outside flood hazard areas through cluster zoning and other
planned developments.
4. To prevent pollution during low or high water periods by
eliminating unsanitary or dangerous substances in flood hazard
areas.
5. To minimize public expenditures for flood control projects, repairs
to public facilities and utility services and rescue and relief efforts.
6. To minimize disruption in homes, businesses and places of
employment.
7. To give better assurance that buyers are notified of the limits of
properties in a flood hazard area and that those who occupy
properties in these areas assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 30-67 HOLMDEL § 30-68
1:676
§ 30-68. HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATIONS. [1976 Code § 78-47; Ord.
No. 3-82; Ord. No. 85-12]
Where open space or common property is generated and the Township will
not take title to such land, a Homeowners' Association shall be established
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43. The creation of the organization
shall be approved by the Township Attorney and shall incorporate the
following provisions which shall be submitted and approved prior to final
plat approval.
a. Membership by all owners of property or interests in the project shall
be mandatory and shall be included as a permanent deed restriction on
each lot or interest in the property. The deed restriction shall be filed in
the same manner as the filing of deeds and/or final plats after a final
subdivision approval, otherwise the final plat approval of the
development creating the Homeowners' Association shall be void.
Required membership and their responsibilities shall be in writing
between the organization and each member in the form of a covenant
with each agreeing to liability for his pro rata share of the
organization's costs and providing that the Township shall be a
beneficiary to such covenant entitled to enforce this provision. The
assessment levied by the organization upon each property owner may
become a lien on each property owner's property.
b. The organization shall be responsible for liability insurance, with the
municipality carried as a named insured, taxes, maintenance and any
other obligations assumed by the organization and shall hold the
municipality harmless from any liability. The organization shall not be
dissolved and shall not dispose of any common open space or common
property by sale or otherwise, except to an organization conceived and
established to own and maintain such open space or property for the
benefit of such development. Thereafter such organization shall not be
dissolved or dispose of any of its open space or property without first
offering to dedicate the same to the municipality(s) wherein the land is
located.
c. The organization shall be allowed to adjust the assessment to meet
changing needs.
d. The organization shall clearly describe in its bylaws all the rights and
obligations of each tenant and owner, including a copy of its covenants,
model deeds and articles of incorporation. The master deed shall state
that every tenant and property owner shall have the right to use all
common properties.
e. The articles of incorporation, covenants, bylaws, model deeds and other
legal instruments shall ensure that control of the organization shall be
transferred to the members based on a percentage of the dwelling units
sold and/or occupied and shall clearly indicate that in the event that
such organization shall fail to maintain the common open space or
common property in reasonable order and condition, the Township may
§ 30-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-68
1:677
serve written notice upon such organization or upon the owners of
the development setting forth the manner in which the organization
has failed to maintain the common open space or common property
in reasonable condition, and the notice shall include a demand that
such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within 35 days thereof and
shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be
held within 15 days of the notice. At such hearing, the designated
Township body or officer, as the case may be, may modify the terms
of the original notice as to deficiencies and may give a reasonable
extension of time not to exceed 65 days within which they shall be
cured. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the
modification thereof shall not be cured within the 35 days or any
permitted extension thereof, the Township, in order to preserve the
common open space and common property and maintain the same
for a period of one year, may enter upon and maintain such land.
The entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to
use the common open space and common property except when the
same is voluntarily dedicated to the public by the owners. Before the
expiration of the year, the Township Committee shall, upon its initiative
or upon the request of the organization theretofore responsible for the
maintenance of the common open space and common property, call
a public hearing upon 15 days' written notice to such organization
and to the owners of the development, to be held by the Township
Committee, at which hearing such organization and the owners of the
development shall show cause why such maintenance by the Township
shall not, at the election of the Township Committee, continue for
a succeeding year. If the Township Committee shall determine that
such organization is ready and able to maintain the open space and
property in reasonable condition, the Township shall cease to maintain
the open space and property at the end of the year. If the Township
Committee shall determine such organization is not ready and able
to maintain the open space and property in a reasonable condition,
the Township Committee may, in its discretion, have the Township
continue to maintain the open space and property during the next
succeeding year, subject to a similar hearing and determination in each
year thereafter. The decision of the Township Committee in any such
case shall constitute a final administrative decision subject to judicial
review.
f. The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be assessed pro
rata against the properties within the development that have a right of
enjoyment of the common open space and common property in
accordance with assessed value at the time of imposition of the lien and
shall become a lien and tax on the properties and be added to and be a
part of the taxes to be levied and assessed thereon and enforced and
collected with interest by the same officers and in the same manner as
other taxes. No such lien or tax, however, may be placed against an
LIRPP property unless so allowed in the Administrative Code adopted
by the Township which shall govern low and moderate income housing.
§ 30-68 HOLMDEL § 30-69
1:678
§ 30-69. LIGHTING. [1976 Code § 78-48; Ord. No. 3-82]
The objective is to provide safety and security on the site and minimize
undesirable off-site effects. While mounting heights may vary, the intent is
to minimize the heights of lights. All area lighting in places such as parking
lots or for security shall provide translucent fixtures with shields around
the light source. The light intensity at ground level shall be a maximum of
1.0 footcandle. For recreation purposes where more intense lighting may
be permitted, additional shielding and planting may be required to limit offsite
spillage. In all instances, no lighting source shall shine or reflect into
windows or onto streets and driveways. No lighting shall be a beam or a
rotating, pulsating or other intermittent frequency.
§ 30-70. LOWER INCOME HOUSING.109
§ 30-70.1. Purpose. [1976 Code § 78-48.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
84-7]
The purposes of this section are to assure a variety of opportunities to
provide the Township's fair share of lower income housing without undue
densities and in a manner related to utility services, highway access,
convenience to jobs, and other services.
§ 30-70.2. Required Participation. [1976 Code § 78-48.1; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 86-11; Ord. No. 87-74; Ord. No. 88-11;
Ord. No. 97-1 §§ II, III]
a. Any developer of LIRPP property as set forth in this chapter shall have
the responsibility to participate in the Township's effort to provide its
fair share of lower income housing. However, each tract may have not
more than two lots subdivided off the original tract without the
production of lower income housing provided the lower income housing
obligation of those lots is added to the obligation of the remainder of the
tract. The level and type of participation shall be as set forth below.
Subdivision and site plan approval of properties required to participate
in the production of lower income housing shall be denied unless the
developer complies with the obligation to provide lower income housing
pursuant to this section, and the approving authority may impose
reasonable conditions to secure such undertaking.
b. No application providing for increased intensities of development shall
be approved unless the resolution of the approving authority contains a
condition that the requirements for low and/or moderate income
housing units shall be binding upon the applicant and all heirs,
successors and assigns. The intent of this provision is to prevent the
bonus residential densities from inflating land costs that might be
passed on to a third party, thereby jeopardizing the number of lower
109. Editor's Note: For additional provisions concerning Low and Moderate Income Housing,
see Chapter 14. Affordable Housing.
§ 30-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-70.2
1:679
§ 30-70.3. Monitoring Costs of Lower Income Housing. [1976 Code
§ 78-48.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 97-13 § III]
income units that might be built, when the intent of the bonuses is to
subsidize the development of lower income housing.
c. Each unit constructed as a lower income unit shall be either sold or
rented at prices, qualifying the units as available for lower income
households. Each such unit shall be limited to occupancy by households
that qualify by virtue of their having corresponding low and moderate
incomes. Unless otherwise provided through the adoption of State
legislation, half the lower income units shall be low income and the
other half moderate income, each category having a reasonable cross
section of units in order to avoid all units being at the upper level of
each income category.
d. Where the lower income units are constructed as part of a housing
development containing both market-level and lower income units,
building permits and certificates of occupancy for the low and moderate
income units shall be phased-in as a development progresses so that the
low and moderate income units are built and occupied proportionately
with the market value units of the development.
e. Cash contributions in residential districts are addressed in subsection
30-70.5, and subsection 30-127.6a and Chapter 14 of the Code of the
Township of Holmdel.
f. Cash contributions in nonresidential districts are addressed in Chapter
14 of the Code of the Township of Holmdel.
a. Each development project containing lower income housing shall
include in its development application, assurances that purchasers and
renters of lower income housing shall qualify by income for the
particular category of housing, whether low or moderate income, as the
case may be, and that subsequent purchasers or renters shall also
qualify by income, adjusted for the date of any such subsequent
transaction. The subdivision and/or site plan of a LIRPP development
shall not be approved by the approving authority unless it complies with
the Township's requirements for lower income housing.
b. The period for control of the income category of purchaser or renter
shall be 30 years from the date of the certificate of occupancy of the
first occupant of the housing unit after construction.
c. No lower income housing unit may, during the period for control
specified in paragraph b above, be occupied unless a certificate of
occupancy is issued therefor. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued unless the approving authority has certified in its plan approval
that the unit is covered by a deed or lease restriction, as the case may
be, as required by paragraph e, and that the office of the Township
Administrator has determined that the proposed occupant qualifies by
§ 30-70.2 HOLMDEL § 30-70.3
1:680
§ 30-70.4. Bulk and Design Requirements. [1976 Code § 78-48.1;
Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 84-7]
The total number of units of any kind allowed in the LIRPP project, will
depend on the gross density as noted in subsection 30-70.5. The design
of housing within that portion of the tract devoted to housing shall be as
follows:
Requirement
Atrium,
Patio,
Townhouses,
Duplexes,
Quadplexes
Garden
Apartments
Mobile
Homes
Detached
Single-
Family
Minimum lot
site/unit
* N/A 4,000 square
feet
7,000 square
feet
Minimum lot
width/unit
* N/A ** 70 feet
Minimum lot
depth/unit
* N/A ** 100 feet
Minimum
tract size
2 ac. 5 ac. ** N/A
Minimum
tract width
200 feet 400 feet ** N/A
Minimum
perimeter
setback of
buildings
50 feet 85 feet ** N/A
Minimum
front yard
20 feet1 20 feet ** 30 feet
gross household income with the lower income criteria fixed by this
chapter.
d. The monthly cost of the lower income housing unit to the occupant shall
not exceed 28% of the household income for principal and interest,
taxes, condominium fees and insurance, as to sales housing, nor 30%
for rent and utilities in rental units.
e. Upon the initial sale or lease of any lower income unit the deed or lease
shall contain a covenant, running to the developer and to the Township,
that the unit shall not, for a period of 30 years after the initial certificate
of occupancy, be conveyed or leased or permitted to be occupied by any
household not qualified by income, or at a price or rental in excess of
that specified by this chapter, adjusted for the date of the transaction.
Adjustment for the income of subsequent households shall be in
accordance with the then most recent U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development "Family Income Limits".
§ 30-70.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-70.4
1:681
Requirement
Atrium,
Patio,
Townhouses,
Duplexes,
Quadplexes
Garden
Apartments
Mobile
Homes
Detached
Single-
Family
Minimum
side yard
20 feet1, 2 20 feet ** 10 feet
Minimum
rear yard
25 feet1 25 feet ** 25 feet
Maximum
building
height
30 feet 30 feet N/A 30 feet
Maximum lot
coverage
30%3 22% 22% 20%
Minimum offstreet
parking
2/unit 2/unit ** 2/unit
* Townhouse, atrium and patio units: minimums at 20 feet by 80 feet =
1,600 square feet/unit
Duplex: minimums at 80 feet by 100 feet = 8,000 square feet/duplex
Quadplex: minimums at 100 feet by 150 feet = 15,000 square feet/
quadplex
** See Section 30-58
NOTE 1: The minimum setback from any interior parking area shall be 15
feet
NOTE 2: For townhouses, the side yard for attached units is zero feet
NOTE 3: For townhouses, the lot coverage for each dwelling unit shall not
exceed 50%
§ 30-70.5. Maximum Gross Density. [1976 Code § 78-48.1; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord. No. 90-30; Ord. No. 97-1
§ IV]
On any LIRPP parcel, bonus densities shall be available to provide
opportunities for lower income housing. The base density in a given zoning
district shall have additional density added so as to bring the density in each
district up to the maximum specified in Schedule I below.
§ 30-70.4 HOLMDEL § 30-70.5
1:682
Schedule I
Density Option in R-11, R-30, R-30SC, R-TH, M and R-MH Districts
Combination of Lower Income Units
and Contributions
Units/Gross
Acres1
% of All Units
Required to be
Lower Income1
% Lower
Income Units
+ Value of
Contributions
4.4 20% 20% + -0-
5.7 25% 20% + Fee2
7.0 29% 20% + Fee2
NOTE 1: Where the Township contributes financial support to a project,
either the percentage of lower income housing shall be increased, or the
number of units per gross acre shall be reduced, or a combination of the
2, the determination to be mutually acceptable to the approving authority
and the developer dependent upon the specific project and the amount of
nondeveloper financial participation.
NOTE 2: The fee shall be the amount specified in any agreements relating
to same unless the Council on Affordable Housing concludes, after any
relevant Office of Administrative Law proceeding, that the agreements that
are the subject of these proceedings were the product of duress or are
otherwise defective. The following chart identifies the parcels which are
the subject of an agreement and the fee, expressed as a percentage of the
sales price of market units, contemplated by the agreement:
Parcel % of Sales Price of Market Units
Contemplated by Agreement
a. Block 58, Lots 53, 53.01 and
53.02
3.6%
b. Block 56, Lot 7 3.6%
c. Block 52, Lots 2 and 8 2.2%
d. Block 52, Lot 19.02 3.6%
Only the fees as to parcels c and d are in dispute.
§ 30-70.6. Design Density. [1976 Code § 78-48.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 84-7]
(The density of units on that portion of the tract devoted to the housing
type noted for purposes of LIRPP; but subject to the maximum gross density
limitation for the entire tract as set forth in subsection 30-70.5, above.)
Detached single-family: 5.0/acre
Mobile homes: 8.0/acre
§ 30-70.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-70.6
1:683
Townhouses: 12.0/acre
Duplexes: 12.0/acre
Quadplexes: 14.0/acre
Garden apartments: 16.0/acre
§ 30-70.7. Certificate of Occupancy. [1976 Code § 78-4.1; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 84-7]
See subsection 30-70.3 above.
§ 30-70.8. Waivers for Lower Income Housing. [1976 Code
§ 78-48.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 2006-06 § 6]
The approving authority, when acting upon an application which includes
provisions for lower income housing in accordance with Section 30-70 may
waive those portions of the following standards provided the developer
proves to the satisfaction of the approving authority that any waivers, if
granted, shall not create health and safety concerns for either the Township
or the future residents of a development, and provided further the
developer shall satisfy the approving authority that any such waiver(s) shall
reduce construction costs, and that the savings therefrom shall be passed
on to buyers and renters of the lower income housing in the form of reduced
housing costs, otherwise the standard provisions of this chapter shall apply:
a. Curbs and gutters may be waived except in locations where drainage
control and/or erosion control are necessary. When curbs and/or gutters
are required, they shall conform to Section 30-56, paragraphs a and b.
b. Piped storm water systems may be waived with swales substituted
except in situations where swales are likely to increase erosion control
problems. If used, swales shall comply with Sections 30-57 and 30-157
of this chapter.
c. Street lighting and other lighting standards may be waived provided
the resulting lighting plan shall be adequate to meet overall public
safety considerations with respect to intersections, public parking
areas, walkways, and the intensity of development within the project.
Where installed, lighting shall meet the requirements and/or objectives
of Section 30-70.
d. Off-street parking designs may have waivers to reduce landscaping
requirements. Curbing around all parking lots may be waived except
that curbing will be required where drainage control is needed and
where erosion potential cannot adequately be addressed by alternate
methods. Overall, a minimum of two spaces per unit shall be provided,
but of these, a limited number of eight feet by 16 feet spaces for
"compact cars" may be provided based on site plan review and the
requirements of Section 30-80e.
§ 30-70.6 HOLMDEL § 30-70.8
1:684
§ 30-71. LOTS. [1976 Code § 78-49; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 85-12;
Ord. No. 2011-16]
e. Shade tree planting and landscaping may be reduced, but not
eliminated.
f. Sidewalks shall be installed in locations determined by the approving
authority to be in the interest of public safety and proper pedestrian
circulation. Sidewalks need not follow all streets and in some instances
it may be better to follow open space corridors. The determination of
whether sidewalks are needed and where they are best located shall be
based on public safety considering the intensity of development, the
probable volume of pedestrian traffic, the adjoining street classification
where sidewalks parallel streets, access to school bus stops, recreation
areas, and the general type of improvement intended. If required,
sidewalks shall meet the requirements of Section 30-94.
g. Street paving widths may be reduced consistent with curbing/no
curbing requirements and curb-side parking provisions as set forth in
Section 30-103.
a. Insofar as is practical, lots shall be rectangular, lot lines shall be
straight and side lot lines shall be either at right angles or radial to
street lines.
b. Each lot must front upon an approved street, improved to Township
standards as designated in the Holmdel Development Design Manual.
c. Through lots or corner lots with frontage on two streets are permitted,
provided that access shall be to the street with the lower traffic
functions. (See Sections 30-103b and 30-107)
d. Extra width for street widenings in accordance with an adopted Master
Plan or Official Map shall either be dedicated or, if not dedicated, shall
be anticipated by increasing the lot size in anticipation of future rightof-
way.
e. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot(s) due to flood
conditions, high water table, where percolation tests or test borings
show the ground conditions to be inadequate for proper sewage
disposal or similar circumstances, the approving authority may, after
adequate investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
f. Where two or more contiguous lots exist under the same ownership and
one or more of the lots do not conform with the area and/or dimension
requirements of this chapter, the contiguous lots shall be considered
merged into the greatest number of conforming lots.
g. Any nonconforming lot legally existing on October 31, 1986, and not
meeting the definition of the previous paragraph may have a building
permit issued for a permitted use without an appeal for a variance,
provided that the building coverage is not exceeded, the new structure
§ 30-70.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-71
1:685
§ 30-72. through §30-75. (RESERVED)
§ 30-76. MOBILE HOME/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.
§ 30-76.1. Purpose. [1976 Code § 78-49.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
84-7]
The purpose of creating mobile home park regulations is to designate
standards in the growth area where a mobile home park can be located to
provide the opportunity for low and moderate income housing. The intent
is that mobile home parks be permitted for residential occupancy only in
the designated districts, except that mobile homes for farm workers are
permitted as specified in the appropriate zoning districts.
§ 30-76.2. License Required. [1976 Code § 78-49.1; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 84-7]
Prior to the occupancy of any mobile home unit, the mobile home park
shall first have received a Township license. Such license shall be limited to
parks located within zoning districts in which they are allowed. The license
shall expire December 31 of each year and shall be renewed for additional
periods of one year, expanded to include additional units, if necessary. The
plans included as part of the application for a license shall comply with the
following design standards as well as applicable codes and statutes of the
State of New Jersey. To the extent any State Code or statute conflicts with
these provisions, the Code or statute shall prevail.
§ 30-76.3. Compliance With Lower Income Housing. [1976 Code
§ 78-49.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 84-7]
In the development and occupancy of any mobile home park, unless
otherwise provided through the adoption of State legislation, at least 1/2 the
units shall be available within the price ranges qualifying for lower income
households. At least 20% of all units shall qualify for low income with not
does not violate any height or setback requirements, parking
requirements are met and the nonconforming lot abuts lots on either
side that are developed and the nonconforming lot is the largest
possible assemblage of contiguous land under the preceding
paragraph. The side and rear yards may be reduced to the same
percentage the area of the undersized lot bears to the zone district
requirements, except that no yard shall be less than half that required
by this chapter or five feet, whichever is greater.
h. Whenever land has been dedicated to the Township in order to meet the
minimum street width requirements or to implement the Official Map or
Master Plan, the Building Inspector shall not withhold a building and/or
occupancy permit when the lot depth and/or area was rendered
substandard due to such dedication and where the owner has no
adjacent lands to meet the minimum requirements.
§ 30-71 HOLMDEL § 30-76.3
1:686
less than 30% qualifying for moderate income. Other provisions of Section
30-56 shall also be complied with.
§ 30-76.4. Site Plan and Design Standards. [1976 Code § 78-49.1;
Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 97-13 §§ III, IV]
a. Mobile home parks shall be permitted provided the required portion of
the units herein shall be occupied by qualified lower income households
as outlined in subsection 30-76.3 above. Mobile home parks shall be a
permitted use by right only in the R-MH District.
b. Permitted accessory uses in a mobile home park include off-street
parking, open space and recreation areas, recreation center, and a
maintenance and repair facility limited to services necessary for the
mobile home units and common facilities within the mobile home park.
c. The minimum tract size for a mobile home park shall be 10 acres unless
the mobile homes are part of a larger project and mixed housing types
in which case the minimum tract size for the entire housing
development shall be 20 acres. The maximum tract size devoted to
mobile homes shall be 30 acres. The minimum tract width and depth
shall be 300 feet.
d. The minimum number of dwelling units in a mobile home park shall be
70 and the maximum shall be 210, but in any event the maximum
density of seven units per acre shall not be exceeded.
e. Mobile home "berths" as used herein need not be subdivided lots, but
are an area specifically designated on a site plan for the location of one
mobile home and for determining compliance with the terms of this
chapter. Each mobile home berth shall be designed to have access from
a street within the mobile home park.
f. No more than two access roads to a mobile home park shall be
constructed from any one street and the mobile home park shall have at
least two means of access.
g. Each mobile home park shall have a landscaped buffer area at least 25
feet wide around the perimeter of the tract meeting the objectives of
Section 30-54.
h. Each mobile home berth shall be a minimum of 40 feet wide by 100 feet
long.
i. The minimum yards and setbacks for each mobile home berth shall be
as follows:
1. Twenty-five-foot front yard setback from any street right-of-way.
2. Fifteen-foot side yard setback from any street right-of-way.
3. Fifteen feet between units from the sides.
§ 30-76.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-76.4
1:687
4. Fifteen feet between units from the rear.
5. Fifty feet between a mobile home unit and any other permanent
structure in the mobile home park.
j. The entrance road(s) into the mobile home park shall be designed with
reverse frontage (no individual driveway access from any mobile home
berth), up to at least the second street intersection within the mobile
home park.
k. The edge of all roadways shall have rolled concrete curbs so as to
control drainage and the edge of pavement while also allowing the units
to be maneuvered across the curbing.
l. Each mobile home berth shall have at least one off-street parking space,
but not more than two. In addition, the mobile home park shall provide
several small parking lots, each with at least six off-street parking
spaces and designed to serve clusters of mobile home units for guest
parking and other resident needs. The rear of these spaces may open
directly onto a street. The total number of spaces in the parking lots
shall be at least 0.25 off-street space per mobile home berth in order to
assure some common parking areas. The total, combined number of
parking spaces (parking lots plus on-lot spaces) shall be at least two
spaces per mobile home berth.
m. The minimum paving widths of the interior roads shall be as follows.
Interior roads shall meet local street specifications. No parking shall be
allowed on the street.
1. One-way traffic — 20 feet.
2. Two-way traffic — 24 feet.
n. The mobile home park shall be provided with a comprehensive
pedestrian/bikeway system. These paths may be limited to one side of
the road or in locations away from the street system such as through
open spaces areas. Where these paths are located along the interior
roads, the road width shall be widened to provide the needed space so
that the pathway shall not be counted as part of the minimum area for
each mobile home berth. The pathway system shall be reasonably
distributed throughout the mobile home park and be designed to serve
predictable travel patterns such as access to the off-street parking
spaces, park and recreation areas, activity center, school bus stops, and
similar facilities. Path construction details of Section 30-94 shall apply.
o. The minimum size of any active recreation area shall be 0.5 acre having
a shape with four sides, a minimum width in any direction of 100 feet
and street frontage of at least 150 feet.
p. Mobile home parks shall be connected to water and sewage systems
approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
where required, and by local health authorities.
§ 30-76.4 HOLMDEL § 30-76.4
1:688
§ 30-77. MONUMENTS. [1976 Code § 78-50; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
91-5; Ord. No. 2005-32 § VI]
Monuments shall be the size and shape required by N.J.S.A. 46:239.12 (the
Map Filing Law, as amended), shall be placed in accordance with the statute
and shall be indicated on the final plat.
In addition to the monuments required by the Map Filing Law, monuments
must also be installed along easement boundaries as required in
subsections 30-43.3w, 30-43.4g, 30-44.3b6 and Section 30-58f. Monuments
shall also be installed where specified in Sections 30-82 and 30-83.
§ 30-78. NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES OR LOTS. [1976
Code § 78-51; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 99-31 § I; Ord. No. 2011-16]
The lawful use of land or structure existing on October 31, 1986, may be
continued, although it may not conform to this chapter.
q. All utilities shall be underground.
r. In addition to the landscaping around the perimeter buffer, all interior
streets shall be landscaped on both sides with shade trees spaced no
less than one tree between every third mobile home berth planted at
least 15 feet from the curb.
a. Abandonment. A nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned if it
is terminated by the owner, if a nonconforming use involving a structure
is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, or if a nonconforming use of
land without structure(s) ceases for a period of six months. The
subsequent use of the abandoned structure and/or land shall be in
conformity with this chapter.
b. Maintenance may be made to a nonconforming use, structure or lot,
provided that the maintenance work does not change the use, expand
the building or the functional use of the building, increase the area of a
lot used for a nonconforming purpose or increase the nonconformity in
any manner.
c. Building Additions. Any existing structure located on a conforming or
nonconforming lot, which structure violates any yard requirements,
may have either additions to the principal building or have an accessory
building erected without an appeal for a variance, provided that the
existing use is a permitted use. Whether an addition or an accessory
building is proposed, the total permitted building coverage shall not be
exceeded, and neither addition by itself shall violate a setback
requirement or any other requirement of this chapter.
d. Subdivision of Lots. An existing lot whose area and dimensions are
sufficient to permit a subdivision, but where a structure exists on the lot
with one or more setback violations, may nevertheless be subdivided
without an appeal for a variance, provided that the subdivision itself
does not create any new zoning violations and does not increase the
§ 30-76.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-78
1:689
§ 30-79. OFF-SITE AND OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS. [1976 Code
§ 78-52; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 13-84; Ord. No. 85-12]
Before final approval the approving authority may require the payment
of the developer's pro rata share of the following off-site and off-tract
improvements: street improvements, water system, sewerage, drainage
facilities and easements. (See definitions in Section 30-3c.)
severity of the existing setback violation, such as moving the lot line
even closer to the existing building.
e. Restoration and Repairs.
1. Any nonconforming structure or use which has been condemned or
damaged by fire, explosion, flood, windstorm or act of God shall be
examined by the Construction Official. If, in his opinion, the value
of repairing the condition is greater than 50% of the value of
replacing the entire structure, it shall be considered completely
destroyed and may be rebuilt to the original specifications only
upon approval of a use variance.
2. Where the value of repairing the condition is determined to be less
than 50% of the value of replacing the entire structure, the
nonconforming structure or use may be rebuilt and used for the
same purpose as before, provided that it does not exceed the
height, area and bulk of the original structure. The reconstruction
shall commence within 12 consecutive months of the date the
building was damaged or condemned, with the reconstruction
carried out without interruption, otherwise the damaged structure
shall not be rebuilt as a nonconforming use or building.
3. The percent damaged or condemned shall be the current
replacement costs of the portion damaged or condemned computed
as a percentage of the current replacement cost of the entire
structure, neither to include the cost of the foundation unless the
foundation is damaged or condemned.
f. Creation by Governmental Action. Whenever in a residential zoning
district a nonconformity is created by or exists solely by reason of the
exercise of a governmental right of eminent domain, no bulk
variance(s), i.e. lot area, side yard setback, front yard setback, etc.,
shall be required to use the property as though it were conforming in
that respect, providing that the remaining lot contains at least 60% of
the bulk standard. The "exercise of governmental right of eminent
domain," for purposes of this section, shall be evidenced by the filing of
an eminent domain complaint by a governmental entity in a court of
competent jurisdiction, which complaint shall set forth the taking of
property which results in the nonconformity from which relief is sought
or by a deed of conveyance to a governmental entity for a public
purpose given by the property owner in a voluntary conveyance in lieu
of condemnation.
§ 30-78 HOLMDEL § 30-79
1:690
a. Essential off-site and off-tract improvements may be required to be
installed or a performance guaranty furnished in lieu thereof, with the
total cost borne by the developer.
1. Where a development has no direct access to an improved street or
public or private central water supply or central sanitary sewer and
does not qualify for individual sewage disposal systems, the
approving authority may nevertheless grant final approval if the
developer shall acquire and improve such street between the
development and an existing improved street and, in the case of
water/sewer system(s), if the developer shall acquire and improve
such water and sanitary sewer connections between the
development and existing facilities.
2. Where a development creates a demand for water supply and/or
sewerage treatment beyond the capacity of the present facilities
and causes the need for a new or expanded well, pump or storage
tank for water supply and/or a new or expanded sewage treatment
plant and ancillary equipment, the approving authority may
nevertheless grant final plat approval if the developer shall acquire
land for, improve and dedicate such water and sewer facilities, all
as approved by the approving authority, governing body and
serving utility company. Where such new or expanded facilities will
have a capacity beyond the needs of the development, the cost to
the developer shall be determined in accordance with paragraph b
below.
3. Where drainage waters are diverted from the development into
other drainage systems or onto other lands or streets and they are
not adequate to accommodate the additional waters, the approving
authority may grant final approval if the developer shall acquire,
improve and dedicate to the Township such enlarged, additional or
new drainage facilities.
4. In lieu of the developer's performing such off-site and off-tract
work, the developer may request and the governing body may enter
into an agreement for such work to be performed by the Township
or its contractors at the cost of the developer.
5. Where the approving authority determines that off-site and off-tract
improvements are essential to the development and the developer
does not consent to the improvements, the application shall be
denied, without prejudice, to a future application at such time as
the conditions no longer apply.
b. Advisable Off-Site and Off-Tract Improvements. Where the approving
authority finds that off-site and off-tract improvements would be
advisable, although not essential, and the improvements would promote
the objectives of this chapter and can be most appropriately
accomplished in connection with the development and particularly
where the off-site and off-tract improvements could be required to be
§ 30-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-79
1:691
made as a local improvement by the Township, with the cost thereof
to be assessed against all properties specifically benefited thereby,
including the property of the developer, the following provisions shall
apply:
1. During the processing of the application the approving authority
shall refer it recommendations for off-site and off-tract
improvements to the governing body.
2. If the governing body concurs, the Municipal Engineer or other
authority retained by the Township shall determine the nature of
the off-site and off-tract improvements, including the needs created
by the applicant's proposed development and the then-existing
needs in the area, notwithstanding any work of the applicant.
3. The Municipal Engineer or other authority shall estimate the costs
of such work, including costs to be assigned to the developer and
those to be assessed to others, including a possible local
improvement ordinance, and including costs for construction,
engineering, any easement or right-of-way acquisition, legal work,
advertising, contingencies, bonding and assessments.
4. (Reserved)
5. The Planning Board shall then proceed in the following manner:
(a) Based on the information received from the Municipal
Engineer the Planning Board shall determine the anticipated
amount that the lands of the applicant would be expected to be
assessed.
(1) The amount determined by the Planning Board shall then
be deposited by the applicant with the Township Treasurer
prior to final approval.
(2) Such deposit shall be made concurrent with an agreement
between the applicant and the Township concerning the
uses of the deposit, which shall include the following
stipulations: that the funds shall be used by the Township
solely for the expenses of such off-site and off-tract
improvements; that such deposit may be appropriated by
the Township, with other funds of the Township, and may
be commingled with other appropriated funds and
expended by the Township in connection with such
purposes; that, if such deposit is not used by the Township
within a specified time agreed upon by the applicant, the
funds shall be distributed in accordance with the terms of
the agreement; that, upon completion of the work by the
Township or its contractors, the properties specially
benefited by such improvement shall be assessed as
provided by law, including the property of applicant; that
the applicant's deposit shall be credited against the
§ 30-79 HOLMDEL § 30-79
1:692
§ 30-80. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING. [1976 Code
§ 78-53; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord. No. 88-21; Ord. No.
92-18]
assessment made upon applicant's property, whether or
not applicant is then the owner thereof; and that, if such
deposit was less than the amount ultimately assessed
against such property, then the owner(s) of the property
shall pay the difference between the deposit and such
assessment; or, if the deposit exceeded the amount
assessed, the excess shall be refunded to the applicant,
without interest.
(3) Where the off-site and off-tract improvements are found by
the approving authority to be advisable and important to
the sound development of the site, but the developer is
unwilling to make such deposit as specified above, then
there shall be no final approval. However, final approval
may be granted if the funds are deposited under protest
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
a. Access To and From Lots. Drives shall be limited to two to any street,
except that, when the frontage exceeds 500 feet, the number of drives
may be based on one drive for each 250 feet of property frontage. The
center lines of access points shall be spaced at least 65 feet apart. Each
drive shall handle no more than two lanes of traffic, shall be at least 18
feet wide for one-way traffic and 25 feet wide for two-way traffic, shall
be at least 100 feet from the right-of-way of any intersecting street,
shall be at least 20 feet from any property line, and, for parking lots
with more than 50 spaces, all entrance drives shall extend at least 100
feet from the street curbline before the first aisle is encountered, and
the exit drive shall extend at least 60 feet from the curb. No parking
shall be in the entrance/exit drive. In the event that lot dimensions
preclude meeting these setbacks, the approving authority shall approve
driveway locations that best meet the interests of this chapter,
including requiring a design and stub connection to adjacent
undeveloped properties. Curbing shall be either depressed at the
driveway or have the curbing rounded at the corners with the access
drive connected to the street in the same manner as another street.
b. Access to parking and loading spaces shall be by on-site aisles to permit
each vehicle to proceed to and from each space without moving another
vehicle. Parking spaces shall not be an extension of any street right-ofway.
Parking lots serving more than 50 vehicles shall not have parking
spaces served off the entrance/exit drives or major, interior circulation
drives. Individual garages served by a single-width driveway shall count
as one space.
c. Buffers. Parking areas for six or more vehicles and loading areas for
nonresidential uses shall be buffered from adjoining streets and
§ 30-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-80
1:693
residential uses meeting the objectives of Section 30-54, but shall be at
least 15 feet in width.
d. Curbing. Off-street parking areas containing six or more spaces and all
off-street loading areas shall have Belgian Block curbing around the
perimeter located in conjunction with an overall drainage plan. In lieu
of Belgian Block curbing, the approving authority may accept alternate
means that will define the edge of paving, prevent vehicles from
encroaching upon unpaved areas, control drainage and guide traffic
circulation. Curbing or any alternative shall be ramped in accordance
with the current Design Standards for Curb Ramps for the Physically
Handicapped of the New Jersey Department of Transportation with
ramps opposite each aisle, at locations to serve the required
handicapped spaces so handicapped persons can avoid passing behind
parked cars and at other selected locations.
e. Dimensions.
1. Off-street parking spaces for residential uses shall be a minimum of
8 1/2 feet wide and 18 feet in length.
2. Off-street parking spaces for retail/commercial establishments
which use or supply carts, carriages, or hand trucks to their
customers shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide and 18 feet in length.
3. All other off-street parking spaces, not falling into 1 and 2 above
shall be a minimum of nine feet wide and 18 feet in length.
4. Parallel parking spaces shall be a minimum of 25 feet in length in
all instances.
5. In parking lots containing fewer than 20 spaces a minimum of one
space shall be at least 12 feet wide, and for parking lots with
greater than 20 spaces, 2% of all spaces shall be 12 feet wide.
These wider spaces shall be located in one area and designated as
parking for the handicapped.
6. For Parking Spaces 10 Feet Wide For Parking Spaces 8 1/2 or 9
Feet Wide
Angle of the
Parking Space
1-Way Aisle
(Feet)
2-Way Aisle
(Feet)
1-Way Aisle
(Feet)
2-Way Aisle
(Feet)
90° 24 24 25 25
60° 18 20 20 22
Parallel 12 18 12 18
Off-street loading spaces shall have 15 feet of vertical clearance
and be designated as follows:
§ 30-80 HOLMDEL § 30-80
1:694
Loading Space Apron Width
Length
(Feet)
Width
(Feet)
90°
(Feet)
60°
(Feet)
60 10 72 66
60 12 63 57
60 14 60 54
f. Drainage. Facilities shall be installed in accordance with good
engineering practice as approved by the Municipal Engineer and in
accordance with the drainage provisions of Section 30-57.
g. Surfacing shall be approved as part of the plan approval, based on the
Holmdel Development Design Manual.
h. Landscaping in parking and loading areas shall be shown on the site
plan at the rate of at least one tree for every eight parking spaces. Each
tree shall be at least two inches in diameter measured one foot above
the ground and shall be of a type permitted in the Development Design
Manual. All areas between the parking area and the building and
between the parking area and the street shall be landscaped with trees
and/or shrubs and ground cover. Any plantings which do not live shall
be replaced within one year or one season. A majority of the parking
areas for more than 50 cars shall be obscured from streets by buildings,
landscaped berms, natural ground elevation or plantings, singly or in
combination.
i. Minimum Parking and Loading Requirements. The number of spaces
shall be based on the schedule for each zoning district in Article V. The
number of spaces required shall be in addition to the number of
vehicles that belong to the occupant and must be stored on-site.
Individual garages served by single-width driveways shall count as one
space. In nonresidential developments, where an applicant can
demonstrate the Township's parking and loading requirements are
excessive, the approving authority may approve a plan showing less
parking and/or loading area to be paved, provided that a landscaped
area sufficient to meet the deficiency shall be set aside on the plan and
reserved for future parking and/or loading in the event that the use
needs more parking than approved or a change of use of the premises
shall require the additional spaces, and provided further that this
reserved area shall be graded compatibly with the storm sewer system
for both its landscaped and possible paved conditions.
j. Location of Parking and Loading Areas.
1. Parking and loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the
use being served. The edge of any parking space shall be at least 20
feet from any building. No individual off-street parking or loading
space shall have direct access from a street. No loading areas shall
§ 30-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-80
1:695
§ 30-81. PATIO HOMES. [Ord. No. 96-14]
be in the front yard. All off-street parking lots along arterial and
collector streets shall be set back at least 15 feet from the right-ofway.
2. No loading and parking spaces shall be located in any required
buffer area, and all spaces shall be set back a sufficient distance to
prevent any part of a vehicle from overhanging the street right-ofway
or property line.
3. Parking spaces located to serve residential, commercial and
industrial uses shall be located conveniently to the intended
dwelling unit or entrance door of a commercial use and shall
generally be within 150 feet of the entrance of the building and
within 300 feet of commercial/industrial uses. No vehicle shall be
parked in or on any "front yard" as that term is defined in Section
30-3, unless the parking space is located on an improved driveway
consisting of stone or pavement.
4. In multifamily developments, commercial districts and industrial
zones, no parking shall be permitted in fire lanes, streets,
driveways, aisles, sidewalks or turning areas.
5. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located to be most accessible
and approximate to the building(s) being served and shall be
specified on the site plan. Each handicapped space shall be
identified by a capital "H" painted in the space and by a sign using
the international symbol. The sign shall be placed at the end of
each space, facing the space.
a. Developments consisting of patio homes shall receive subdivision or
site plan approval, and shall have public or private central water supply
and a central sanitary sewer system approved by appropriate state and
local agencies.
b. Patio home developments shall be bound to a unified architectural
scheme. Adequate controls shall be established to prevent departures
from the approved architectural scheme, and all permissible variations,
additions and modifications shall be clearly set forth in the
architectural controls and reviewed by the Planning Board during the
application for preliminary approval. All units shall be part of a
homeowners association, which shall be charged with primary
responsibility for maintaining the architectural controls.
c. The unified architectural scheme shall address architectural,
landscaping and amenity controls so that the overall project
appearance is coordinated and interrelated. Items to be addressed shall
include the color and exterior of materials of proposed buildings,
fences, walls and other structures; and proposed landscaping, including
screening materials and foundation plantings.
§ 30-80 HOLMDEL § 30-81
1:696
§ 30-82. PRESERVATION AREAS. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § VII; Ord. No.
2006-19 § VI]
d. To promote privacy, fences may be located along the front, side or rear
lot lines, and walls may be located along the rear lot line and side lot
line beyond the front yard. All fences and walls shall be compatibly
designed in relation to all other fences and walls, but may be
distinguished by such design features as color and materials.
e. Windows may be provided on the first and second story of dwelling
units, provided that the windows along the sides of adjoining units shall
be offset and not opposing in order to promote privacy.
a. Public access for pedestrians shall be provided in preservation areas
where shown in the Master Plan. The location of public access ways
shall conform with the Township's planned greenway network as shown
in the Master Plan. The design of public access ways shall conform with
the requirements of Section 30-112 for trails.
b. Conservation easements consistent with the requirements of this
section shall be placed on all preservation areas.
c. Rainwater gardens, wet ponds, constructed stormwater wetlands, pipes
for the conveyance of stormwater and outlet structures permitted by a
County, State or Federal agency are permitted in preservation areas.
Detention basins and/or infiltration basins shall be permitted if required
by a municipal, County or State agency.
d. Activities permitted in preservation areas prior to the release of liability
pursuant to the performance guaranty submitted for improvements in
such areas include the following:
1. Landscaping in accordance with approved plans.
2. Demolition of structures in accordance with approved plans.
3. Restoration and enhancement of plantings, including the removal
of dead or diseased trees, thinning of trees and growth, and the
removal of trees to allow for structures permitted by a municipal,
County or State agency.
4. Activities necessary to enhance water bodies in accordance with
approved plans.
5. Protection of streams from siltation.
6. Installation of any and all improvements permitted by municipal,
County and State agencies, including greenway trails and related
structures.
7. Minor grading necessary to effectuate the above-listed activities.
§ 30-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-82
1:697
§ 30-83. RESERVATION AREAS. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § VIII; Ord. No.
2005-38 § III; Ord. No. 2006-19 §§ VII]
e. Activities permitted in preservation areas following the release of
liability pursuant to the performance guaranty submitted for
improvements in such areas include protection of streams from
siltation, maintenance of open space in as close to its natural state as
possible, and the maintenance, repair, restoration and replacement of
previously installed improvements.
f. Preservation areas may be dedicated to a homeowners' association
meeting the requirements of paragraph b7 in Section 30-55.
Alternatively, preservation areas may be deeded to the Township, at the
developer's option and conditional on the Township's acceptance of
such areas.
g. Preservation areas shall be delineated from building lots with
monuments. Additionally, on each individual building lot adjoining a
preservation area, fencing and/or a vegetated buffer area shall be
provided to delineate the lot from the preservation area.
h. Preservation areas shall not be subdivided into individual building lots.
a. Public access for pedestrians shall be provided in reservation areas
where shown in the Master Plan. The location of public access ways
shall conform with the Township's planned greenway network as shown
in the Master Plan. The design of public access ways shall conform with
the requirements of Section 30-112 for trails.
b. Landscape easements should be placed on all reservation areas.
c. Reservation areas are intended to be used for a variety of activities
including passive recreation, historic preservation, farming,
stormwater management and landscaping. Activities permitted in
reservation areas shall include, but not be limited to, those listed in
Section 30-82d and e. Additionally, in reservation areas, all such
activities shall be permitted both before and after the release of
performance guarantees. Stormwater management facilities including
detention basins are permitted in reservation areas, although such
areas shall only qualify as "open space" if they meet the definition of
"open space" in this chapter.
d. Reservation areas shall be maintained in one of the following ways:
1. Reservation areas may be dedicated to a homeowners' association
meeting the requirements of paragraph b7 in Section 30-55.
2. Reservation areas may be deeded to the Township, at the
developer's option and conditional on the Township's acceptance of
such areas.
§ 30-82 HOLMDEL § 30-83
1:698
§ 30-84. through §30-86. (RESERVED)
§ 30-87. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. [1976 Code § 78-54; Ord.
No. 3-82]
3. Reservation areas to which a farmland easement has been applied
may be privately owned by an individual, corporation or other
entity, provided that the land remains in compliance with the terms
of the farmland easement.
e. Reservation areas shall be delineated from building lots with
monuments. At the discretion of the approving authority, the
delineation may be further supplemented with one or more of the
following: signs, fencing, and/or landscape buffering.
f. Other than greenway trails and playground and fitness trail equipment,
reservation areas shall not include active recreation facilities except in
the locations shown in the Master Plan.
g. Reservation areas shall not be subdivided into individual building lots.
However, not more than one single-family residence may be
constructed on a reservation area to which a farmland easement is
applied, provided that:
1. A residual dwelling site area meeting the requirements of Section
30-58B shall be delineated for such residence.
2. The residual dwelling site area shall not be counted as open space
for the purposes of this chapter.
3. The residence and structures accessory thereto shall not extend
outside the delineated residual dwelling site area.
4. If the reservation area is part of a subdivision, the number of
permitted building lots in the subdivision shall be reduced by one
for each delineated residual dwelling site area within reservation
areas within the subdivision.
a. Electricity. Electronic equipment shall be shielded so that there is no
interference with any radio or television reception beyond the
operator's property.
b. Air, Water and Environmental Pollution. No use shall emit heat, odor,
vibrations, noise or any other pollutant into the ground, water or air
that exceeds the most stringent, current, applicable State and Federal
regulation. No permit shall be issued for any use where a State permit
is required until the State has ascertained and approved the level and
quality of emission, type and quality of emission control and level of
monitoring to be conducted.
c. Storage and Waste Disposal. No materials shall be deposited so they
can be transferred off the lot, directly or indirectly, by natural forces,
§ 30-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-87
1:699
§ 30-88. PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS. [1976 Code § 78-55; Ord. No.
3-82]
The approving authority shall find the following:
such as precipitation, surface water, evaporation or wind. All materials
which might create a pollutant or be a safety and health hazard shall
be stored indoors and/or be enclosed in appropriate containers to
eliminate such pollutant or hazard. No flammable or explosive
substance shall be stored on a property, except under conditions
approved by the Fire Department. No bulk storage of materials or
equipment shall be in any front yard nor closer to any street line than
100 feet nor closer to any side or rear lot line than the minimum setback
for principal buildings nor be higher than 10 feet. Each site shall be
provided with an area(s) properly screened and concealed from any
parking area or adjacent property for the orderly deposit and pickup
of trash and garbage in accordance with an approved site plan. The
screening shall be in accordance with landscaping requirements of the
Holmdel Development Design Manual and the buffer provisions of this
chapter. Bulk storage areas shall be paved with bituminous concrete or
equivalent surface material of sufficient strength to accommodate the
anticipated use.
a. The planned development provisions of this chapter shall supersede any
conflicting portions of this chapter to the extent of such inconsistencies.
b. Proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common open space
shall be reliable and, if proposed to be handled by a private agency,
shall be established in accordance with the Homeowners' Association
provisions in Section 30-68. The amount, location and purpose of the
common open space shall be adequate for the use intended.
c. The design of the proposed development for public services, control
over vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the amenities of light and air,
recreation and visual enjoyment shall be adequate and comply with
appropriate portions of the Master Plan.
d. The development will not have an unreasonably adverse effect upon the
area in which it is proposed to be established.
e. In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, there shall be adequate terms and
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of the
residents, occupants and owners of the proposed development upon the
total completion of the development.
f. Before final approval of a development, the applicant shall submit a
schedule for completion of the development plan in one or more stages,
including the location and mix of housing types in each stage. The
housing mix at the end of any stage shall not deviate more than 20%
from the approved final mix of unit types. Failure to meet the schedule
§ 30-87 HOLMDEL § 30-88
1:700
§ 30-89. PRINCIPAL USE. [1976 Code § 78-56; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 84-7; Ord. No. 90-32]
No lot shall have more than one principal permitted use or one principal
building, except that nonresidential and certain residential developments
normally having more than one principal building and/or a mix of uses may
be permitted more than one principal use or building on a lot provided
the development has site plan approval and all buildings comply with all
yard, industrial or office park requirements. Examples of developments
having more than one principal use or building include shopping centers,
industrial complexes, office developments, motels and conference centers,
townhouses and other multi-family complexes, and mobile home parks. (See
Section 30-3c.)
§ 30-90. PUBLIC UTILITIES. [1976 Code § 78-57; Ord. No. 3-82]
All public services shall be connected to approved public utilities systems
where they exist.
§ 30-91. SANITARY SEWERS. [1976 Code § 78-58; Ord. No. 3-82]
If a central sewage treatment and collection system is accessible, the
developer shall connect to the system. If on-site systems are proposed, the
required data in subsection 30-36.3r shall be submitted.
§ 30-92. (RESERVED)110
of development shall mean that no other sections of the development
or new development by the same principals shall be considered by the
approving authority until the section in default is completed.
a. The distribution supply lines and service connections shall be installed
underground, except that lots which abut streets with existing
overhead electric or telephone lines may be supplied from those
overhead lines, but the service connections shall be installed
underground. Should a road widening or an extension of service occur
as a result of the development, any replacement, relocation or
extension of existing overhead lines shall be underground.
b. Where soil conditions, woods or other special conditions exist, the
developer may apply to the approving authority for an exception from
the terms of this section in accordance with Section 30-32. If overhead
lines are permitted as the exception, pole locations shall avoid horizons,
there shall be selective tree cutting and a staggered alignment, and
trees shall be planted in key locations to minimize the view of the poles
and alignments, which poles shall follow rear lot lines and other interior
locations and similar considerations to lessen the visual impact.
110. Editor's Note: Former Section 30-92, Service Stations, previously codified herein and
containing portions of 1976 Code § 78-59 and Ordinance No. 3-82, was repealed in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
§ 30-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-93
1:701
§ 30-93. SHADE TREES. [1976 Code § 78-60; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
85-12; Ord. No. 2005-32 § IX]
Except as otherwise provided in subsections 30-103j and k, all trees shall be
planted no further than 50 feet apart along all new streets located 20 feet
from the edge of paving and shall be balled and burlapped, nursery grown,
free from insects and disease, of substantially uniform size and shape, with
straight trunks and true to species and variety. Stripping trees or filling
around trees in the yard portion of a lot shall not be permitted, unless it
can be shown that grading requirements or thinning necessitates removal
of trees, in which case those lots shall be replanted to reestablish the tone
of the area and to conform with adjacent lots. Planted trees that do not
live shall be replaced by the developer during the next planting season.
Parking lots shall be planted as required in Section 30-80. The type of trees
to be provided shall be as designated in the Holmdel Development Design
Manual.
§ 30-94. SIDEWALKS. [1976 Code § 78-61; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
94-43; Ord. No. 2005-32 § X]
a. Requirement; Waiver. Except as otherwise provided in subsections
30-103j and k, sidewalks shall be required in all areas and constructed
on both sides of all streets; however, the Planning Board may waive this
requirement where in its opinion it is to the best interest of the
Township. Upon granting such a waiver, the developer shall be required
to pay the Township an amount equal to 75% of the reasonable cost of
installing the sidewalks, the amount to be determined by the Township
Engineer upon submission and consideration of various estimates and
other documentation from the developer, other interested parties, and
the office of the Township Engineer itself. All funds collected by the
Township from developers as a result of waivers granted in accordance
with this section, shall be maintained in a sidewalk construction
account, the proceeds of which shall be available to install sidewalks
throughout the Township where and as authorized by the Township
Committee. Nothing contained herein shall affect the right of the
Township to enact ordinances requiring assessments for sidewalks from
property owners as authorized under N.J.S.A. 40:65-2 or pursuant to
other ordinances in the Township.
b. Standards. Except as otherwise provided in subsections 30-103j and k,
sidewalks shall be four feet wide and four inches thick, except crossing
driveways, where the thickness shall be increased to six inches for
residential uses and all drives to parking areas of less than 50 spaces
and to eight inches for heavier uses. Where the approving authority
determines that a sidewalk may be subject to unusually heavy
pedestrian traffic or intended equally for bicycles it may require that its
width be increased to either six or eight feet. All sidewalk construction
shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of the
Standard Specifications. Concrete shall be Class "C", air-entrained.
Preformed bituminous cellular joint filters 1/2 inch thick shall be placed
§ 30-93 HOLMDEL § 30-94
1:702
§ 30-95. SIGHT TRIANGLES. [1976 Code § 78-62; Ord. No. 3-82]
Sight triangles shall be required at each quadrant of an intersection of
streets and streets and driveways serving commercial, industrial and
multifamily housing developments and shall be shown on the plan. The area
within sight triangles shall be either dedicated as part of the street right-ofway
or kept as part of the lot and identified as a sight triangle easement. No
grading, planting or structure shall be erected or maintained more than 18
inches above the center-line grade of the intersecting street or driveway or
lower than 10 feet above their center lines, excluding street name signs and
official traffic regulation signs. Where any intersection involves earth banks
or vegetation, including trees, the developer shall trim or selectively thin
trees and grade to provide the sight triangle. Any development requiring
site plan approval shall provide sight triangles at each driveway with the
driveway classified as a local street for purposes of establishing distances.
The classifications of existing and proposed streets shall be those shown
on the adopted Master Plan or as designated by the approving authority
where a new street is not included on the Master Plan. A sight triangle
easement shall be expressed on the plat as follows: "Sight triangle easement
subject to grading, planting and construction restrictions as provided in the
Holmdel Development Regulations Ordinance." Portions of a lot set aside
for the sight triangle may be calculated in determining the lot area and
minimum setbacks required by the zoning provisions.
§ 30-96. SIGNS.
§ 30-96.1. General Regulations. [1976 Code § 78-63; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 24-82; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord. No. 88-11; Ord. No. 88-34; Ord.
No. 88-35]
No person shall erect, alter or relocate any sign without a sign permit,
unless it is exempted by the following provisions.
at intervals not exceeding 20 feet. Dummy (formed) joints shall be
cut into the concrete sidewalk between the expansion joints at equal
intervals not exceeding the width of the sidewalk.
The sidewalk subgrade shall be six inches thick porous material
approved by the Township Engineer and compacted prior to the
placement of any sidewalk as directed by the Township Engineer. All six
inch or eight inch sidewalk areas crossing driveways shall be reinforced
at the midpoint or 1/3 points, respectively, of the sidewalk section.
Reinforcing shall be welded wire fabric (66-1212), or an equivalent
approved by the Township Engineer. The width of reinforced sidewalks
shall be not less than the width of the driveway plus 10 feet, five feet
each side.
Further specifications for and alternatives for sidewalks can be found in
Section S28.11 of the Holmdel Development Design Manual, available
in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 30-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-96.1
1:703
a. Animated, Flashing and Illusionary Signs. Signs using mechanical and/
or electrical devices to revolve, flash or display movement or the
illusion of movement are prohibited.
b. Attached Signs. Signs shall be parallel to the wall, with the face of the
sign no more than 15 inches from the surface of the wall.
c. Height. The uppermost part of an attached sign shall not be higher than
the base of the second floor window sill or the base of the roof or 15
feet, whichever is lowest. The lowest portion of any sign which projects
above a driveway or walkway shall be at least 15 feet and 10 feet,
respectively.
d. Illuminated Signs. No sign shall be permitted flashing illumination or
lights of changing intensity. All signs lighted exteriorly shall have the
light source shielded from adjoining or nearby lots, streets and interior
drives.
e. Location. Freestanding signs shall be located no closer to a side lot line
than the minimum side yard for the principal building, but in any event
no closer to a street right-of-way than 25 feet, and not located in any
sight triangle.
f. Sign Area and Dimension. Sign area shall include all lettering, wording,
coloring and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the
background, whether open or enclosed, but not including supporting
framework and bracing incidental to the display itself. A freestanding
sign with two exposures shall have a total sign area consisting of the
area of one side of the sign, but both sides may be used.
g. Exemptions from Sign Permits. Street number designations, postal
boxes, family names on residences, on-site pedestrian and vehicular
traffic directional and parking signs, signs posting property as "private
property," "no hunting" and "danger," "warning" or similar purposes are
permitted, but are not to be considered in calculating the sign area,
shall not exceed two square feet each and shall require no permit.
Temporary "pick your own" agriculture signs shall be exempt from the
requirements of any Board approval and may be constructed and placed
on farms so long as they meet all of the requirements of paragraph h5.
h. Temporary Signs.
1. Construction Signs, Nonresidential. No more than one sign naming
the project under construction and the participating firms and
individuals is permitted on the construction site, beginning with
the issuance of a building permit and terminating with the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy or the expiration of the building
permit, whichever comes first. Such signs shall not exceed an area
of 32 square feet.
2. Construction Sign, Residential. Not more than two temporary
ground signs for an approved residential development shall be
§ 30-96.1 HOLMDEL § 30-96.1
1:704
permitted, provided that each sign does not exceed 12 square feet,
shall be no closer than 15 feet to any street or side lot line and shall
be removed within 30 days after all the lots or units have been sold.
3. Real Estate Signs. Real estate signs shall be set back at least 10
feet from the edge of the street paving and 10 feet from all property
lines and shall not exceed four square feet on each side. Signs shall
be removed at the expense of the advertiser within 15 days after
the termination or completion of the matter being advertised. They
do not require a permit. No more than one sign shall be permitted
along each street. Real estate signs shall be permitted only on the
lot which the sign is advertising.
4. Signs for Not-for-Profit Organization Activities. Signs, not
exceeding four feet by eight feet, may be located throughout the
Township advertising special events of the organization. The signs
may not impair site distances nor be closer than 25 feet to any
street or side lot line. Any such sign may be installed no earlier than
14 days prior to the event being held and must be removed no later
than two days after the event.
5. "Pick Your Own" Agricultural Signs.
(a) Two one-sided signs no larger than four feet by eight feet may
be placed on a fully operational vehicle (such as a truck or
tractor) for each farm within the Township. Separate,
contiguous or adjoining tax blocks and/or lots owned and/or
rented by or to a person(s), corporation, partnership, joint
venture or any other entity which has a common ownership or
business interest shall be considered for the purposes of this
section as one farm.
(b) All such signs shall be allowed to be placed on the property, as
specific herein, from May 1 to November 1 of each year and
from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. of each day within the time period.
At all other times the signs and vehicles used to display them
shall be removed and stored in a farm building on the farm.
(c) Directional signs, which must comply with the size and manner
of display requirements of paragraph a and all provisions of
paragraph h5(b) above shall be permitted subject to the
following additional conditions:
(1) Directional signs may advertise "pick your own"
availability for farms within or outside of the Township, so
long as the location outside the Township is no further
than three miles from the location of the sign.
(2) Directional signs may be located on separate, contiguous
or adjoining tax blocks and/or lots (whether considered
one farm or not) owned or rented by or to a person(s),
corporation, partnership, joint venture or any other entity;
§ 30-96.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-96.1
1:705
however, no such directional sign may be located closer
than one mile to another directional sign or "pick your
own" agricultural sign placed by the same person,
corporation, partnership, joint venture or any other entity
on any other property owned, leased or donated to them
for the purposes of farming or for the mere purpose of
locating a directional sign or "pick your own" signs;
however, an additional sign may be located within the one
mile limit at each intersection where a turn must be made
to arrive at the site of the property which is the subject of
the directional sign.
6. Real Estate Open House Directional Signs. A real estate open
house directional sign advertising the location of an open house to
facilitate the sale of property shall be permitted without the
necessity of a permit or application only at the following locations:
(a) No more than one such sign may be located at each
intersection where a turn must be made to arrive at the site of
the property for sale which is the subject of the directional
sign;
(b) No more than one such sign shall be located on the property to
be sold. Signs must be installed and removed on the same day
the open house is scheduled, and shall include thereon the
name of the real estate agency installing the sign.
i. One wall or ground sign not exceeding 12 square feet may be located on
the premises of places of worship, school buildings, libraries, parish
houses, government buildings and public recreational and community
center buildings and grounds. The signs shall comply with all setback,
height, area and other design standards of this chapter. No fee shall be
required in connection with the permit for such a sign.
j. Service Stations. In addition to other permitted signs, service stations
only may display the following special signs:
1. One freestanding sign advertising the name of the station,
including the company or brand name, insignia or emblem,
provided that such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet on a side,
shall be at least 15 feet from the curbline and not more than 20 feet
above the ground. "High-rise" or "turnpike height" signs are
prohibited.
2. Incidental signs advertising services, trade information, prices or
other information than product advertising are permitted, provided
that no one sign exceeds 16 square feet in area on a side and there
are no more than four such signs, all set back at least 20 feet from
the property line.
k. Prohibited Signs.
§ 30-96.1 HOLMDEL § 30-96.1
1:706
§ 30-96.2. Permitted Signs. [1976 Code § 78-63; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 85-12; Ord. No. 97-35 § VII; Ord. No. 98-16 § II; Ord. No.
2005-32 § XI; Ord. No. 2006-19 § VIII]
Signs within each district shall be permitted as follows:
1. Illuminated tubing or strings of lights.
2. Banner-type signs, except where in celebration of public events and
when erected with approval of the Township itself.
3. Billboards.
4. Advertising signs are not permitted in any district.
a. Residential Districts. One freestanding sign limited to giving the name
of a multifamily complex not exceeding 12 square feet, a maximum
height of three feet, no closer than 30 feet to the intersection of any two
street lines and no closer than 10 feet to any right-of-way.
b. Commercial or Business Districts.
1. There shall be no more than a total of two signs per business,
including not more than one sign per wall. One sign may be a
freestanding sign, provided that the lot on which it is located is one
acre or larger in size. Their aggregate area shall not exceed the
equivalent of 10% of the area of the front of the building(s),
including the window and door areas or 100 square feet in
aggregate, whichever is smaller. No one sign shall exceed 40
square feet. A freestanding sign shall meet the setback
requirements of paragraph b2 below.
2. Shopping centers shall be permitted one freestanding sign
advertising the name of the shopping center and meeting the
following specifications:
(a) Located on the same lot as the shopping center, but no closer
to the intersection of two street lines than 50 feet, not
exceeding 20 feet in height and no closer to the right-of-way
line than 25 feet.
(b) The sign area shall not exceed 100 square feet.
(c) No freestanding sign shall be within 100 feet of any other
freestanding sign.
3. Individual tenant nameplates on the sign below the principal name
of the building are prohibited.
c. Industrial, Commercial-Industrial, Office and Office Laboratory
Districts.
§ 30-96.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-96.2
1:707
1. Not more than one freestanding sign advertising the name,
product(s) and seal of an industry or office shall be allowed for each
street frontage and meeting the following:
(a) Located on the same lot as the industrial use, but not closer
than 30 feet to the right-of-way of any street, no closer to the
intersection of two street lines than 50 feet and a height not
exceeding 10 feet.
(b) An area not exceeding 0.5 square foot for each linear foot of
front yard setback of the principal building, but not to exceed
200 square feet.
2. No more than two attached signs advertising the name, product(s)
and seal of an industry or office will be allowed, provided that they
shall be attached to the main building and limited to one sign per
side and the area of each sign shall not exceed 200 square feet or
10% of the area of the wall to which it is attached, whichever is
less.
3. Individual tenant nameplates on the sign below the principal name
of the building are prohibited.
d. Temporary Farm Stands. Two freestanding signs, two movable signs
and one attached sign shall be permitted for each temporary farm
stand. The freestanding signs shall be located between the property
line and the farm stand with one sign located on either side of the
temporary farm stand. Each freestanding sign shall not exceed 10
square feet in area and shall be removed within five days of the date
that the temporary farm stand closes for the season. The two movable
signs shall not exceed four square feet each and may only advertise
seasonal offerings and shall be removed within five days of the date that
the temporary farm stand closes for the season. In addition, one
attached sign not exceeding 16 square feet shall be permitted, provided
that it is located upon and affixed to the temporary farm stand or
building.
e. LIH-PUD Redevelopment District.
1. For retail sales or retail service establishments within the LIH-PUD
Redevelopment District, signs shall be permitted as follows:
(a) A maximum of two freestanding monument signs shall be
permitted along the State highway frontage and one
freestanding sign shall be permitted along the secondary
frontage. The monument signs shall meet the following
specifications:
(1) Each monument sign shall be ground mounted with a
maximum height of eight feet.
§ 30-96.2 HOLMDEL § 30-96.2
1:708
(2) The maximum area of the monument sign shall be 70
square feet.
(3) The purpose of these signs is solely to identify the retail
component of the PUD; no individual tenant nameplates
shall be permitted.
(4) The monument signs shall be located on the same lot as
the retail establishments, but no closer than 50 feet to the
intersection of any two street lines and no closer to the
right-of-way line than 25 feet.
(5) The monument signs shall be architecturally compatible
with the buildings within the retail portion of the Planned
Unit Development.
(6) A signage plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board at
the time of the application for site plan approval.
(7) No sign shall be located within any required sight triangle.
(b) Wall signage for individual retail establishments within the
LIH-PUD Redevelopment District shall be permitted as follows:
(1) No occupant shall have more than one sign on any of its
exterior walls, except in the event of a retail unit having
more than 250 feet of store frontage, in which event it
shall be permitted one additional sign (to be no more than
1/2 the square footage of the largest wall sign) for each 75
feet of store frontage over 250 feet. In no event shall there
be more than three signs per occupant regardless of the
number of exterior walls.
(2) The maximum width of any sign shall not exceed 75% of
the width of the wall upon which the sign is located.
(3) The maximum area of any wall sign shall not exceed 10%
of the area of the wall upon which the sign is located, and
in no case shall any wall sign exceed 250 square feet.
(4) The maximum letter height of each sign shall be based
upon the total square footage of the establishment as
follows:
Area of Establishment
Maximum Letter
Height
Greater than 35,000 square
feet
4 feet
5,000 to 50,000 square feet 3 feet
Less than 5,000 square feet 2 feet
§ 30-96.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-96.2
1:709
§ 30-96.3. Permit Procedure. [1976 Code § 78-63; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 20-82]
If application is not part of a subdivision, site plan or variance request, the
sign permit procedure is as follows:.
(5) No more than three colors shall be permitted for any
individual sign, subject to approval by the Planning Board
of a coordinated signage plan.
2. For office and scientific research laboratory establishments, and
assisted living facilities within the LIH-PUD Redevelopment
District, signs shall be permitted as follows:
(a) One freestanding monument sign shall be permitted for each
building. The monument signs shall meet the following
specifications:
(1) Each monument sign shall be ground mounted with a
maximum height of five feet.
(2) Letter height shall not exceed four feet.
(3) The monument signs shall be located no closer than 50
feet to the intersection of any two street lines and no
closer to the right-of-way line than 25 feet.
(4) The monument signs shall be architecturally compatible
with the buildings. A signage plan will be submitted to the
Planning Board at the time of application for site plan
approval.
(b) Wall signage shall be permitted as follows:
(1) There shall be not more than one sign per building.
(2) The maximum width of any sign shall not exceed 66% of
the width of the wall upon which the sign is located.
(3) The maximum letter height shall be 36 inches.
(4) Individual tenant nameplates on the sign below the
principal name are prohibited.
3. No neon signs shall be permitted anywhere in the LIH-PUD
District.
a. Applications shall be signed by the owner of the premises and the
person responsible for erecting the sign and submitted to the
Construction Official with the following:
1. Name, address and telephone number of the owner and/or lessee of
the premises and of the person or business erecting the sign.
§ 30-96.2 HOLMDEL § 30-96.3
1:710
§ 30-96.4. Enforcement Procedure.
Any sign advertising a use or product no longer at the site shall be removed
by the permittee, owner or person having use of the property within 30 days
after written notice from the Construction Official. Failure to comply shall
authorize the Construction Official to remove the sign at the expense of the
permittee or owner of the premises.
§ 30-97. through §30-100. (RESERVED)
§ 30-101. SOIL EROSION; SEDIMENT CONTROL; TOPSOIL. [1976
Code § 78-64; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 21-83; Ord. No. 90-37; Ord.
No. 94-38]
Developments shall incorporate soil erosion and sediment control programs
phased according to the scheduled progress of the development, including
anticipated starting and completion dates. The purpose is to control soil
erosion and sediment damages to promote the public safety, health,
convenience and general welfare of the community. See Sections 30-57 and
30-67.
2. Lot lines, sidewalks, the location of structure(s), zoning district and
the location of the signs.
3. The dimensions of the sign, height, lighting and method of
attachment to a building or the type of structure for a freestanding
sign.
4. Site plan review fee shall be paid to the Township Clerk in
accordance with subsection 30-12.5b.
b. The sign permit shall be issued or denied within 45 days of the date of a
complete submission, and the work shall be completed within 180 days
after issuance of the permit otherwise the permit shall be void.
a. Data Required.
1. A plan established the means for controlling soil erosion and
sedimentation at the applicant's expense as certified by the Soil
Conservation District.
2. The plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed in
New Jersey, except in instances where the preparation of a plan
does not include or require the practice of engineering as defined
in Title 45, Chapter 8, of the N.J.S.A. and shall contain:
(a) Location and description of general topography and soil
characteristics on and surrounding the site, including a copy of
the Soil Conservation Service Soil Survey.
(b) Proposed changes to contours showing existing and postconstruction
conditions.
§ 30-96.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-101
1:711
(c) Proposed measures for controlling soil erosion and sediment
during and after construction.
(d) The sequence of installing erosion and sediment control
measures, including anticipated starting and completion dates.
b. General Design Principles.
1. Stripping of vegetation, grading or other soil disturbance shall be
done in a manner which will minimize soil erosion; whenever
feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected; the
extent of the disturbed area and the duration of its exposure shall
be kept within practical limits; either temporary seeding, mulching
or other suitable stabilization measures shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during construction or other land
disturbances; drainage provisions shall accommodate increased
runoff resulting from modified soil and surface conditions during
and after development or land disturbance; water runoff shall be
minimized and retained on site wherever possible to facilitate
groundwater recharge; sediment shall be retained on site; and
diversions, sediment basins and similar structures shall be installed
where required, prior to any on-site grading or land disturbance.
2. Grading and Filling. All fill shall be clean fill and/or topsoil. Grading
shall be limited to areas shown on an approved plat. Any topsoil
distributed during grading operations shall be redistributed
throughout the site.
3. Soil Removal and Redistribution. Excavation of soil, other than
required to construct approved structures and facilities shall be
prohibited. Any application proposing the disturbance of more than
5,000 square feet of surface area of land as defined in the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act (P.L. 1975, c. 251)111 shall
include the following: the means to control or prevent erosion;
providing for sedimentation basin(s) for soil that does erode due to
water; controlling drainage, dust and mud on the premises as well
as abutting lands; preserving soil fertility and the ability of the area
to support plant and tree growth by maintenance of adequate
topsoil consisting of at least six inches of the original layer;
maintaining necessary lateral support and grades of abutting
lands, structures and other improvements; preventing pits and
declivities which are hazardous or which provide insect breeding
locations; and not altering the physical limitations and
characteristics of the soil in such a way as to prevent the use to
which the land may lawfully be put.
c. Maintenance. All erosion and sediment control measures shall be
maintained for two years after completion or until such measures are
permanently stabilized as determined by the Township Engineer,
111. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
§ 30-101 HOLMDEL § 30-101
1:712
whichever is longer. The Township Engineer shall periodically inspect
the control measures to insure compliance with the provisions of
paragraphs a and b above.
d. Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act:
1. Land disturbance associated with the construction of a singlefamily
dwelling unit unless such unit is part of a proposed
subdivision, site plan, conditional use, zoning variance, planned
development or construction permit application involving two or
more such single-family dwelling units. In the event that this
exemption applies, however, the owner and/or builder of the
exempt single-family dwelling unit must comply with the provisions
of paragraph e below.
2. Land disturbance of 5,000 square feet or less of the surface area of
land for the accommodation of construction for which the State
Uniform Construction Code112 would require a building permit.
3. Agricultural use of lands when operated in accordance with a farm
conservation plan approved by the local soil conservation district or
when it is determined by the local soil conservation district that
such use will not cause excessive erosion and sedimentation.
4. Use of land for gardening primarily for home consumption.
5. Percolation tests and/or soil borings.
e. No stripping of vegetation, grading or other soil disturbance in
preparation for the construction of a single-family dwelling (including
mobile homes, modular homes, and patio homes) shall be undertaken
on any lot which is otherwise exempt pursuant to paragraph d1 until
receipt of a construction permit. The application for a construction
permit for one single-family dwelling house shall have annexed thereto
a soil erosion and control plan designating the existing topography of a
lot in question and a plan for controlling runoff, erosion and siltation of
any streets, roads, public or private rights-of-way, sidewalk areas,
adjacent properties, drainage swales or waterways. The Construction
Official shall issue a construction permit upon receipt of approval of the
plan from the Township Engineer and compliance with any other
requirements set forth in the Code. The owner and/or builder of the
single-family dwelling house must implement and maintain the plan
submitted with the construction permit request. The Township
Construction Code Official shall make periodic inspections during the
course of the construction of the single-family dwelling house to insure
compliance with the filed plan.
112. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 30-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-102
1:713
§ 30-102. STREETLIGHTING. [1976 Code § 78-65; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 4-84; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord. No. 2001-22 § I]
§ 30-103. STREETS. [1976 Code § 78-66; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
20-82; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord. No. 95-22 § II; Ord. No. 2005-32 § XII;
Ord. No. 2005-38 § V; Ord. No. 2006-19 § IX]
a. Streetlighting standards of a type and number approved by the
approving authority and Municipal Engineer shall be installed at street
intersections and elsewhere if deemed necessary by the approving
authority. As detailed in paragraph c, the developer shall pay for the
lights, including lights required at intersections of new roads with an
existing road, and installation of underground service for streetlighting.
b. Street lights shall be installed prior to certificates of occupancy being
issued and the cost of electricity for streetlighting in all streets within
the development shall be paid for by the developer until such streets
are accepted by the municipality, or upon the developer complying with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.6.
c. For all development projects which require Board approval, the
developer shall arrange and pay for streetlighting service upon the
appropriate tariff and prevailing government rules and regulations. The
developer shall pay all costs for the installation of streetlighting,
including, but not limited to, wiring, poles, and fixtures. The payment
made by the developer to the utility shall include the amount set by the
approved tariff for capital contribution for fixture costs. Accordingly,
the appropriate tariff is hereby defined as the "Contribution Fixture"
tariff or its equivalent.
a. All developments shall be served by approved streets, improved to
Township standards. All utilities, drains, and other facilities located
under the road paving shall be installed prior to the placing of any road
surfacing material. Streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official
Map shall provide for the appropriate extension of existing streets,
conform with the topography as far as practical and allow for continued
extension into adjoining undeveloped tracts. The approving authority
shall classify streets proposed in a development, considering the
Master Plan, conditions within and around the development and the
intent of this chapter.
b. Residential development bounded by any arterial or collector street
shall control access to the streets by having all driveways intersect local
streets either by reverse frontage design, parallel local street, corner
lots fronting on the intersecting street or other designs having the same
result. Where circumstance(s) may dictate that a driveway enter an
arterial or collector street, the lot shall provide on-site turnaround
facilities and abutting lots may be required to share one curb cut. All
lots with reverse frontage shall have an additional 25 feet of lot depth to
provide a buffer area, which shall be either planted with nursery grown
trees or, where topography permits, free-form earthen berms may be
§ 30-102 HOLMDEL § 30-103
1:714
created. Berms shall not be less than six feet in height, shall be
stabilized by ground cover and shall be planted with evergreens and
deciduous trees according to a landscaping plan and Section 30-93.
c. Street rights-of-way shall be measured from lot line to lot line. The
continuation of an existing street shall be continued at the same width
as the existing street unless a greater width may be required to
implement the Master Plan or Official Map in accordance with the
schedule for street rights-of-way. The following alternate street designs
are offered in conjunction with cluster design options in the interest of
promoting the conservation of energy by reducing street mileage and
the amount of material needed, long-term maintenance and travel
distance.
Minimum Widths
Street
Classification
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Each Travel
Lane
Each
Shoulder(1)
Curbside
Parking
Remaining
width for
Utility,
Bikeway,
Sidewalk and
Median
Purposes
(feet)
ARTERIAL
Curbed and not curbed
2-lane 80 2 @ 12 feet 2 @ 6 feet None 44
4-lane 80 4 @ 11 feet 2 @ 6 feet None 24
COLLECTOR
Curbed 60 2 @ 13 feet None None 34
60 2 @ 11 feet 1 @ 8 feet 1 side 30
Not curbed 60 2 @ 11 feet 2 @ 2 feet None(2) 34
60 2 @ 11 feet 1 @ 2 feet
and 1 @ 8
feet
1 side(3) 28
LOCAL
2 @ 13 feet None None(2) 24
2 @ 11 feet 1 @ 8 feet 1 side(3) 20
Curbed 50
2 @ 10 feet 2 @ 6 feet 2 sides 18
2 @ 10 feet 2 @ 2 feet None(2) 26
2 @ 10 feet 1 @ 2 feet
and 1 @ 8
feet
1 side(3) 20
Not curbed 50
2 @ 10 feet 2 @ 6 feet 2 sides
§ 30-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-103
1:715
Minimum Widths
Street
Classification
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Each Travel
Lane
Each
Shoulder(1)
Curbside
Parking
Remaining
width for
Utility,
Bikeway,
Sidewalk and
Median
Purposes
(feet)
Not curbed
with
maximum
15 units on
minimum
3-acre lots
50 2 @ 9 feet 2 @ 2 feet None(2) 28
(1) Uncurbed streets shall have shoulder areas designed with
consideration given to street classification, slope, storm drainage,
traffic volume, soil considerations, water table and adjoining
roadway pavement thickness. This information shall be used to
determine the width and depth of shoulder areas, and any such
design shall be subject to approval by the approving authority's
engineer.
(2) Any street with no curbside parking shall have no frontage
development.
(3) Any street with one-side parking shall have the frontage
development along the side with the curbside parking. The other
side with no curbside parking shall have no frontage development.
d. No reserve strips shall be approved, except where the control and
disposal of land comprising such strips has been given to the governing
body.
e. Where a development adjoins or includes existing streets that do not
conform to widths shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or the
requirements of the Township, additional land along both sides of the
street sufficient to conform to the right-of-way requirements shall be
either dedicated or anticipated in the development design by creating
oversized lots in a subdivision as well as increased building setbacks in
subdivisions and site plans to accommodate the widening at some
future date. The additional widening may be offered to the Township
and, if offered, shall be expressed on the plat as follows: "Street rightof-
way easement granted to the Township of Holmdel." If the
subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of the required extra width shall
be anticipated.
f. Secondary local streets shall be designed to discourage through traffic
using L- and U-streets or similar designs. Four-way intersections
§ 30-103 HOLMDEL § 30-103
1:716
involving primary and secondary local streets shall be avoided
wherever possible.
g. Sight triangles shall be provided as required in Section 30-95.
h. Guardrails may be required by the approving authority at drainage
structures, streams, embankment limits and curves. Timber guardrail is
preferred and shall meet New Jersey Department of Transportation
standards. Alternate designs may be used if submitted and approved as
part of the application.
i. Cul-de-sacs.
1. Cul-de-sacs of a permanent nature, where extension is impractical
or impossible, or of a temporary nature, where provision is made
for the future extension of the street, shall provide a turnaround at
the end, tangent to the right side as you enter the street, wherever
possible.
2. If a cul-de-sac is temporary, a turnaround area may be waived. If a
turnaround area is required, provisions shall be made for its
removal and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining
properties as an off-tract responsibility of the developer creating
the street extension when the street is extended.
3. A cul-de-sac shall serve an average daily traffic (ADT) level of no
more than 250 trips, provided that in no case shall the cul-de-sac be
greater than 2,000 feet in length. The ADT shall be calculated
utilizing trip generation rates prepared by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers for the proposed land use type.
j. No street shall have a name which duplicates or nearly duplicates in
spelling or phonetic sound the name of existing streets so as to be
confused therewith. The continuation of an existing street shall have
the same name. The names of new streets shall be approved by the
approving authority.
k. Rural Conservation Special Street Regulating Area.
1. For the areas within the Rural Conservation Special Street
Regulating Area shown on Exhibit 103-A,113 the following street
standards shall apply.
2. It is the intent of the Governing Body that these standards be
adopted by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs or its
successor agencies as Special Area Standards which will take
precedence over the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards (RSIS) in the Rural Conservation Special Street
Regulating Area. Unless and until such time as these standards are
adopted as Special Area Standards, it is intended that the Township
113. Editor's Note: Exhibit 103-A, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 30-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-103
1:717
shall grant such de minimis exceptions from the RSIS, and
furthermore that the Township shall enter into such agreements
with developers to exceed the RSIS, as may be necessary to
implement the standards described herein.
3. The standards herein supersede those elsewhere in this chapter or
in the Holmdel Development Design Manual. However, for any
element of street design or streetscaping for which this subsection
does not provide a standard, the applicable municipal, County or
State standard shall prevail unless the application of such standard
would be inconsistent with the standards in this section.
4. The locations of local streets shall be approximately as provided in
the Master Plan.
5. Sidewalks and street trees shall be required on both sides of all
streets unless otherwise indicated. The maximum spacing of street
trees shall be one tree for each 50 feet. The developer shall not be
required to make payments in lieu of providing sidewalks in any
location where sidewalks are not required by this section; however,
if the approving authority waives any sidewalks required herein,
payments in lieu of providing sidewalks shall be required in
accordance with Section 30-94.
6. Intersection Curb Return Radii.
(a) The specified intersection curb return radii are intended to
narrow the perceived width of the street at intersections.
Where the specified intersection curb return radius is expected
to be inadequate to handle truck traffic, the turning area may
be widened beyond the specified maximum turning radius by
means of additional pavement and/or a truck apron.
(b) The curb return radius regulations do not apply to
intersections involving County or State roadways.
(c) Truck aprons shall be prominently identified by signs reading
"Raise Plow." Following the expiration of any performance
guaranty and maintenance bonds for such structures, if a truck
apron identified by such a sign is damaged by a contractor
performing snow removal, the contractor shall be liable for all
repairs to the truck apron.
7. Local Street Types. Local streets in the Rural Conservation Special
Street Regulating Area shall conform to one of the following street
types as indicated in the Master Plan.
(a) Rural entrance street.
(b) Estate Street.
§ 30-103 HOLMDEL § 30-103
1:718
8. A median island shall be permitted at the entrance of any
residential development intersecting a collector or arterial
roadway.
9. Specifications for each of the local street types are provided in this
section. The standards in both the text and the exhibits are
required.
(a) Rural Entrance Street Specifications (See Exhibit 103-B).114
Traffic lanes Two-way
ROW width 100 feet min. and max.
Pavement width 24 feet min. and max.
Curb radius at
intersections
15 feet min.; 20 feet max.115
Curb type Flat or angled Belgian block
Sidewalk width 4 feet min. and max.
Drainage Swale or pipe
Required edge
treatment
Rail fence (4 feet high max.) on both
sides
Fence setback 32 feet from cartway edge
Sidewalk location Both sides of the street; 15.5 feet from
the cartway (min. and max.)
Tree location Double row of trees on both sides of
the street. Required dimensions are
provided in Exhibit 103-B. Dimensions
provided in the exhibit are both min.
and max.
Tree size (caliper) 3 in. (min.); 3.5 in. (max.)
Street lighting Max. 15 feet high; downcast
(b) Estate Street Specifications for Rural Conservation Area (See
Exhibit 103-C).116
Traffic lanes Two-way
ROW width 50 feet min. and max.
Pavement width 26 feet min. and max.
Curb radius at
intersections
15 feet min.; 20 feet max.117
114. Editor's Note: Exhibit 103-B, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
115. Editor's Note: See paragraph 30-103j6.
116. Editor's Note: Exhibit 103-C, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 30-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-103
1:719
Traffic lanes Two-way
Curb type Flat or angled Belgian block
Sidewalk width 4 feet min. and max.
Drainage Swale or pipe
Sidewalk location Both sides of the street;118 7 feet from
cartway (min. and max.)
Tree location Single row of trees on both sides of the
street. Required dimensions are
provided in Exhibit 103-C. Dimensions
provided in the exhibit are both min.
and max.
Tree size (caliper) 3 in. (min.); 3.5 in. (max.)
Street lighting Max. 15 feet high; downcast
Cul-de-sac Only permitted where shown in Master
Plan; landscaped center island
required; cartway width of 14 feet
(min.) and 15 feet (max.) around center
island.
l. Hamlet Conservation Special Street Regulating Area.
1. For the areas shown within the Hamlet Conservation Special Street
Regulating Area on Exhibit 103-A,119 the following street standards
shall apply.
2. It is the intent of the Governing Body that these standards be
adopted by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs or its
successor agencies as Special Area Standards which will take
precedence over the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards (RSIS) in the Hamlet Conservation Special Street
Regulating Area. Unless and until such time as these standards are
adopted as Special Area Standards, it is intended that the Township
shall grant such de minimis exceptions from the RSIS, and
furthermore that the Township shall enter into such agreements
with developers to exceed the RSIS, as may be necessary to
implement the standards described herein.
3. The standards herein supersede those elsewhere in this chapter or
in the Holmdel Development Design Manual. However, for any
element of street design or streetscaping for which this subsection
does not provide a standard, the applicable municipal, County or
117. Editor's Note: See subsection 30-103j6.
118. Editor's Note: Exception: In the locations indicated in the Master Plan, a sidewalk is
required on only one side of the street.
119. Editor's Note: Exhibit 103-A, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 30-103 HOLMDEL § 30-103
1:720
State standard shall prevail unless the application of such standard
would be inconsistent with the standards in this section.
4. The locations of local streets shall be approximately as provided in
the Master Plan, except that the Long Green Street may terminate
in a cul-de-sac if it is not used to bound a green.
5. Sidewalks and street trees shall be required on both sides of all
streets unless otherwise indicated. The maximum spacing of street
trees shall be one tree for each 50 feet. The developer shall not be
required to make payments in lieu of providing sidewalks in any
location where sidewalks are not required by this section; however,
if the approving authority waives any sidewalks required herein,
payments in lieu of providing sidewalks shall be required in
accordance with Section 30-94.
6. Intersection Curb Return Radii.
(a) The specified intersection curb return radii are intended to
narrow the perceived width of the street at intersections.
Where the specified intersection curb return radius is expected
to be inadequate to handle truck traffic, the turning area may
be widened beyond the specified maximum turning radius by
means of additional pavement and/or a truck apron.
(b) The curb return radius regulations do not apply to
intersections involving County or State roadways.
(c) Truck aprons shall be prominently identified by signs reading
"Raise Plow." Following the expiration of any performance
guaranty and maintenance bonds for such structures, if a truck
apron identified by such a sign is damaged by a contractor
performing snow removal, the contractor shall be liable for all
repairs to the truck apron.
7. Local Street Types. Local streets in the Hamlet Conservation
Special Street Regulating Area shall conform to one of the
following street types as indicated in the Master Plan.
(a) Long Green Street.
(b) Long Green Access Street.
(c) Hamlet Entrance Road.
(d) Paddock Edge Street, which shall be in the location of the Polo
Field Street in the Master Plan.
(e) Estate Street.
8. Specifications for each of the local street types are provided in this
section. The standards in both the text and the exhibits are
required.
§ 30-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-103
1:721
(a) Long Green Street Specifications (See Exhibit 103-D).120
Traffic lanes Two-way
ROW width 50 feet min. and max.
Pavement width 26 feet min. and max.
Curb radius at
intersections
10 feet min.; 15 feet max.121
Curb type Flat or angled Belgian block
Sidewalk width 4 feet min. and max.
Drainage Swale or pipe
Edge treatment Optional on individual building lots
outside the right-of-way; not required
on the side of the street adjacent to a
green, if a green is provided.
Sidewalk location Sidewalk on sides adjacent to the
building lots, located 7.5 feet from
cartway (min. and max.). Sidewalk not
required on side adjacent to green, if a
green is provided
Tree location Double row of trees on side adjacent to
building lots; single row of trees on the
other side. Required dimensions are
shown in Exhibit 103-D. Dimensions
shown in the exhibit are both min. and
max.
Tree size (caliper) 3 in. (min.); 3.5 in. (max.)
Street lighting Max. 15 feet high; downcast
(b) Long Green Access Street Specifications (See Exhibit
103-E).122
Traffic lanes Two-way
ROW width 44 feet min. and max.
Pavement width 24 feet min. and max.
Curb radius at
intersections
10 feet min.; 15 feet max.123
Curb type Flat or angled Belgian block
120. Editor's Note: Exhibit 103-D, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
121. Editor's Note: See paragraph 30-103k6.
122. Editor's Note: Exhibit 103-E, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
123. Editor's Note: See paragraph 30-103k6.
§ 30-103 HOLMDEL § 30-103
1:722
Traffic lanes Two-way
Sidewalk width Not required
Drainage Swale or pipe
Edge treatment Not required
Tree location Single row of trees on each side of the
street. Required dimensions are
provided in Exhibit 103-E. Dimensions
shown in the exhibit are min. and max.
Tree size (caliper) 3 in. (min.); 3.5 in. (max.)
Street lighting Max. 15 feet high; downcast
(c) Hamlet Entrance Road Specifications (See Exhibit 103-F).124
Traffic lanes Two-way
ROW width 76 feet min. and max.
Pavement width 26 feet min. and max.
Curb radius at
intersections
10 feet min.; 15 feet max.125
Curb type Flat or angled Belgian block curb
Sidewalk width No sidewalk
Drainage Swale
Required edge
treatment
Rail or picket fence; max. height 4 feet
Fence or wall
setback
24 feet from cartway edge
Tree location Double row of trees on both sides of
the street. Required dimensions are
shown in Exhibit 103-F. Dimensions
provided in the exhibit are both min.
and max.
Tree size (caliper) 3 in. (min.); 3.5 in. (max.)
Street lighting Max. 15 feet high; downcast
(d) Paddock Edge Street Specifications (See Exhibit 103-G).126
124. Editor's Note: Exhibit 103-F, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
125. Editor's Note: See paragraph 30-103k6.
126. Editor's Note: Exhibit 103-G, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 30-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-103
1:723
Traffic lanes Two-way
ROW width 80 feet min. and max.
Pavement width 26 feet min. and max.
Curb radius at
intersections
10 feet min.; 15 feet max.127
Curb type Flat or angled Belgian block
Sidewalk width 4 feet min. and max.
Drainage Swale or pipe
Edge treatment
(house side)
Optional outside the right-of-way on
individual building lots; see Section
30-61
Edge treatment
(active recreation
facility or paddock
side)
Picket or rail fence; 4 feet max. height
Fence or wall
setback
26 feet from cartway edge
Sidewalk location Required on both sides of the street;
11.5 feet from the cartway (min. and
max.)128
Tree location Double row of trees on both sides of
the street. Required dimensions are
shown in Exhibit 103-H. Dimensions
provided in the exhibit are both min.
and max.
Tree size (caliper) 3 in. (min.); 3.5 in. (max.)
Street lighting Max. 15 feet high; downcast
(e) Estate Street Specifications for Hamlet Conservation Area (See
Exhibit 103-H).129
Traffic lanes Two-way
ROW width 50 feet min. and max.
Pavement width 26 feet min. and max.
Curb radius at
intersections
10 feet min.; 15 feet max.130
127. Editor's Note: See paragraph 30-103k6.
128. Editor's Note: A sidewalk is only required on one side of the street if a farm is provided
instead of an active recreation facility.
129. Editor's Note: Exhibit 103-H, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
130. Editor's Note: See paragraph 30-103k6.
§ 30-103 HOLMDEL § 30-103
1:724
§ 30-104. STREET SIGNS. [1976 Code § 78-67; Ord. No. 3-82]
Street signs shall be of a type, design and material approved by the
approving authority on advice of the Municipal Engineer. Each sign shall
show the name of both streets. There shall be at least two street signs
furnished at each four-way intersection and one street sign at each Tintersection.
All signs shall be installed free of visual obstruction.
§ 30-105. SWIMMING POOLS, TENNIS COURTS AND PADDLE
TENNIS COURTS. [1976 Code § 78-68; Ord. No. 3-82]
These facilities installed in residential districts shall be installed only on
lots containing a residence with the pool or court as an accessory use to
the residence. The pool or court and its accessories shall meet the setback
requirements for an accessory building in the district in which it is located,
except that, if located in the front yard, all facilities shall be set back twice
Traffic lanes Two-way
Curb type Flat or angled Belgian block
Sidewalk width 4 feet min. and max.
Drainage Swale or pipe
Edge treatment Optional on individual building lots
outside the right-of-way; see Section
30-61
Sidewalk location Both sides of street; 7 feet from the
cartway (min. and max.)
Tree location Single row of trees on both sides of the
street. Required dimensions are shown
in Exhibit 103-H. Dimensions provided
in the exhibit are both min. and max.
Tree size (caliper) 3 in. (min.); 3.5 in. (max.)
Street lighting Max. 15 feet high; downcast
m. The detail shown below is recommended for street and road pavement
edges where curbing is provided. The detail shows angled curbing;
however, flat curbing is also permitted. The strength of the concrete
curbing should be 4,500 psi.
§ 30-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-105
1:725
the distance from the street line than is required for the principal building.
A pool or court shall occupy no more than the equivalent of 50% of the
yard area in which it is located. Before a pool or court is granted a building
permit, the Board of Health Inspector shall have reviewed the plans for
compatibility with the on-lot septic system, if any.
§ 30-106. TOWNHOUSES AND OTHER MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS.
[1976 Code § 78-69; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 13-84; Ord. No. 2003-23
§ I]
Multifamily developments shall have site plan approval and public or
private central water supply and a central sanitary sewer system approved
by appropriate State and local agencies.
a. Each overall development shall have a compatible architectural and
landscaping theme with variations in design to provide attractiveness to
the development. Each project shall specify how each of the following
items has been given consideration in the overall plans: landscaping
techniques; building orientation to the site and to other structures;
topography; natural features such as wooded areas, drainage courses,
soil conditions and topographic relief; and building design features
such as varying unit widths, staggering unit setbacks providing
different exterior materials, changing roof lines and roof designs,
altering building heights and changing types of windows, shutters,
doors, porches, colors and vertical or horizontal orientation of the
facades, singly or in combination.
b. The configuration of structures may be an alignment that meets the
yard requirements and does not exceed the following overall or
component building lengths in order to assure safe fire service access
between buildings and to provide convenient pedestrian/vehicular
circulation patterns; 200 feet along one plane; 340 feet on any angle;
and 500 feet along the center line. Townhouse structures shall have not
less than three nor more than five units in one townhouse building
group along one plane, and not more than 12 units attached to create
one overall structure. Staggered unit setbacks shall differ by at least
four feet.
c. No dwelling unit shall have a bedroom area level lower than the
finished grade along the front of the structure except that on sidehill
locations where difference in elevation is at least eight feet from the
front of the building to its rear, the number of stories above ground on
the uphill side shall not exceed 2.5 stories with a third story permitted
above ground on the downhill side. The height of the building measured
from the foundation on the downhill side shall not exceed 40 feet.
d. All required open space and recreation areas shall be improved for the
purposes intended as shown on the plan.
e. The location of recreational facilities shall consider the proximity of
structures, type of recreational facility, noise level and evening
§ 30-105 HOLMDEL § 30-106
1:726
§ 30-107. YARDS. [1976 Code § 78-70; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
90-30]
§ 30-108. WATER SUPPLY. [1976 Code § 78-71; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 90-30]
Where water is accessible from a servicing utility, the developer shall
arrange for a connection to the system to serve each use.
§ 30-109. GARAGES. [1976 Code § 78-71.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
24-82; Ord. No. 84-7]
In the R-40A District, each single-family dwelling to be erected shall have an
attached or detached garage for at least two vehicles, and such garage shall
have an interior floor area of at least 400 square feet within the foundation
walls. No carports shall be permitted. An adequate area shall be provided so
that vehicles may be turned around in the driveway and exit in the forward
direction.
§ 30-110. MODIFICATION OF IMPROVEMENTS. [1976 Code
§ 78-71.2; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 12-83]
At any time, whether as a result of his inspection of a work or otherwise,
the Township Engineer may recommend to the Board that the applicant be
required to modify the design and extent of the improvements required.
The Board may require such modifications; provided, however, that it must
first afford the applicant an opportunity for a public hearing. The Board
may grant the applicant permission to effect such modification upon his
own application. Whenever a modification is approved, the appropriate
subdivision map or plat must be revised to reflect such modification. The
illumination which may create nuisances for residents and pedestrian
and bicycle traffic across major interior roads or driveways. The
periphery of any recreation area shall be no closer to a residential
structure than the minimum yard for that structure.
f. Density. The permitted densities shall not be inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter.
a. No open space providing front, side or rear yard space for one building
shall be considered as providing the yard provisions of another. A lot
with frontage on two or more streets, including corner lots, shall have
building setback from each street not less than the required front yard.
b. Lot lines of corner lots that are coexistent with side lines of abutting
lots shall be considered side lines.
c. Lot lines of corner lots that are coexistent with rear lines of adjoining
lots shall be considered rear lines.
d. Lot lines of corner lots that are coexistent with lot lines of adjoining
corner lots shall be considered side lines.
§ 30-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-110
1:727
Township Engineer or Construction Code Official may issue a stop-work
order pending the completion of the approval process for the applicant's
modifications.
§ 30-111. NONCOMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS. [1976 Code
§ 78-71.3; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 12-83]
Failure to comply with any of the conditions of subdivision or site plan
approval subsequent to the receipt of a building permit or certificate of
occupancy shall be construed to be a violation of this chapter and shall
be grounds for the revocation of any building permit or certificate of
occupancy. A written notice of revocation from the Construction Official
sent by certified mail requiring compliance with the conditions of approval
within a period of time not less than five days shall effectively revoke
any building permit or certificate of occupancy if compliance is not
accomplished within the time limit set.
§ 30-112. TRAILS. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XIII]
§ 30-113. through §30-115. (RESERVED)
a. Trails are intended to provide access to and within greenway corridors
and, where shown in the Master Plan, to provide connections between
sections of neighborhoods. Trails should be designed and constructed
to have a minimal impact on their surroundings.
b. All trails shall use natural contours and shall minimize the cutting of
trees.
c. Trails within stream corridors and steep slope areas shall be unpaved
and have a natural tread except for wetland and stream crossings.
Trails outside stream corridors and steep slope areas may be paved at
the discretion of the Planning Board.
d. Signs shall be posted at trail entrances indicating the allowed uses and
whether the trail is accessible to persons with disabilities.
e. The minimum width of clearing shall be four feet at shoulder height.
The maximum width of clearing shall be eight feet.
f. The minimum width of the tread shall be three feet.
g. Shoulders shall not be provided.
h. The maximum longitudinal grade shall be 10% except where
topographical conditions necessitate a steeper grade and there is no
feasible alternative.
i. Wetland and stream crossings should be avoided whenever possible.
When it is not possible to avoid a crossing, streams, wetlands and wet
areas shall be crossed by boardwalks for short spans and bridges for
longer spans. Culverts and pipes should be avoided.
§ 30-110 HOLMDEL § 30-116
1:728
§ 30-116. RESOURCE MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.
§ 30-116.1. Regulations. [1976 Code § 78-71.4; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 94-22]
The following resource management regulations shall govern all
applications for major subdivision and major site plan approval. The
municipal agency may require easements, pursuant to Section 30-58 in
furtherance of the purposes of these resource management regulations.
§ 30-116.2. Agriculture. [1976 Code § 78-71.4; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 94-22]
§ 30-116.3. Air Quality. [1976 Code § 78-71.4; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 94-22]
a. The purpose of this subsection is to preserve and protect contiguous
areas of agricultural/horticultural lands and allow for the continuation
of farming in these areas, while minimizing conflicts between
residential and agricultural uses.
b. The use of land for agricultural activities and fish and wildlife
management activities, including the preparation of land and the
planting, nurturing and harvesting of crops, should reflect
recommended management practices established for the particular
agricultural activity by the New Jersey Department of Agriculture, the
U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, and the New
Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station at Rutgers University. Such
practices include recommended management practices as found in, but
not limited to, the following publications, as may be amended from time
to time:
1. Erosion and runoff: Soil Conservation Service Technical Guide;
2. Animal waste: Soil Conservation Service Animal Waste
Management Field Manual; and
3. Fertilizers and pesticides: Rutgers University, Cook College,
Cooperative Extension Service Annual Recommendations.
c. All agricultural operations utilizing recommended management
practices shall be exempt from any ordinance or regulation which
inhibits efficient crop production, except those ordinances and
regulations which are necessary for the maintenance of public health.
a. The purpose of this subsection is to ensure that the quality of air is
protected and enhanced in recognition of its importance to the public
health, safety and general welfare.
b. All applications for nonresidential development shall include a
certification from a licensed professional engineer stating that such
§ 30-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-116.3
1:729
§ 30-116.4. Groundwater Protection and Drainage. [1976 Code
§ 78-71.4; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 94-22]
uses comply with the relevant air quality standards in N.J.A.C. 7:27 et
seq. (Air Pollution Control Regulations).
1. Prior to preliminary approval of any subdivision of 10 lots or more,
or any residential site plan of 10 units or more, the applicant shall
prepare an analysis of the potential for energy savings related to
building design and orientation including opportunities to enhance
solar access, and strategies to limit microclimate impacts using
landscape plantings to provide shade and wind protection. The
proposed plat or plan shall specify all energy saving design
features utilized therein.
2. Prior to approval of any site plan for development of an office use
consisting of 20,000 square feet of floor area or more or employing
100 persons or more, the applicant shall demonstrate compliance
with the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1991 and the New Jersey
Traffic Congestion and Air Pollution Control Act.
3. Prior to preliminary approval of any site plan for development of
any nonresidential use consisting of 20,000 square feet of floor
area or more, the applicant shall provide an analysis of options to
reduce energy costs related to interior and exterior climate
controls, which may include solar energy. The applicant shall
incorporate such energy saving measures as can be cost effectively
integrated into the design of buildings and site layout features.
4. A plan for bikeways, sidewalks, and/or walkways for all major
subdivisions and office uses shall be provided to allow safe
pedestrian access to adjacent neighborhoods, adjoining roads or
commercial centers. The plan shall show how the development will
comply with national and/or regional Clean Air plans, and the plan
shall be consistent with the Township's Bikeway Plan.
a. The purpose of this subsection is to preserve and protect the quality of
groundwater in Holmdel.
b. Major subdivisions and major site plans proposed for development in
aquifer recharge areas shall be designed to maintain the quality of
groundwater resources and to maintain or decrease the ratio of runoff
to infiltration.
c. Natural drainage patterns shall be maintained wherever possible, and
surface water run-off shall be directed in such a manner as to travel
over stabilized, vegetated areas as opposed to potentially contaminated
surfaces such as parking lots. The intent of the latter provision is to
reduce the level of pollutants in stormwater, and to allow for vegetative
and soils filtration of stormwater contaminants.
§ 30-116.3 HOLMDEL § 30-116.5
1:730
§ 30-116.5. Scenic Resources. [1976 Code § 78-71.4; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 94-22]
§ 30-116.6. Steep Slopes. [1976 Code § 78-71.4; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 94-22; Ord. No. 2002-20 § III; Ord. No. 2003-24 § I]
a. The purpose of this subsection is to direct the location of development
so that it will enhance the visual character of the scenic resources in
Holmdel.
b. Development should be sited behind visual barriers, such as trees,
ridge lines, and other topographic features.
c. On hillsides, development may be located at any point in the foreground
to midground of the hill, and the height and location of development
shall protect unobstructed views of, and from, the ridges.
d. Development shall be located and designed to preserve views of
cultural/historic landmarks and of unique geographic and topographic
features, including but not limited to the Unique Natural Areas
identified in the Township's 1990 Natural Resources Inventory.
a. Scope. These regulations apply to the disturbance of soil and the
construction of structures, roads, and parking lots in areas of steep
slopes.
b. Objective. The purpose of this subsection is to minimize cutting and
grading of steep slope areas as well as to minimize the disturbance of
soil and removal of vegetative cover. Adherence to these regulations
will assist in preventing erosion, siltation of streams, and other
maintenance and safety problems.
c. Definition and Identification. A steep slope is defined as a slope that is
greater than or equal to 15%. Slopes shall be identified from a
topographic survey of a site based on two-foot contour intervals.
d. Submission Requirements.
1. The applicant shall prepare a steep slope analysis depicting on a
plot plan slope classes of under 8.00%, 8.00% to 14.99%, 15% to
24.99% and greater than 25%, as well as calculations of the area in
square feet within each slope class.
2. A lot grading plan shall be provided showing the proposed
driveway plans and profiles, the location of all structures, and any
site grading necessary.
3. If any disturbance is planned to a steep slope area or if a steep
slope has been disturbed by prior land use such as agriculture, a
revegetation plan shall be provided.
§ 30-116.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-116.6
1:731
e. Exception to Submission Requirements. When the total disturbed area
on slopes of 15% or more is less than 500 square feet, subparagraphs 2
and 3 of paragraph d above do not apply,
f. Performance Requirements.
1. On the plot plan area where slopes are between 15% and 24.99%,
no more than 20% of this area or 5,000 square feet, whichever is
smaller, shall be developed and/or regraded or stripped of
vegetation.
2. On areas with slopes greater than 25%, no development, regrading,
or stripping of vegetation shall be allowed.
3. On areas where slopes greater than 8% are to be disturbed,
regraded or stripped of vegetation, hay bales and silt fences shall
be installed prior to the onset of the disturbance of the slope. This
requirement is in addition to any requirements of the Monmouth
County Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Standards.
4. Regrading to create slopes greater than 25% is prohibited.
5. Retaining walls of up to four feet in height are allowed. However, if
there are multiple retaining walls, then the slope as measured from
the top of a retaining wall to the top of an adjacent retaining wall
shall not exceed 25%.
6. An approved application for development on a property which
contains slopes greater than 25% shall provide a conservation
easement for the continued protection of the slopes greater than
25%. The conservation easement shall be perpetual, shall name the
Township of Holmdel as beneficiary, shall prohibit the erection of
any structures including fences and walls, shall be in conformance
with Section 30-58 of these Development Regulations, and shall be
confirmed by deed recorded with the County Clerk.
g. Exceptions to Performance Requirements.
1. Subparagraphs 2 and 3 of paragraph f above do not apply if the
total disturbed sloped area is under 500 square feet.
2. Subparagraph 2 of paragraph f above does not apply if the
disturbance is needed for driveways or utility and drainage
systems, and no better option for their location is available, in the
opinion of the reviewing authority and based on, among other
considerations, the advice of the Board or Township Engineer.
3. Subparagraph 2 of paragraph f above does not apply if the
disturbance is due to a drainage system, and in the opinion of the
reviewing authority and based on, among other considerations, the
advice of the Board or Township Engineer, such system is beneficial
in stabilizing the slope.
§ 30-116.6 HOLMDEL § 30-116.6
1:732
§ 30-116.7. Stream Corridors. [1976 Code § 78-71.4; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 94-22; Ord. No. 2002-20 § III; Ord. No. 2003-24 § I]
4. Subparagraph 4 of paragraph f above does not apply to landscape
berms or detention basins.
a. Scope. These regulations apply to stream corridors as defined below.
b. Objective. The purpose of this subsection is:
1. To protect property from flooding.
2. To reduce development impacts on water quality.
3. To protect natural drainage features.
4. To protect others' rights within the same watershed from adverse
effects of improper stream corridor development, and
5. To provide for possible recreation and wildlife migration corridors.
c. Definitions.
1. STREAM CHANNEL – Shall mean permanent or intermittent
watercourses shown on U.S.G.S. quadrangle maps, the Monmouth
County Soil Survey, or other sources as the reviewing authority
may deem appropriate.
2. STREAM CORRIDOR – Shall mean the stream channel and all land
on either side of the stream channel which is within the 100-year
floodplain, or is a sloping area of 15% or greater that is contiguous
to the stream channel or 100-year floodplain. A slope shall be
identified from a topographic survey of a site based on two-foot
contour intervals.
3. STREAM CORRIDOR BUFFER – Shall mean an area contiguous
with the stream corridor where no permanent structure is allowed.
4. STREAM CORRIDOR BUFFER AVERAGING – Shall mean the
replacing of a curved corridor buffer boundary by a straight line or
sequence of joined straight lines so that the total corridor buffer
area remains the same.
d. Submission Requirements. The following information shall be provided
for any development on property containing a stream corridor or buffer,
or any property directly bordering on a stream corridor or buffer:
1. A plan delineating the stream corridors and buffers.
2. Detailed hydrologic engineering studies indicating the effects on
drainage, streams, and adjacent properties, as well as the property
in question, which should include the necessary data to determine
whether the boundaries of the stream corridor and buffer would be
affected if the application were granted.
§ 30-116.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-116.7
1:733
§ 30-116.8. Surface Water. [1976 Code § 78-71.4; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 94-22; Ord. No. 2002-20 § III; Ord. No. 2003-24 § I]
3. A plan indicating the disposition of any fill materials proposed to be
deposited by the grading or regrading of land.
4. A plan demonstrating the manner in which suitable techniques,
including erosion and soil stabilization measures, sediment traps
and nutrient control by vegetation filters or other mechanisms will
be incorporated to protect the stream.
5. If any disturbance is planned to a stream corridor or stream
corridor buffer area, or if such has been disturbed by prior land use
such as agriculture, a revegetation plan shall be provided.
e. Performance Requirements.
1. Stream corridors shall have a buffer of 100 feet on each side.
However, the Hop Brook/Ramanessin Brook and its tributaries shall
have a buffer of 150 feet on each side.
2. No septic system shall be located within any stream corridor or
stream corridor buffer.
3. For any application where a stream corridor buffer has been
disturbed by prior land use such as agriculture, revegetation of the
disturbed area is required utilizing native tree and plant species.
The submitted plan shall be approved by the reviewing authority
based on, among other considerations, the advice of the Board or
Township Engineer and/or the Holmdel Shade Tree Committee.
4. An approved application for development on a property that
contains a stream corridor or buffer or portion thereof shall provide
a conservation easement for the continued protection of the stream
corridor or buffer. The conservation easements shall be perpetual,
shall name the Township of Holmdel as beneficiary, shall prohibit
the erection of any structures including fences and walls, shall be
in conformance with Section 30-58 of these Development
Regulations, arid shall be confirmed by deed recorded with the
County Clerk.
5. Stream corridor buffer averaging is allowed as long as the width at
all points of the averaged buffer is at least 70% of the width of the
stream corridor buffer before averaging.
a. The purpose of this subsection is to preserve and protect the quality of
all surface waters which are found within or adjacent to the Township.
b. Applicants for major subdivision or major site plan approval shall
include efforts to minimize non-point source pollution through the use
of such techniques as:
Buffer strips.
§ 30-116.7 HOLMDEL § 30-116.8
1:734
§ 30-116.9. Threatened and Endangered Plants and Animals. [1976
Code § 78-71.4; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 94-22]
Overland stormwater flow.
Regional stormwater management.
Vegetated swales.
Wetland or marsh creation.
Infiltration practices.
Porous pavements.
Water quality inlets.
c. Definition; Performance requirements.
1. Definition.
SURFACE WATER BODY — Shall mean a permanent or intermittent
water body shown on U.S.G.S. quadrangle maps, the Monmouth
County Soil Survey, or other sources as the reviewing authority
may deem appropriate.
2. Performance Requirements.
(a) No construction of any type including fences and walls shall be
permitted within 50 feet of any lake, pond, or other permanent
surface water body of over 100 square feet, except for
bikeways, trails, footbridges, gazebos, docks, piers, and boat
launches. Such construction may not intrude on more than
10% of the perimeter of the water's edge on the site of the
application.
(b) An approved application for development on a property that
contains any lake, pond or other permanent surface water body
of over 100 square feet or portion thereof shall provide a
conservation easement for the continued protection of the
water body and the fifty-foot construction free buffer. The
permitted footbridges, gazebos, docks, piers, and boat
launches may be excluded from the conservation easement.
The conservation easements shall be perpetual, shall name the
Township of Holmdel as beneficiary, shall prohibit the erection
of any Structures including fences and walls, shall be in
conformance with Section 30-58 of these Development
Regulations, and shall be confirmed by deed recorded with the
County Clerk.
a. The purpose of this subsection is to preserve, protect, and enhance the
diversity of plant and animal communities and their habitats,
recognizing the regional and national significance of these resources.
§ 30-116.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-116.9
1:735
§ 30-116.10. Tree and Woodland Removal. [1976 Code § 78-71.4;
Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 94-22; Ord. No. 2005-39 § 6; Ord. No.
2006-19 § X]
b. Applicants for major subdivision or major site plan approval shall
document the occurrence of threatened and endangered species, and
other species uncommon to the Coastal Plain, on the property to be
developed and shall identify critical habitat areas needed to provide for
the survival of any local populations of these species. No development
shall be permitted, initiated, or conducted unless it is designed to avoid
irreversible adverse impacts on habitats that are critical to the survival
of local populations of threatened or endangered plants and animals.
No construction, grading or vegetation removal shall take place in
critical habitat areas during breeding or mating of threatened and
endangered species, and protection for the critical habitat area
appropriate to the species shall be provided.
c. Threatened and endangered plants and animals shall be defined as
those which:
1. Appear on the national list developed by the Department of the
Interior; or
2. Appear on the State list developed by the N.J. Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy; or
3. Are designated in N.J.S.A. 23:2A-4 (The Endangered and Nongame
Species Conservation Act, State list of endangered species).
a. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to promote the intent of the
Holmdel Township Master Plan and the purposes of the Municipal Land
Use Law (set forth at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2) by protecting critical
environmental resources, including air quality, water quality, soil cover,
animal and plant habitat and viewsheds, that are negatively affected by
the removal of woodlands. Retention of woodlands helps to control the
velocity and amount of stormwater runoff, thereby reducing flooding;
filters sediments and pollutants before they reach streams; promotes
groundwater recharge; stabilizes the soil and reduces soil erosion;
improves air quality by filtering pollutants from the air; preserves
viewsheds; offers a stable habitat for associated plant species and for
animal wildlife; and provides shade and windbreaks that help moderate
the effects of climate conditions. Protection of woodlands along a
stream corridor is essential to the maintenance of stream biota, and
protection of woodlands on steep slopes is essential to soil stabilization.
The retention of woodlands is essential to the scenic equality of a
community and helps to preserve the diversity of native plant life and
animal species. The protection of woodlands is consistent with New
Jersey's Stormwater Management Rules and Best Management
Practices. The protection of woodlands also has an intrinsic value. Once
removed or mismanaged, the restoration or replacement of woodlands
can be a lengthy, delicate, complex and expensive process. The time,
§ 30-116.9 HOLMDEL § 30-116.10
1:736
difficulties and costs inherent in this process render existing woodlands
tantamount to a nonrenewable resource in a community.
b. Applicability.
1. The regulations set forth herein shall apply to any tract of land that
is the subject of an application for site plan and/or subdivision
approval, except that the portions of the R-4H and R-4R Districts
designated as building locations, individual building lots, street
rights-of-way, preservation areas and reservation areas in the
Master Plan shall be exempt from the requirements of paragraphs
d1, d4, d5 and d6 of this section. In lieu of these requirements, the
following standards shall apply:
(a) No specimen trees, significant trees, or desirable healthy
individual trees shall be removed from the preservation areas
and reservation areas, nor shall priority woodlands as
described in paragraph d below be cleared from such areas,
unless required to facilitate stormwater management, farming,
parks, trails, or recreation facilities, or for other purposes
permitted by this chapter in preservation and reservation
areas. The approving authority may require woodlands
mitigation in accordance with paragraph e below for trees that
are removed from reservation and preservation areas.
(b) The areas identified as building locations are intended for the
use and enjoyment of residents. Applicants shall strive to
maintain significant trees, specimen trees and desirable
healthy individual trees within the areas identified as building
locations. For trees removed from areas identified as building
locations, the approving authority may require that woodlands
mitigation in accordance with paragraph e below be provided
to replace the portion of the disturbed forested area that lies
outside the required setback lines on the building lot from
which trees are being removed.
2. It is strongly recommended that each prospective applicant
schedule a preapplication meeting with the administrative officer
prior to submitting a formal application for development to the
administrative officer for the purpose of evaluating the impact of
this subsection on the plans for development.
c. Woodland Retention and Preservation Plan.
1. A woodland retention and preservation plan shall be submitted for
approval. The plan shall include a report articulating how the
requirements of paragraph d of this subsection will be met by the
proposed woodland retention and preservation plan; how the
proposed development will affect the existing natural resources on
the tract; the quantity of existing woodlands, and of individual trees
not located within a designated forest stand, that will be removed
and that will be retained; and what specific techniques will be used
§ 30-116.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-116.10
1:737
to protect woodlands and individual trees during the construction
process.
2. The woodland retention and preservation plan shall be prepared
using the information requested in Section 30-59 and shall be
certified by a New Jersey Approved Forester, A New Jersey
Certified Landscape Architect or a New Jersey Certified Tree
Expert.
3. The woodland retention and preservation plan shall include all of
the information provided on the natural resource inventory map as
well as:
(a) Proposed topography as shown on the proposed grading plan;
(b) Surveyed locations of the following:
(1) All individual trees six inches DBH or larger that are not
located in a delineated forest stand but are nevertheless
proposed to be retained and are located within the
proposed areas of disturbance; and
(2) If a forest stand or portion thereof is proposed to be
retained, all individual trees six inches DBH or greater
located within the first 25 feet of such area, measured
toward the interior of the woodland from its proposed
perimeter.
(c) Cultural features, historic sites, and critical viewsheds as
identified and/or mapped in the Township Master Plan;
(d) Existing man-made structures to be removed and to remain;
(e) All proposed development including buildings, roads,
driveways, utilities and other improvements;
(f) A table listing the entire tract area in square feet; the square
footage of existing and proposed woodlands located within the
entire tract, classified according to the priority categories
listed in paragraph d1 of this subsection; and the percentage of
the net tract area covered by existing and proposed woodlands,
classified according to the priority categories listed in
paragraph d1 of this subsection;
(g) A clear, graphic indication of the woodland preservation areas
on the site;
(h) A clear, graphic indication of the proposed limit of disturbance
line, Protected Root Zone fencing and other proposed tree
protection measures;
(i) Locations of proposed soil stockpile areas; and
§ 30-116.10 HOLMDEL § 30-116.10
1:738
(j) A clear written and graphic indication of all proposed methods
to be employed in protecting existing trees that are proposed
to be retained but lie within the limits of disturbance during
construction;
(k) Existing preservation/conservation easements on the tract.
d. Woodland Retention Requirements.
1. The goal of this subsection is to retain rather than to replace
existing woodlands. To that end, development shall be designed to
maximize the area of existing woodlands to be retained. However, it
is not the intent of this subsection to reduce the number of lots or
the amount of development permitted. If woodlands are to be
disturbed or removed, the applicant shall design the development
in such a way as to avoid or minimize removal of priority
woodlands, which shall consist of woodlands in any of the following
priority categories:
(a) Any woodlands prioritized in the Holmdel Township Master
Plan;
(b) Any woodlands within required stream corridor buffers,
wetlands, wetland transition areas or floodplains;
(c) Woodlands on slopes of 15% or more or woodlands located in
highly erodible soils on slopes of less than 15% with the
steepest slopes having the highest priority;
(d) Woodlands associated with a critical groundwater recharge
area, defined as having a recharge rate greater than or equal
to the median recharge rate for the municipality as a whole;
(e) Woodlands associated with critical viewsheds identified in the
Holmdel Township Master Plan;
(f) Woodlands identified in the New Jersey Landscape Project as
either Forests or Forested Wetlands that create a habit having
a ranking of 3, 4 or 5 for rare, threatened or endangered
species;
(g) Woodlands that are connected to a larger woodlands corridor
extending beyond the tract boundaries; and
(h) Woodlands and hedgerows that provide visual screening, are
associated with an historic site, or line a rural roadway.
Not more than 10% of priority woodlands existing on the site prior
to its development shall be removed or otherwise disturbed for
development. Any removal of priority woodlands shall require
mitigation, irrespective of the exemptions set forth in paragraphs d4
and 5 herein.
§ 30-116.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-116.10
1:739
2. All woodland areas that are in a required buffer area or setback
area and are designated for retention shall be protected by a
Landscape or Conservation Easement. Requirements for the
documenting and delineating of easements are given in subsections
30-58d, 30-58f and 30-58h.
3. To the extent that the use of the clustering or lot averaging
techniques permitted in the applicable zoning district will
maximize the retention of woodlands in the development of the
tract, such techniques shall be used.
4. Subject to the provisions of paragraph d1, above, if the application
is for a subdivision, a portion of the woodlands existing on the tract
prior to development may be permitted to be removed for
development as follows:
(a) Up to 10% of the woodlands based on the area covered by the
tree canopy (dripline) existing on the tract prior to
development may be removed for the construction of necessary
public and private streets, public utilities and common or
public stormwater management facilities; and
(b) Reasonable and necessary removal of woodlands to provide for
the necessary footprint area on each residential lot within the
subdivision shall also be permitted.
(c) All improvements on new residential lots shall be located so as
to retain any significant or specimen tree or any other
desirable healthy individual tree as identified by the approving
authority. The approving authority may consult with the
Holmdel Shade Tree Committee and/or the Construction Office
and/or the Environmental Officer in making this identification.
Improvements must also be located and designed to minimize
forest removal and fragmentation.
(d) The above criteria for permitted removal of woodlands on new
residential lots shall not result in the removal of woodlands on
any lot in excess of the following:
Acreage of Lot(1)
Maximum Area of Woodlands
Removed(2)
1 20,000 square feet
2 30,000 square feet
3 40,000 square feet
4 50,000 square feet
5 acres or more 60,000 square feet
§ 30-116.10 HOLMDEL § 30-116.10
1:740
Notes:
(1) For lots with a lot area less than or between these size
ranges, interpolation shall be used.
(2) Or an area equal to twice the impervious surface
coverage permitted in the zone, whichever is less.
5. Subject to the provisions of paragraph d1 above, if the application
is for site plan approval, up to 20% of the woodlands existing on the
lot prior to development may be removed for development,
provided, however, that all improvements shall be located so as to
retain any significant or specimen tree or any other desirable
healthy individual tree as identified by the approving authority. The
approving authority may consult with the Holmdel Shade Tree
Committee and/or the Construction Office and/or the
Environmental Officer in making this identification.
For developments involving both site plan and subdivision
approval, the requirements of paragraph d4 shall apply to the
development of the tract as a whole and to the development of any
new residential lots within the development, and the requirements
of this paragraph d5 shall apply only to the development of any
nonresidential lots within the development.
6. If the approval of the application and of any permits issued
pursuant to such approval will result in the removal of more
woodlands than the limits set forth in paragraphs d4 and 5 above,
or will result in the removal of any priority woodlands, identified in
paragraph d1 above, mitigation shall be required on an acre for
acre basis to the extent of such excess removal of priority
woodlands. Mitigation shall be undertaken in accordance with
paragraph f of this subsection. Prior to approving a plan for
mitigation, the approving authority shall first determine that the
proposed design cannot reasonably be modified to reduce
woodlands removal or to locate improvements outside of priority
woodlands.
7. The following procedures and requirements for the protection of
the woodlands and individual trees to be retained shall be adhered
to in the construction phase of the development:
(a) During construction, no permanent or temporary material,
including soil, shall be placed or deposited within an area
extending five feet from the outer perimeter of the dripline or
within the critical root zone, whichever is greater, of any tree
to be retained or of the trees at the perimeter of any forest
stand to be retained. Such area shall be protected as a
Protected Root Zone (PRZ) by orange-blazed fencing or snow
fencing placed outside of such area during construction, and
the fencing shall be inspected and approved by the
Construction Office prior to the start of any site disturbance.
§ 30-116.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-116.10
1:741
See also Section 30-58A for requirements on tree protection
and Section 30-58g for requirements on the delineation of
conservation easements during construction.
(b) Where necessary, pursuant to an approved grading plan, to fill
or remove soil within an area that encompasses either the
critical root zone or the area five feet from the outer perimeter
of the dripline, whichever is greater, of any individual tree to
be retained in the area of disturbance or of the trees within the
perimeter of any forest stand to be retained, the existing grade
around each such tree shall be maintained to the extent of the
critical root zone or the area five feet from the outer perimeter
of the dripline, whichever is greater, by a tree well and
extension tiles (in the case of fill) or by a retaining wall (in the
case of a cut).
(c) No chemicals shall be disposed of and no concrete trucks shall
be rinsed within the critical root zone of any tree or of the trees
at the perimeter of any forest stand to be retained.
(d) During construction, individual trees to be retained and trees
located at the perimeter of a forest stand to be retained shall
be maintained in accordance with a maintenance schedule and
plan under the direction of the Construction Office.
(e) If equipment must temporarily invade the PRZ of any
individual tree to be retained or of any tree(s) located at the
perimeter of a forest stand to be retained, the Construction
Office shall approve and inspect the installation of required
root protection measures within the path of such equipment
(e.g., the installation of a six-inch deep layer of wood chips),
shall inspect the invasion of the PRZ and shall thereafter
inspect the removal of all temporary protective measures and
the replacement of the protective fencing.
(f) If the approved calls for the installation of any pavement,
utilities, or other improvements within the critical root zone or
the area five feet from the outer perimeter of the dripline,
whichever is greater, of any individual tree to be retained or of
any tree(s) located at the perimeter of any forest stand to be
retained, special techniques for such installation shall be
employed to minimize the impact on the protected tree(s), and
such installation shall be directed, inspected and monitored by
the Construction Office.
(g) In the event any of the foregoing procedures and requirements
for construction are violated, the Construction Office or the
Township Administrator shall issue a stop work order until the
violation is remedied.
e. Woodlands Mitigation.
§ 30-116.10 HOLMDEL § 30-116.10
1:742
1. If mitigation is required, a woodlands mitigation plan shall be
presented which shall consist of one or more of the following
alternative approaches (in descending order of desirability):
(a) Mitigation planting on-site.
(b) Mitigation planting off-site on public land (including County or
State land) or on other land designated in or meeting the
requirements identified in the Holmdel Township Master Plan
that is, to the extent practicable, located within the same
subwatershed as the woodlands being removed.
(c) Mitigation planting off-site on privately-owned land to be
permanently deed-restricted for that purpose that is, to the
extent practicable, located within the same subwatershed as
the woodlands being removed.
2. Requirements for mitigation planting on and off-site:
(a) Landscaping in accordance with an approved landscaping plan
may be credited as mitigation if the landscaped area has a
width of 35 feet or more in all directions and equals or exceeds
2,500 square feet in area and if the quantity of plantings per
each 2,500 square foot area is at least seven trees and 20
shrubs.
(b) A woodlands mitigation planting plan that is not part of the
approved landscaping plan shall be reviewed and approved by
the approving authority based on the recommendations of the
Construction Office and/or the Shade Tree Committee. All of
the following shall ordinarily be planted on each acre of
woodlands mitigation area:
(1) Thirty-five trees per acre at a two-inch caliper size; and
(2) Seventy trees per acre at a one-inch caliper size; and
(3) One hundred trees per are installed as whips (five feet to
six feet in height); and
(4) Forty woody shrubs per care, to be located at the edges of
the planting area; and
(5) A native grass mix shall be seeded over the entire planting
area.
A diversity of native species shall be planted in each of the above
categories. The species selection shall be based on the information
collected in the natural resource inventory required in Section
30-59 and shall be subject to the approval of the Construction
Office, who shall also inspect and approve all planting materials
upon delivery to the site and prior to and following their
installation.
§ 30-116.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-116.10
1:743
(c) The applicant's landscape architect or New Jersey Certified
Tree Expert or New Jersey Approved Forester shall prepare the
cost estimate for the woodlands mitigation planting plan. Such
estimate shall be separate and apart from the estimate
pertaining to the approved landscaping plan. The cost of the
woodlands mitigation planting plan shall include all materials,
installation costs and continuing costs associated with the
implementation of the maintenance plan. The cost estimate for
the woodlands mitigation planting plan shall be reviewed and
approved by the Construction Office and shall thereafter be
transmitted to the Township Committee for inclusion in the
cost estimate for the performance guarantee for the entire
project.
(d) Prior to the release of any portion of the performance
guarantee covering the woodlands mitigation planting plan,
the Construction Office shall inspect the plantings and shall
make a recommendation to the Township Engineer as to
whether the plantings have been installed in accordance with
the approved woodlands mitigation planting plan. The
applicant shall post a maintenance guarantee following the
inspection and approval or acceptance by the Township of the
installation of the plantings included in the woodlands
mitigation planting plan. The amount and timing of the
maintenance guarantee shall be in accordance with N.J.S.
40:55D-53.
(e) At least 30 days prior to the release of the maintenance
guarantee or portion thereof covering the woodlands
mitigation area, the Construction Office shall inspect the
mitigation area and notify the Township Clerk and by certified
mail the applicant and the bonding company. The maintenance
guarantee shall not be released unless the following conditions
have been met:
(1) Survival of 100% of the trees installed at two-inch caliper
size and 100% of the woody shrubs;
(2) Survival of 85% of trees installed at one-inch caliper size;
(3) Survival of 75% of trees installed as whips;
(4) All surviving plant material shall be found to be in good
health and free of diseases and pests; and
(5) There shall be no evidence of exotic and invasive plant
material.
(f) To ensure that foregoing survival rates and conditions, a
maintenance plan shall be submitted to the Construction Office
for approval prior to the grant of final approval by the
approving authority. The maintenance plan shall include, but
§ 30-116.10 HOLMDEL § 30-116.10
1:744
not by way of limitation, the following: plans and schedules
for weeding, watering and deer protection (including fencing
or tree shelters). For individual trees, the maintenance plan
may also be required to include mulching, fertilizing, and
treatments for pests and diseases. The Construction Office
shall inspect the premises periodically following the
installation of the woodlands mitigation planting to ensure that
the maintenance plan is being implemented and to recommend
additional maintenance requirements, if necessary, to ensure
the health and survival of the woodlands mitigation area.
(g) A landscape easement shall be placed on the woodlands
mitigation area. The landscape easement shall allow for
continued maintenance of the woodlands mitigation area by
the owner via the removal of hazardous or diseased trees or
tree limbs, removal of exotic and invasive plant species,
erection of protective fencing, and the installation by hand of
new plantings intended to replace dead trees or supplement
existing growth, but only with the approval of the Construction
Office.
3. Information to be provided for mitigation planting on and off-site.
(a) A table and description of soil preparation methods, species,
sizes and spacing to be utilized for the new plantings;
(b) A binding two-year maintenance and management agreement
that details how the area(s) designated for new plantings will
be maintained to ensure satisfactory establishment of the new
woodland including:
(1) Regular watering;
(2) Regular removal of invasive plant species;
(3) Protection from deer grazing; and
(4) Contact name and phone number for party responsible for
maintenance.
(c) A mitigation table identifying the percent of the tract area in
woodlands that is proposed to be cleared as a result of the
proposed development; the number of acres of existing
woodlands to be cleared; the applicable replacement
requirements; and the number of acres of mitigation plantings
proposed.
f. Fees, Violations and Penalties.
1. Fees.
(a) The fees charged for inspections undertaken and other
services provided by the Construction Office shall be
§ 30-116.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-116.10
1:745
established by the Governing Body by ordinance. Such fees
may, from time to time, be amended by ordinance.
(b) All charges made against escrow accounts for the services of
the Construction Office in connection with the enforcement of
this subsection shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.2.
2. Violations and Penalties.
(a) Any violation of the provisions of this subsection shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment
or community service not exceeding 90 days, or both, for each
separate offense.
(b) Each day on which a duly noticed violation is continued or
remains unremedied while work is progressing shall constitute
a separate offense, punishable as set forth herein.
(c) Upon notification by the Township of Holmdel or its agent of
the existence of a violation, the violation shall be immediately
remedied. If a violation cannot be remedied immediately, the
municipality or its agent may issue a "Stop Work Order" until
the violation is remedied. If a violation causes irreversible
damage to a tree or woodland slated for retention, the
municipality or its agent shall issue a "Stop Work Order" and
the developer shall be required to submit a new preliminary
and final plan to the approving authority for its approval before
resuming work.
(d) The approving authority shall reserve the right to revoke or
withdraw any approval granted for subdivision or site plan
upon notice to the applicant and public hearing, in the event
that there is any deviation from, or alteration of, the approved
woodlands retention and preservation plan, unless prior
written approval for such deviation or authorization has been
obtained from the approving authority. Minor deviations and
field changes may be authorized solely by the Construction
Office in writing and only after consultation with the Chairman
of the applicable approving authority to determine if the
proposed minor deviations and field changes deviate from the
intent of the original approval with respect to the woodlands
retention and preservation plan. If it is determined by this
consultation that the changes proposed are not minor, the
matter must be referred to the full Board, and no changes may
be effected until such Board gives its approval.
(e) Each of the terms and conditions of any approval relating to
woodlands retention and preservation are material elements of
the development approval based upon the submission of the
application in its entirety, and the noncompliance with any
term or condition by the applicant or its successors or assigns
§ 30-116.10 HOLMDEL § 30-116.10
1:746
§ 30-116.11. Wetlands. [1976 Code § 78-71.4; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 94-22]
§ 30-116.12. (Reserved)131
shall be deemed a material default subjecting the applicant to
revocation of such approval. The request to change any single
condition, since all conditions are integrally related, shall open
the entire application to the applicable approving authority
for reconsideration, possible reapproval, and new terms and
conditions in addition to those terms and conditions contained
in the original approval.
a. An onsite wetland delineation shall be prepared by a qualified
consultant for submission on any subdivision or site plan if any of the
following conditions exist on the applicant's property:
1. Hydric or wetland soils as identified in the Monmouth County Soil
Survey.
2. Wetlands as identified on the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or
NJDEPE Wetland Maps.
3. Onsite vegetation or soil conditions which indicate the probable
presence of wetlands.
b. All wetlands and transition areas required pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7A-1 et
seq. (New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act Rules) shall be
clearly shown on all plats or site plans submitted for approval.
c. Wetland protection standards are required to provide protection of
these highly valuable resources. The following standards should be
employed:
1. A snow fence shall be installed outside of the wetland transition
line prior to the commencement of onsite construction so as to
prevent encroachment into these regulated areas.
2. All silt fence and/or hay bales shall be installed adjacent to the
State mandated wetland transition line (or buffer) so as to prevent
the transport of silt into the wetland areas.
3. All final plats or final site plans shall include the wetland line(s)
identification number as assigned by NJDEPE, pursuant to the
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act.
4. The applicant shall avoid all unnecessary encroachment into Stateregulated
wetland areas. Preservation of the existing onsite
vegetation adjacent to the wetland areas is highly recommended.
131. Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-116.12, Septic Systems, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance No. 95-22, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
No. 2004-35.
§ 30-116.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-116.13
1:747
§ 30-116.13. Child Care Centers. [Ord. No. 95-22 § IV; Ord. No.
2005-32 § XIV; Ord. No. 2006-19 § X]
Child care centers shall be a permitted principal or accessory use in all
nonresidential zoning districts in Holmdel Township. The following
standards shall apply to this use when proposed in the M, OL-1, OL-2, B-1,
B-2, CI, LIH, RO-3, RL-40 and O-30 Districts.
a. All portions of any child care center to be used by children shall be
located on the principal entrance floor and any other level which is not
more than 1/2 story above or below grade at the location from which
egress is provided to the street.
b. A minimum of 30 square feet of outdoor space per child over 10 months
shall be provided adjacent to the center and shall be adequately fenced
or otherwise protected from hazards, traffic, and driveways. The per
child outdoor area requirement shall be calculated utilizing the licensed
capacity authorized.
c. Child care centers shall provide one parking space per employee plus
one additional parking space every eight children. Adequate space shall
be provided for the loading and unloading of children which shall take
place on site and not in a public right-of-way.
d. The internal pedestrian circulation pattern shall be adequate to assure
the safe movement of children and parents in and out of the child care
facility. Design features to be incorporated include use of sidewalks and
pedestrian cross walks to connect the parking area with the child care
facility.
e. Parking areas and pedestrian walkways shall be illuminated to provide
safe entrance and egress from the center for both pedestrian and
automobile traffic.
f. Location of access driveways, landscaping, signage and general site
plan design shall be compatible with the neighborhood in which the
center is to be located. The location of any child care center shall be
approximately situated in relation to the use or area it is intended to
serve.
g. Where a child care center is provided as an accessory use to a principal
use located on the same lot, the gross floor area devoted to the child
care center shall be excluded from calculating the parking
requirements for the zone.
h. Where a child care center is provided as a principal use the area and
yard requirements shall apply as noted in the application district
standards.
i. Adequate landscape screening may include the use of earth berms,
evergreen plantings and landscape plantings, solid fencing used
individually or in combination so as to visually separate the child care
§ 30-116.13 HOLMDEL § 30-116.13
1:748
§ 30-117. (RESERVED)132
§ 30-118. (RESERVED)133
§ 30-119. RETAIL FARM MARKETS. [Ord. No. 97-35 § II]
Retail farm markets shall receive site plan approval and shall be subject to
the following development standards:
center lot from the adjoining parcels. Each child care center shall
provide landscaped buffers adjacent to any side or rear lot line equal to
at least 10% of the lot width.
j. Any child care center shall comply with all State standards and any
local approval shall be conditioned upon receipt of a State license.
k. All other applicable requirements of this chapter shall apply, except
where the Planning Board determines that such requirements are not
appropriate for child care centers.
a. In those zones in which retail farm markets are permitted accessory
uses, the farm on which the retail farm market is located shall have a
minimum area of five acres excluding the area on which the retail farm
market is situated. In those zones where a retail farm market is
permitted as of right, it shall comply with the minimum lot area of the
zone in which it is located.
b. The retail farm market shall have at least 300 feet of frontage on a State
or County road.
c. The minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be 100 feet.
d. The retail farm market portion of any building shall be limited to one
story.
e. The maximum building coverage for the retail farm market shall be 1%
but in no case shall the retail farm market exceed 8,700 square feet.
f. Where the lot on which the retail farm market is located abuts
residential uses or a residential zone on the side or rear, a minimum
landscaped buffer of 50 feet shall be maintained and planted in
accordance with Section 30-54. Where the lot on which the retail farm
market is located abuts nonresidential uses or a nonresidential zone on
the side or rear, a minimum landscaped buffer of 20 feet shall be
maintained and planted in accordance with Section 30-54.
132. Editor's Note: Former Section 30-117, Visual Compatibility Requirements for the
Installation of Wireless Telecommunications Antennas, Towers and Equipment
Compounds, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 98-11
and 2001-23 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
133. Editor's Note: Former Section 30-118, Antenna Modifications, Tower Certification,
Abandonment, and Collocation, previously codified herein and containing portions of
Ordinance No. 98-11 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
§ 30-116.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-119
1:749
§ 30-120. TEMPORARY FARM STANDS. [Ord. No. 97-35 § III]
Development standards for temporary farm stands are as follows:
g. Access to the retail farm market shall be provided by at least one
driveway with a minimum width of 24 feet. If one-way driveways are
provided the minimum width may be reduced to 18 feet.
h. Driveways shall be located no closer than 75 feet to an adjoining lot
line.
i. Off-street parking shall be permitted at a rate of one parking space for
each 200 square feet of floor area devoted to the retail farm market,
and shall be located no closer to side and rear lot lines than the
minimum setbacks for the retail farm market.
j. Where the retail farm market is located in a building also being used for
other agricultural purposes, the retail farm market shall be separated
by permanent partitions (which may have doors) from the remainder of
the building. No members of the public shall be allowed into any portion
of such building not designated as the retail farm market. Signs, with a
minimum area of one square foot, shall be posted to prohibit public
access to any area not used for the retail farm market.
k. The hours of operation of the retail farm market shall be limited to the
period from dawn to dusk daily, except that seasonal sales be permitted
until 10:00 p.m. between November 15 and January 1, provided that the
on-site parking area is suitably lighted as approved by the Township
Engineer.
l. Two freestanding signs shall be permitted for each retail farm market.
A freestanding sign shall not exceed 20) square feet. Freestanding
signs shall be located no closer than 75 feet to a side lot line and 25 feet
to a street right-of-way, and shall not be located in any sight triangle. In
addition, one attached sign not exceeding 20 square feet shall be
permitted, provided that it is located upon and affixed to the retail farm
market. Two movable signs not to exceed five square feet shall be
permitted to advertise seasonal produce. Permitted signs shall also
comply with Section 30-96.
m. Any area used for the parking, loading or unloading of trucks or other
commercial vehicles or storage shall be situated at least 150 feet from
any residential lot lines.
n. Compressors or fans (including vehicle compressors or fans) used at the
retail farm market or used at associated facilities such as greenhouses
shall be situated so the physical structure (building, wall) exists
between the compressors and fans and any residence.
o. Retail display areas for nursery stock and other products not grown on
the farm shall occupy no more than 10,000 square feet.
§ 30-119 HOLMDEL § 30-120
1:750
a. The farm on which the temporary farm stand is located shall have a
minimum area of five acres.
b. At least 50% of the goods offered for sale shall be goods grown,
rendered or processed to their salable form on the property.
c. The maximum size of a temporary farm stand standing alone shall be
1,000 square feet, including all structures used for display and sale.
Any item offered for sale must be displayed only within or on the farm
stand. There shall arise a rebuttable presumption that any items
located within 30 feet of the front, sides or back of the farm stand are
being offered for sale. The foregoing presumption shall not apply to
farm machinery or equipment used in the production of the farm
product, registered and licensed motor vehicles, or growing crops not
yet harvested and still in the ground.
d. Where the display and selling area is located in a structure also being
used for other agricultural purposes, the display and selling area shall
be separated by permanent partitions (which may have doors) from the
remainder of the structure, and the display and selling area shall be
limited to 1,000 square feet. No members of the public shall be allowed
into any portion of such building not designated as the retail farm
stand. Signs, with a minimum area of one square foot, shall be posted to
prohibit public access to any area not used for display or selling.
e. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each 200 square feet
of display and selling area, with a minimum of three spaces regardless
of the farm stand's size. The spaces shall be located outside of the
public right-of-way and shall be designed and arranged so as not to
create a traffic hazard or obstruction to the traveling public. The farm
stand shall be accessed by a driveway at least 20 feet wide if for twoway
traffic, or 14 feet for one-way traffic, and the driveway and parking
area shall be at least 50 feet from side and rear property lines.
f. No more than two free standing signs not to exceed 10 square feet, two
movable signs not to exceed four square feet to advertise seasonal
offerings, and one attached sign not to exceed 16 square feet, shall be
permitted on the premises, as regulated in subsection 30-96.2d.
g. Temporary farm stands shall operate for no more than 10 months per
year.
h. The only permitted exterior lighting shall be for security purposes.
i. The business shall be operated by the person farming the property.
j. The hours of operation of the temporary farm stand shall be limited to
the period from dawn to dusk.
§ 30-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-120
1:751

ARTICLE V
Zoning
§ 30-121. DIVISION INTO DISTRICTS. [1976 Code § 78-72; Ord. No.
3-82]
The Township is divided into zoning districts as enumerated below and as
shown on the Zoning Map.
§ 30-122. ZONING MAP.
§ 30-122.1. Zoning Map Adopted. [1976 Code § 78-73; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 85-18; Ord. No. 86-28; Ord. No. 8-32;
Ord. No. 90-30; Ord. No. 94-5; Ord. No. 94-16; Ord. No. 94-25; Ord.
No. 95-22 § V; Ord. No. 95-24 § II; Ord. No. 95-27; Ord. No. 96-3 § II;
Ord. No. 97-9 § I; Ord. No. 97-28 § I; Ord. No. 97-29 § I; Ord. No.
98-4 § I; Ord. No. 2000-03 § I; Ord. No. 2005-12 § II; Ord. No.
2005-32 § XV; Ord. No. 2006-18 § I; Ord. No. 2007-02 § I; Ord. No.
2010-13; Ord. No. 2013-32; Ord. No. 2015-14]
Except as set forth hereinafter to the contrary, the boundaries of zoning
districts are established on the map entitled "Official Zoning Map" dated
March 1, 2007, which accompanies and is made part hereof.
§ 30-122.2. Redevelopment Plans.
§ 30-123. INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. [1976
Code § 78-74; Ord. No. 3-82]
a. Amendments.
1. The "Official Zoning Map" is amended to reflect the Route 35
Highway Overlay Zone as depicted on Schedule A, the Route 35
Overlay District Map, found as an attachment to this chapter.
2. Chapter 30, Development Regulations, shall be amended to create
the AH-MF overlay zone, Block 52, Lots 17 and 18.134
a. Ordinance No. 2010-13.
b. Ordinance No. 2012-12. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7c, the Holmdel
Township Zoning Map is hereby amended to identify the redevelopment
area in the manner depicted in the Alcatel-Lucent Redevelopment Plan.
c. Ordinance No. 2015-13 amended the Alcatel-Lucent Redevelopment
Plan, Section 1F.
a. Zoning district lines are intended to follow lot lines and the centerlines
of streets, streams and railroads unless otherwise indicated by
134. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 30-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-123
1:753
§ 30-124. PROHIBITED USES. [1976 Code § 78-75; Ord. No. 3-82]
All uses not expressly permitted in this chapter are prohibited.
§ 30-125. CONTINUATION OF EXISTING USES. [1976 Code § 78-76;
Ord. No. 3-82]
Any use, building or structure lawfully existing at the time of the enactment
of this chapter may be continued even though such use, building or
structure may not conform with this chapter. (See Section 30-78.)
§ 30-126. EXCEPTIONS. [1976 Code § 78-77; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
99-2, § I; Ord. No. 99-24 § I]
Exceptions to the zoning provisions are as follows. (See also Section 30-30.)
dimensions on the Zoning Map. Any disputed zoning district shall be
determined by the Board of Adjustment.
b. If a zoning district line divides a lot, the use of one district may be
extended into the other for a distance no greater than 50 feet, provided
that the property line lies within 50 feet. The permitted uses of the
extended district shall be permitted in the extended area.
c. Where a street or public way serves as the zoning district line and it is
lawfully vacated, the former center line shall be the zoning district line.
a. Height. Nonresidential roof peaks having no functional use (such as
storage, office or retail use); but which are solely for aesthetic and
architectural purposes, in addition to roof structures, such as elevators,
tanks, ventilating fans, air-conditioning equipment, solar panels, fire or
parapet walls, skylights, cupolas, steeples, as well as flagpoles,
chimneys, smokestacks, silos, radio and television towers or similar
structures, may be erected no more than 25% above the height limits of
this chapter or 15 feet above the height of the building to which it is
attached, whichever is shorter, except that spires, steeples, water
towers and commercial radio and television towers shall have no height
restrictions other than to be set back from any property line 1.2 times
their height.
b. Lot Area. (See Sections 30-71 and 30-78.)
c. Flag Lots.
1. Flag lots are permitted only in the R-40A District and shall have
access only to an improved, new secondary local street. The
purpose of this district is to allow flag lots as part of major
subdivisions in limited circumstances and, as the exception, not the
rule, to gain access to difficult portions of a tract.
2. The body of the lot, exclusive of the access drive connecting it to
the public road, has an area of at least two acres.
§ 30-123 HOLMDEL § 30-126
1:754
§ 30-127. RESIDENCE R-40A AND R-40B, RESIDENCE AND
AGRICULTURE DISTRICTS.
§ 30-127.1. Regulations. [1976 Code § 78-78; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 86-28]
Regulations for the R-40A and R-40B districts are as follows.
§ 30-127.2. Purpose. [1976 Code § 78-78; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
86-28]
The purpose of the R-40A and R-40B districts is to zone existing low density
areas in a manner consistent with existing development in the R-40A
District. In the R-40B District, the lower density will reduce the overall
impact of development consistent with the undeveloped, rural character
of these areas and may be more consistent with the sensitivity of the
soils for on-lot septic systems. The R-40B District is located so as to not
impact on sites selected to meet the Township's lower income housing
need. The design standards are intended to provide flexibility in design
so that the vistas and views in the remaining undeveloped areas will be
preserved as much as possible by locating homes over crests of hills, behind
existing trees, or in other locations that will minimize the appearance of
development.
§ 30-127.3. Uses Allowed by Right. [1976 Code § 78-78; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 86-28]
NOTE: In all residential developments, allowance shall be made for
participating in the production of lower income housing in accordance
with Section 30-70 and subsection 30-127.6, both sections superseding any
conflicting parts of this chapter.
3. The access drive has a width at the street line and along its full
length of at least 50 feet.
4. The access drive is reasonably suited for the construction and use
of a private lane.
5. The proposed flag lot and access drive do not adversely affect the
development of the remainder of the tract.
6. In the event an additional lot or use is proposed for service from
such access drive, the owner of the access drive shall, at his
expense, pave and improve it in accordance with Township
standards regulating street construction. Such road improvements
shall be made prior to the issuance of a building permit for the
additional structure.
a. In the R-40A and R-40B Districts, one family detached dwelling with
accessory buildings:
1. On lots conforming to this section; or
§ 30-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-127.3
1:755
§ 30-127.4. Accessory Uses. [1976 Code § 78-78; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 84-7; Ord. No. 86-28; Ord. No. 97-35 §§ V, VI, VIII; Ord. No.
98-11 § 3; Ord. No. 2001-23 § 1]
2. On flag lots. See subsection 30-126c.
b. Churches, public and private schools, libraries, firehouses, historical
museums and private golf courses. No private golf courses shall be
permitted unless the property constituting the course shall consist of at
least 100 acres of land.
c. Agriculture and farms in general, including truck farms, dairy farms,
horse farms, nurseries and fruit farms.
d. Buildings, structures and premises for use and occupancy by the
Township for any municipal purposes.
a. Accessory buildings incident to farms such as tenant houses, buildings
for housing seasonal workers employed by the owner or operator of the
farm, barns, packing, grading and storage buildings and buildings for
the keeping of poultry and livestock, garage or garages for the keeping
of equipment and trucks used in farm operation. In addition, housing of
lower income farm employees may be permitted in mobile homes or in
accessory buildings converted to one or more dwelling units provided
they are occupied by lower income persons who are full-time employees
of the farm and provided there shall be no more than one unit for every
20 acres, up to a maximum of four units per farm, and provided further
that all water and service and sewage treatment facilities meet
applicable codes and ordinances.
b. Accessory buildings incident to farms as defined above shall require
application for and issuance of building permits but shall not be
required to obtain site plan approval unless it is intended that the
general public shall be invited to such building or buildings for the
purpose of retail sales of goods or services.
c. Greenhouses, shade houses and lath houses.
d. Garage, toolshed, swimming pool and tennis court for residences.
e. Off-street parking and loading.
f. Farm Labor Housing. The existing property of approximately 9 1/2
acres, located on the east side of Cat Bird Alley, now owned by a
nonprofit organization may be used for housing not exceeding 100
nonpermanent farm laborers with accessory buildings and for the
storing of equipment, fertilizers, lime, crates, baskets, seeds, spray
materials and other related items.
g. Devices that convert renewable solar energy into usable energy
sources.
h. Retail farm markets in the R-40B District.
§ 30-127.3 HOLMDEL § 30-127.4
1:756
§ 30-127.5. Conditional Uses. [1976 Code § 78-78; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 86-28; Ord. No. 98-11 § 4; Ord. No. 2001-23 § 2; Ord. No.
2002-17 § 3; Ord. No. 2013-33]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 30-155:
§ 30-127.6. Bulk and Design Requirements. [1976 Code § 78-78;
Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 20-82; Ord. No. 21-83; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord.
No. 86-28; Ord. No. 97-2 § II; Ord. No. 97-35 § VIII]
i. Temporary farm stands.
a. Public utilities.
b. Wireless telecommunications antennas and towers.
c. Church or house of worship.
a. Single-family uses, churches, libraries, firehouses, public utilities and
historic museums.
Single-Family, Non-Cluster Churches; Libraries; Firehouses; Public Utilities and
Historic Museums
Type of Single-Family Cluster Design
Requirement R-40A R-40B R-40A R-40B
Minimum lot area 43,000 square
feet
108,900 square
feet
30,000 square
feet
43,000 square
feet
— except for flag lots: see Section 30-126c —
Minimum lot
depth
180 feet 300 feet 150 feet 180 feet
Minimum lot
frontage
100 feet 140 feet 100 feet 100 feet
Minimum lot
width
180 feet 250 feet 150 feet 180 feet
Minimum front
yard setback
50* feet 75 feet 50* feet 50* feet
Minimum side
yard setback
25* feet 40 feet 25* feet 25* feet
Minimum rear
yard setback
25 feet 75 feet 25 feet 25* feet
Maximum building
height
35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet
Minimum offstreet
parking+
3** 3** 3 3**
§ 30-127.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-127.6
1:757
Single-Family, Non-Cluster Churches; Libraries; Firehouses; Public Utilities and
Historic Museums
Type of Single-Family Cluster Design
Requirement R-40A R-40B R-40A R-40B
Maximum
residential density
(units per gross
acre)
0.8/acre*** 0.4/acre 0.8/acre*** 0.4/acre
Maximum
coverage by
primary structure,
driveway and
accessory uses
25% 15% 25% 25%
NOTE: Accessory buildings can conform to principal building setbacks,
except that they shall be set back at least 75 feet from any street line
[60 feet for the cluster design] (See Section 30-105).
* On corner lots, setbacks shall be at least 50 feet from both streets
[40 feet in the cluster].
** There shall be adequate area so vehicles may be turned around in
the driveway and exit in a forward direction.
*** Development of land in the R-40A District shall be permitted to
have the density increased to a maximum of 1.0 unit per acre.
With any increase in density, the minimum lot size and other
bulk and design requirements shall comply with the "single family
cluster design" provisions in the above table. In exchange for
any additional density bonus, the developer shall participate in
the Township's lower income housing program by making a cash
contribution to the Township's escrow fund in accordance with the
standards in Chapter 14 of the Township Code.
In addition, the development of land identified as R-40A(2) may
be developed at up to 4.0 units per acre provided the developer
includes at least half the total number of units as townhouses, and
provided further the developer participates in the development of
lower income housing in accordance with Chapter 14 by donating
cash.
The amount of cash contribution shall be equivalent to 6% of the
sales price of each dwelling unit at the time of the issuance of
the first certificate of occupancy for that unit in the development
payable to the Township in accordance with Chapter 14. In the
event no sale takes place or in the event the sales price does not
reflect the fair market value to the satisfaction of the Township,
then the payment of the 6% shall be established on the fair market
value of that dwelling unit at the time of the issuance of the first
certificate of occupancy on the unit.
§ 30-127.6 HOLMDEL § 30-127.6
1:758
§ 30-127.7. (Reserved)135
§ 30-128. R-4H HAMLET CONSERVATION DISTRICT.
§ 30-128.1. Regulations. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVI]
Regulations for the R-4H Hamlet Conservation District are as follows.
§ 30-128.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVI; Ord. No. 2006-19
§ XI]
+ Where driveways exceed an 8% slope, at least 2 additional offstreet
parking spaces shall be provided near the street.
b. Farms and nursing homes: a five acre minimum, excluding the house,
with a minimum lot width and depth of 300 feet. Maximum building
coverage shall be 15%. Maximum building height shall be 30 feet,
except barns shall not exceed 50 feet. Minimum setbacks shall be 100
feet from all property lines.
c. Public and private schools: 20 acres with minimum lot width and depth
of 500 feet. Minimum setbacks shall be 100 feet from all property lines.
Maximum building height shall be 30 feet.
d. (Reserved)
e. (Reserved)
f. (Reserved)
g. Vehicle Storage. Overnight open storage or parking of farm vehicles
and any and all types of farm equipment shall not be permitted within
50 feet of the right-of-way line of any public streets or roads.
h. Greenhouses and other similar structures may be installed on any farm,
provided that they shall conform to a setback requirement of not less
than 75 feet from any front lot line and not less than 25 feet from any
side or rear lot line. Neither a building permit nor site plan approval
shall be required in connection with the installation of greenhouses on a
farm. Shade houses and lath houses shall also be permitted on a farm,
provided that they conform with the setback requirements of this
subsection.
a. To provide for the appropriate use and development of land by
providing a suitable transition from the historic hamlet of Holmdel
Village to the Willow Brook.
b. To promote a desirable visual environment and good civic design and
arrangements by regulating building type, street design, and open
135. Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-127.7, Wireless Telecommunications Facility
Standards, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 98-11
and 2001-23 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
§ 30-127.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-128.2
1:759
§ 30-128.3. Overall Development Parameters. [Ord. No. 2005-32
§ XVI; Ord. No. 2005-38 § VI; Ord. No. 2006-19 § XI]
The following development parameters shall be applicable to the entire
R-4H District:
space, by encouraging buildings to face greens, and by encouraging
creative development techniques to preserve natural and scenic
resources.
c. To promote the conservation of open space and natural resources by
concentrating development in the most suitable portions of the district
while preserving contiguous environmentally sensitive lands in their
undeveloped state.
d. To prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment by
encouraging development that respects its environmental and
historical setting, is properly sited so as to protect natural resources,
and provides for natural stormwater management.
e. To ensure that development in the R-4H District preserves wetlands,
wetland buffers, steep slopes, stream corridors, existing forested areas,
significant trees, specimen trees, historic sites and structures, and
scenic views of open space from public rights-of-way.
a. The district shall be subdivided into individual building lots. Except for
lots with governmental, recreational, nonresidential or mixed uses, and
except where otherwise provided in Section 30-61, a maximum of one
principal building shall be permitted on each lot.
b. Principal buildings are permitted only in those locations shown in the
Master Plan. The Master Plan indicates which building types are
allowed in which areas of the R-4H District. These guidelines must be
followed, with the following exceptions:
1. Municipal and farm buildings may be located in areas not shown on
the Master Plan.
2. Residential dwellings may be located within residual dwelling site
areas within tracts subject to farmland easements, subject to the
provisions of Section 30-58B.
3. Areas designated in the Master Plan for nonresidential or mixeduse
buildings may instead be developed with Hamlet Estate
Houses.
c. Each principal building shall be required to have an individual
subsurface septic facility located on the same lot as the building it
serves. Public sewer systems, package treatment plants, and other
communal means of sewage treatment shall be prohibited.
§ 30-128.2 HOLMDEL § 30-128.3
1:760
§ 30-128.4. Buildings and Uses Allowed by Right. [Ord. No. 2005-32
§ XVI; Ord. No. 2005-38 § VII; Ord. No. 2006-19 § XI]
The following buildings and uses are allowed by right within the R-4H
District in the locations shown in the Master Plan. Development parameters
for each building type are set forth in Section 30-61, Building Types.
§ 30-128.5. Accessory Uses. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVI; Ord. No.
2006-19 § XI]
d. Each principal building lot shall be of sufficient size and proper layout
to accommodate an individual subsurface septic facility which complies
with all applicable requirements.
e. Residential clustering shall be required for all dwellings in accordance
with the parameters defined in this section, and subject to the minimum
and maximum lot sizes for each building type in Section 30-61.
a. Hamlet estate houses containing one single-family residence within
each principal building, in the locations shown in the Master Plan.
b. Parks.
c. Outdoor active recreation facilities.
d. Reservation areas.
e. Preservation areas.
f. Buildings, structures and premises for use by the Township for any
municipal purpose.
g. Farming and agriculture.
h. A single-family residential dwelling within a residual dwelling site area,
subject to the requirements of Section 30-58B, and provided that not
more than one residual dwelling site area shall be permitted within the
R-4H District.
a. On any lot: Off-street parking and loading.
b. On a residential lot or residual dwelling site area: Swimming pools, pool
houses and equipment sheds, garages, toolsheds, tennis courts,
basketball courts and gazebos.
c. In a preservation area or reservation area: Gazebos or other accessory
structures and uses incidental to the use of the land for passive
recreation, environmental conservation or, where allowed by this
section, active recreation.
d. In a park or green, including parks or greens within reservation areas:
Gazebos, playground equipment or other accessory structures and uses
incidental to the use of the land for passive or active recreation.
§ 30-128.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-128.5
1:761
§ 30-128.6. Residential Clustering. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVI; Ord.
No. 2005-38 § VIII; Ord. No. 2006-19 § XI]
Residential clustering shall be required in accordance with the following
standards. The standards in Section 30-55 shall not apply to residential
clustering in the R-4H District.
§ 30-128.7. Bulk and Yard Requirements. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVI]
Bulk and yard requirements for individual buildings shall be as indicated in
Section 30-61, Building Types.
§ 30-128.8. Design Requirements. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVI; Ord. No.
2005-38 § IX]
e. On a farm, including a farm protected by a farmland easement within a
reservation area: Accessory structures and uses permitted by and
subject to the requirements of Section 30-131.4a, b, c, e, f and g.
a. The minimum and maximum lot sizes shall be in accordance with the
standards for each building type specified in Section 30-61.
b. The maximum allowable residential density of hamlet estate houses,
calculated over the gross area of the entire R-4H District, shall be one
hamlet estate house for each 5.0 acres. Within the district, lot sizes
smaller than 5.0 acres shall be permitted, provided that the residential
density of the entire district does not exceed one hamlet estate house
for each 5.0 acres, including roadways and open space. Any factional
remainder shall count as one whole building.
c. The number of hamlet estate houses permitted within the R-4H District
shall be reduced by one hamlet estate house for each one residual
dwelling site area designated within a tract subject to a farmland
easement within the R-4H District.
d. The minimum area set aside for open space, including parks, active
recreation facilities, reservation areas and preservation areas, shall be
60% of the tract. All open space set aside under this paragraph shall be
located outside individual private building lots except that privately
owned lands subject to a farmland easement may be considered open
space if such lands meet the criteria specified at Section 30-58 and
Section 30-58B.
a. To preserve and enhance the character of the historic hamlet of
Holmdel Village, the detailing, materials and proportions of buildings
shall, to the extent practical, be consistent with architectural styles
popular in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries in small towns in
the northeastern United States. These styles include, but are not
limited to, Colonial, Greek Revival, and Victorian styles.
b. All buildings shall have articulated base courses of stone, brick or
stucco, and cornices or soffits.
§ 30-128.5 HOLMDEL § 30-128.8
1:762
§ 30-128.9. Streets and Streetscaping. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVI;
Ord. No. 2006-19 § XI]
c. Building facade materials shall be masonry, brick, wood, stone, cement,
fiber-cement or stucco, or simulated materials made from one or more
of these materials. Vinyl is prohibited except for architectural or
restoration vinyl with a wood-grain appearance.
d. Architectural detailing should be used to provide visual interest.
e. Horizontal facades should be broken down into segments having
vertical orientation, and vertically oriented facades shall be broken
down into horizontal components through use of appropriate design
features.
f. Expansive blank or nearly blank walls unbroken by windows or other
architectural elements are strongly discouraged.
g. Appearance of the side and rear elevations of buildings shall receive
architectural treatments consistent with the standards applicable to
any proposed front facade if said elevations are visible from public
streets or from residential properties within residential zones.
h. Windows should have muntins or simulated muntins, except that
display windows without muntins or simulated muntins are permitted
on the first floor of mixed-use or commercial buildings.
a. All local streets and streetscaping shall conform to the Hamlet
Conservation Special Area Street Regulations set forth in Section
30-103l of this chapter.
b. Along Holmdel Road north of the long green (shown in the Master Plan)
and Route 520 (Main Street) one tree shall be provided for every 40 feet
of frontage. Sidewalks adjacent to hamlet buildings along these roads
shall be at least eight feet in width.
c. Along Holmdel Road adjacent to preservation and reservation areas, a
rail fence shall be provided at a consistent setback within 25 feet of the
edge of the right-of-way and shall be lined with a staggered double row
of trees. The spacing of the trees shall be one tree for every 30 feet with
alternating spacing. The first row shall be located within five feet from
the edge of the right-of-way, and the second row shall be located 10 feet
from the first row. If a berm is provided, it shall be located behind the
fence. At the discretion of the approving authority, the requirement to
provide a fence may be waived in a stream corridor buffer or steep
slope area.
d. No particular streetscape treatment is required for Holmdel Road
adjacent to the Long Green. The Green should be appropriately
landscaped.
§ 30-128.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-128.9
1:763
§ 30-128.10. Preservation Areas. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVI]
Preservation areas shall be provided in the locations shown in the Master
Plan. Preservation areas shall comply with the requirements of Section
30-82.
§ 30-128.11. Reservation Areas. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVI]
Reservation areas shall be provided in the locations shown in the Master
Plan. Reservation areas shall comply with the requirements of Section
30-83.
§ 30-128.12. Parks. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVI; Ord. No. 2006-19 § XI]
In the R-4H District, at least one pocket park or green shall be provided in
one or more locations shown in the Master Plan.
e. A buffer with a minimum width of 50 feet shall be required from the
right-of-way toward the rear yard of any residential building lot. The
buffer may contain a berm and shall contain appropriate landscaping to
be determined by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
applicable, and shall not contain a fence other than a rail fence. If a rail
fence is provided, it shall not be situated on the berm.
a. Detention basins, infiltration basins and constructed stormwater
wetlands that handle stormwater from areas other than the park are
prohibited in parks, except that an active recreation facility may accept
stormwater from lands outside the park. Swales and wet ponds are
permitted.
b. Parks shall be improved to encourage public access. Parks that simply
serve as a visual screen or buffer and are not pedestrian accessible
shall be discouraged. Berms are prohibited in parks.
c. To the extent practical, and except where otherwise shown in the
Master Plan, the entire perimeter of parks should be bounded by
existing or new public streets or by preservation areas. This provision
shall not be construed or enforced as a requirement.
d. Accessory structures are permitted in parks over one acre in area. Such
structures shall be clearly subordinate to the park use.
e. Maximum building coverage shall be 3%. Maximum footprint of an
individual building shall be 500 square feet. Maximum lot coverage
shall be 10%.
f. To minimize the need to provide parking in residential neighborhoods,
parks may include playground equipment but not ballfields or other
active recreation uses.
g. Parks may be dedicated to a homeowners' association or commercial
property owner, as appropriate. Alternatively, parks may be deeded to
§ 30-128.9 HOLMDEL § 30-128.12
1:764
§ 30-128.13. Active Recreation Facilities; Farmings. [Ord. No.
2005-32 § XVI; Ord. No. 2006-29 § XI]
§ 30-128.14. Trails. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVI]
Trails shall comply with the requirements of Section 30-112. Trails shall be
required in the locations shown in the Master Plan and shall be optional in
other locations.
§ 30-128.15. Buffers. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVI; Ord. No. 2005-38 § X;
Ord. No. 2006-19 § XI]
The buffer requirements of Section 30-54 shall not apply to buildings and
uses permitted by right in the R-4H District, so long as those buildings and
uses are provided in the locations shown in the Master Plan. However, a
landscaped buffer at least 50 feet in width shall be required between any
nonresidential zone or use outside the R-4H District and any residential use
in the R-4H District. Any landscaped buffer provided in accordance with this
the Township, at the developer's option and conditional on the
Township's acceptance of such open space.
a. The R-4H District may include at least one outdoor active recreation
facility in the location shown in the Master Plan. The facility should be
located in a Reservation Area and will be subject to the requirements
for Reservation Areas at Section 30-83.
1. The facility shall be at least 10 acres in area.
2. The facility may include accessory surface parking as well as
buildings or structures that are clearly subordinate to the main
outdoor use. Structures shall be no greater than one story in
height.
3. Maximum building coverage shall be 5%. Maximum lot coverage
shall be 20%.
4. The facility shall be owned and operated by the Township, a
homeowners' association or a private commercial or nonprofit
venture.
b. An outdoor active open space area may include infiltration basins,
detention basins and extended detention basins provided that these
facilities are designed for active recreation use.
c. In lieu of providing an active recreation facility, the applicant may
designate the area shown for an active recreation facility in the Master
Plan for publicly or privately owned farming or agricultural operations,
provided that such area is placed under a farmland easement. The
developer shall have the option to designate a residual dwelling site
area within such farmland easement subject to all the requirements for
residual dwelling site areas in this chapter.
§ 30-128.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-128.15
1:765
requirement shall be subject to the requirements of subsection 30-54e and
g.
§ 30-128.16. Inconsistencies. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVI]
Should any inconsistency arise between the regulations in this subsection
and those in other sections of this chapter, the regulations in this subsection
shall prevail.
§ 30-129. R-4R RURAL CONSERVATION DISTRICT.
§ 30-129.1. Regulations. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVII]
Regulations for the R-4R Rural Conservation District are as follows.
§ 30-129.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVII]
The purposes of the R-4R District are as follows:
§ 30-129.3. Overall Development Parameters. [Ord. No. 2005-32
§ XVII; Ord. No. 2005-38 § XI; Ord. No. 2006-19 § XII]
The following development parameters shall be applicable to the entire
R-4R District.
a. To guide the appropriate use and development of the remaining
developable residential lands in Holmdel in a manner that protects
natural systems.
b. To promote a desirable visual environment and good civic design and
arrangements by regulating building type, street design, and open
space, by encouraging buildings to face greens wherever possible, and
by encouraging creative development techniques to preserve natural
and scenic resources.
c. To encourage developments which utilize residential clustering to
preserve scenic and natural resources and to provide neighborhoods
with a sense of place.
d. To promote the conservation of Holmdel's remaining open space and
natural resources while permitting appropriate residential
development.
e. To prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment by
encouraging development that respects its environmental setting, is
properly sited so as to protect natural resources, and provides for
natural stormwater management.
f. To ensure that development in the R-4R District preserves wetlands,
wetland buffers, steep slopes, stream corridors, existing forested areas,
significant trees, specimen trees, historic sites and structures, and
scenic views of open space from public rights-of-way.
§ 30-128.15 HOLMDEL § 30-129.3
1:766
a. The district shall be subdivided into individual building lots. Except for
lots with governmental, recreational or cemetery uses, a maximum of
one principal building shall be permitted on each lot.
b. Principal buildings are permitted only in those locations shown in the
Master Plan. The Master Plan indicates which building types are
allowed in which areas of the R-4R District. These guidelines must be
followed, with the following exceptions:
1. On any property not subject to residential clustering, a single
individual estate house may be situated in accordance with the bulk
requirements for such houses, regardless of whether the Master
Plan indicates that buildings are permitted on such property. The
determination as to whether a property is subject to residential
clustering shall be made in accordance with the requirements of
this section as set forth below.
2. Cemetery-related, municipal and farm buildings may be located in
areas not shown in the Master Plan.
3. Residential dwellings may be located within residual dwelling site
areas within tracts subject to farmland easements, subject to the
provisions of Section 30-58B, and provided that not more than one
residual dwelling site area shall be permitted for each 100 acres
mapped within the R-4R District.
c. Buildings are permitted only in those locations shown in the Master
Plan. The Master Plan indicates which building types are allowed in
which areas of the R-4R District. These guidelines must be followed,
with the following exceptions:
1. On any property not subject to residential clustering, a single
individual estate house may be situated in accordance with the bulk
requirements for such houses, regardless of whether the Master
Plan indicates that buildings are permitted on such property. The
determination as to whether a property is subject to residential
clustering shall be made in accordance with the requirements of
this section as set forth below. A property not subject to residential
clustering may be subdivided in accordance with the standards set
forth in subsection 30-129.6b below. An individual estate house
may be constructed on each resulting lot.
2. Cemetery-related, municipal and farm buildings may be located in
areas not shown in the Master Plan.
d. Each principal building shall be required to have an individual
subsurface septic facility located on the same lot as the building it
serves. Public sewer systems, package treatment plants, and other
communal means of sewage treatment shall be prohibited.
§ 30-129.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-129.3
1:767
§ 30-129.4. Building Types and Uses Allowed by Right. [Ord. No.
2005-32 § XVII; Ord. No. 2006-19 § XII]
The following building types and uses are allowed by right within the R-4R
District. Development parameters for each building type and are set forth
in Section 30-61, Building Types.
§ 30-129.5. Accessory Uses. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVII; Ord. No.
2006-19 § XII]
e. Each principal building lot shall be of sufficient size and proper layout
to accommodate an individual subsurface septic facility which complies
with all applicable requirements.
a. Rural estate houses containing one single-family residence within each
principal building, in the locations shown in the Master Plan.
b. Green estate houses containing one single-family residence with each
principal building, in the locations shown in the Master Plan.
c. Individual estate houses containing one single-family residence within
each principal building, on lots outside residential clusters only.
d. Cemeteries, mortuaries and mausoleums, subject to the following:
1. Maximum lot coverage excluding tombs and gravestones: 30%.
2. Maximum gross floor area ratio: 0.15.
3. Minimum setback from a street or property line: 30 feet.
4. Exception: The above standards do not apply to historic cemeteries
which occupy one acre or less (such as the existing historic
cemetery located in Lot 2 of Block 15 on the official tax maps of the
Township of Holmdel).
e. Parks.
f. Reservation areas.
g. Preservation areas.
h. Buildings, structures and premises for use by the Township for any
municipal purpose.
i. Farming and agriculture.
j. A single-family residential dwelling within a residual dwelling site area,
subject to the requirements of Section 30-58B.
a. On any lot: Off-street parking and loading.
§ 30-129.3 HOLMDEL § 30-129.5
1:768
§ 30-129.6. Residential Clustering. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVII; Ord.
No. 2005-38 § XII; Ord. #2006-19 § XII]
Residential clustering shall be required in accordance with the following
standards. The standards in Section 30-55 shall not apply to residential
clustering in the R-4R District.
b. On a residential lot or residual dwelling site area: Swimming pools, pool
houses and equipment sheds, garages, toolsheds, tennis courts,
basketball courts and gazebos.
c. In a preservation area or reservation area: Gazebos or other accessory
structures and uses incidental to the use of the land for passive
recreation or environmental conservation.
d. In a park or green, including parks or greens within reservation areas:
Gazebos, playground equipment or other accessory structures and uses
incidental to the use of the land for passive or active recreation.
e. On a farm, including farms protected by farmland easements within
reservation areas: Accessory structures and uses permitted by and
subject to the requirements of subsection 30-131.4a, b, c, e, f and g.
a. The minimum and maximum lot sizes shall be in accordance with the
standards for each building type specified in Section 30-61.
b. Residential clustering shall be required for all development, except that
clustering shall not be required for subdivisions of three or fewer lots,
provided that the parent lot is not greater than 20 acres, and provided
further that the lots are drawn such that they could not be further
subdivided in accordance with the requirements of this subsection. If
residential clustering is not utilized, the minimum lot area shall be four
acres, and the only permitted building type is an Individual estate
house. Bulk standards are provided in Section 30-61.
c. Throughout the district, on clustered properties, preservation areas,
reservation areas and greenway trails shall be provided as described in
this subsection, subject to all requirements for such areas and trails in
this chapter. On nonclustered properties greenway trails shall be
provided where shown in the Master Plan, but reservation areas and
preservation areas shall not be required.
d. The maximum allowable residential density on clustered properties
within the R-4R District shall be one residential unit for each 5.0 acres
of gross land area. Within an individual tract, or within two or more
noncontiguous tracts in common ownership, lots smaller than 5.0 acres
shall be permitted, provided that the gross density of the entire area of
the tract or tracts does not exceed one residential unit for each 5.0
acres, including roadways and open space. This paragraph shall not
apply to nonclustered properties.
§ 30-129.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-129.6
1:769
§ 30-129.7. Bulk and Yard Requirements. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVII]
Bulk and yard requirements for individual buildings shall be as indicated in
Section 30-61, Building Types.
§ 30-129.8. Design Requirements. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVII; Ord.
No. 2005-38 § XIII]
e. The minimum area set aside for open space, including parks, active
recreation facilities, reservation areas and preservation areas, shall be
60% of the tract. All open space set aside under this paragraph shall be
located outside individual private building lots. Where a tract includes
lands in another municipality, part or all of such lands may be included
in the open space calculation, provided that such lands are located
outside individual building lots and meet the definition of "open space"
provided in this chapter. This paragraph does not apply to nonclustered
properties.
f. Applications for development of properties on which reservation areas
and preservation areas are not delineated in the Master Plan, or on
which the only preservation areas delineated are those within existing
conservation easements, shall include a map showing wetlands,
wetland buffers, steep slopes, stream corridors, existing forested areas,
significant trees, specimen trees, and historic sites and structures. An
application for development on such properties shall also include a
written statement discussing each of these elements and describing
how the development proposal works to preserve these elements. This
requirement may be fulfilled by the submittal of an Environmental
Resource Survey and Environmental Impact Report in accordance with
the requirements of Section 30-59 and a Woodland Retention and
Preservation Plan in accordance with the requirements of Section
30-116.10c and, if so fulfilled, shall not require a separate submittal.
g. Within any cluster subdivision, the number of rural estate houses and/
or green estate houses shall be reduced by one house for each one
residual dwelling site area designated within a tract subject to a
farmland easement within the subdivision.
a. The following requirements shall apply to clustered properties in the
R-4R District. Nonclustered properties shall not be required to comply
with these provisions.
b. Building facade materials shall be masonry, brick, wood, stone, cement,
fiber-cement or stucco, or stimulated materials made from one or more
of these materials. Vinyl is prohibited except for architectural or
restoration vinyl with a wood-grain appearance.
c. All buildings shall have articulated based courses of stone, brick or
stucco, and cornices or soffits.
§ 30-129.6 HOLMDEL § 30-129.8
1:770
§ 30-129.9. Streets and Streetscaping. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVII;
Ord. No. 2005-38 § XIV; Ord. No. 2006-19 § XII]
§ 30-129.10. Preservation Areas. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVII; Ord. No.
2005-38 § XV]
d. The design standards that follow are advisory in nature. They should
not be construed or enforced as requirements.
1. Architectural detailing should be used to provide visual interest.
2. Horizontal facades should be broken down into segments having
vertical orientation, and vertically oriented facades shall be broken
down into horizontal components through use of appropriate
design features.
3. Expansive blank or nearly blank walls not interrupted by windows
or other design features are discouraged.
4. Appearance of the side and rear elevations of buildings should
receive architectural treatments comparable to that of any
proposed front facade if said elevations are visible from public
rights-of-way.
5. Plate glass windows should have muntins or simulated muntins.
a. All local streets and streetscaping shall conform to the Rural
Conservation Special Area Street Regulations set forth in Section
30-103k of this chapter, provided that, in accordance with Section
30-51d, any deviation from a standard in Section 30-103k shall be by
way of exception pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51.
b. For cluster subdivisions that front on Route 34, Holmdel Road, Schanck
Road and Roberts Road, a four-foot high rail fence shall be provided at a
consistent setback at least 25 feet from the right-of-way. Between the
fence and the pavement, a staggered double row of street trees shall be
provided at a spacing of 30 feet. The first row shall be located within
five feet from the right-of-way, and the second tree shall be located 10
feet from the first row. Behind the fence, a random pattern of coniferous
and deciduous vegetation is required, with one tree for every 500
square feet. The use of native vegetation is strongly encouraged. If
berms are provided, they must be situated behind the fence. These
requirements do not apply to individual estate houses.
a. Preservation areas shall be provided in the areas shown in the Master
Plan and also in other areas which are not so indicated in the Master
Plan but fall into one of the following categories:
1. Surface water bodies.
2. Protected wetlands and wetlands buffers.
3. Riparian corridors and stream buffers.
§ 30-129.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-129.10
1:771
§ 30-129.11. Reservation Areas. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVI; Ord. No.
2005-38 § XVI]
Reservation areas shall be provided in the locations shown in the Master
Plan and shall comply with the requirements of Section 30-83. The
approving authority may require that existing historic structures and sites
be retained in reservation areas. Within a cluster development, reservation
areas shall be located outside of the individual building lots. On
nonclustered properties, the designation of reservation areas is not
required.
§ 30-129.12. Parks. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVII]
The R-4R District shall include parks shown in the Master Plan. Park types
shall include cul-de-sac islands, greenway access corridors and greens, as
indicated in the Master Plan.
4. Floodways.
b. Preservation areas shall comply with the requirements of Section
30-82. Within a cluster development, preservation areas shall be
located outside the individual building lots. On nonclustered properties,
the designation of preservation areas is not required. However, such
properties are still subject to the requirement to provide conservation
easements as per the Resource Management Regulations, Section
30-116.
a. Parks shall be improved to encourage public access. Parks that simply
serve as a visual screen or buffer and are not pedestrian accessible
shall be discouraged. Parks in the R-4R District should be bounded
entirely by public streets.
b. Accessory structures are permitted in parks over one acre in area. Such
structures shall be clearly subordinate to the park use.
c. Maximum building coverage shall be 3%. Maximum footprint of an
individual building shall be 500 square feet. Maximum lot coverage
shall be 10%.
d. Parks may include the following active recreation facilities: playground
equipment, fitness trail equipment. Other active recreation facilities are
prohibited.
e. Parks may be dedicated to a homeowners' association or commercial
property owner, as appropriate. Alternatively, parks may be dedicated
to the Township, at the developer's option and conditional on the
Township's acceptance of such open space.
f. A landscape easement should be placed on parks.
§ 30-129.10 HOLMDEL § 30-129.12
1:772
§ 30-129.13. Trails. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVII]
Trails shall comply with the requirements of Section 30-112. Trails shall be
required in the locations shown in the Holmdel Township Master Plan and
shall be optional in other locations.
§ 30-129.14. Buffers. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVII]
The buffer requirements of Section 30-54 shall not apply to uses permitted
by right in the R-4R District, so long as those buildings and uses are
provided in the locations shown in the Master Plan.
§ 30-129.15. Inconsistencies. [Ord. No. 2005-32 § XVII]
Should any inconsistency arise between the regulations in this subsection
and that in other sections of this chapter, the regulations in this subsection
shall prevail.
§ 30-129.16. (Reserved)136
§ 30-130. R-2H, HISTORICAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
§ 30-130.1. Regulations. [1976 Code § 78-78.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 94-25]
Regulations for the R-2H District are as follows.
§ 30-130.2. Purpose. [1976 Code § 78-78.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
94-25; Ord. No. 2004-36 § I]
The purpose of the R-2H District is to provide a low density zone for
undeveloped lands in the southern part of the Township adjacent to the
historic hamlet of Holmdel Village. The district seeks to provide standards
that respond to the environmental characteristics of the area by providing
larger lots and ensuring that the historic character of Holmdel Village is
not harmed by inappropriately scaled development. All development shall
comply with the applicable provisions of Chapter 14, Affordable Housing.
§ 30-130.3. Uses Allowed by Right. [1976 Code § 78-78.1; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. 94-25]
g. Wet ponds, detention basins, infiltration basins and constructed
stormwater wetlands that handle stormwater from areas other than the
park itself are prohibited in parks. Swales are permitted.
a. Single-family detached dwelling.
136. Editor's Note: Subsection 30-129.16, Conditional Uses, containing portions of Ordinance
No. 2005-32, was repealed in entirety by Ordinance No. 2015-08.
§ 30-129.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-130.3
1:773
§ 30-130.4. Accessory Uses. [1976 Code § 78-78.1; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 94-25; Ord. No. 97-35 V, VII, VIII; Ord. No.
98-11 § 3; Ord. No. 2001-23 § 1]
§ 30-130.5. Bulk and Design Requirements For Certain Uses. [1976
Code § 78-78.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 20-82; Ord. No. 21-83; Ord.
No. 94-25; Ord. No. 97-35 § VIII]
b. Churches, public and private schools, libraries, firehouses, and
historical museums and private golf courses. No private golf courses
shall be permitted unless the property constituting the course shall
consist of at least 75 acres of land.
c. Agriculture and farms in general, including truck farms, dairy farms,
horse farms, nurseries and fruit farms.
d. Buildings, structures and premises for use and occupancy by the
Township for any municipal purposes.
a. Accessory buildings incident to farms such as barns, produce packing,
grading and storage buildings and buildings for the keeping of poultry
and livestock, garage or garages for the keeping of equipment and
trucks used in farm operation.
b. Accessory buildings incident to farms as defined above shall require
application for and issuance of building permits but shall not be
required to obtain site plan approval unless it is intended that the
general public shall be invited to such building or buildings for the
purpose of retail sales of goods or services.
c. Greenhouses, shade houses and lath houses.
d. Garage, toolshed, gazebo, swimming pool and tennis court for
residences.
e. Off-street parking and loading.
f. Retail farm markets.
g. Temporary farm stands.
a. For single-family uses serviced by septic systems:
1. Minimum lot area: 4 acres.
2. Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
3. Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
4. Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet.
5. Minimum front yard setback: 100 feet.
6. Minimum side yard setback: 75 feet.
§ 30-130.3 HOLMDEL § 30-130.5
1:774
§ 30-130.6. Bulk Requirements for Accessory Uses. [1976 Code
§ 78-78.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 94-25]
Accessory buildings shall conform to principal building setbacks, except
that they shall be set back at least 100 feet from any street line. (See
Section 30-105.)
§ 30-130.7. through 30-130.8. (Reserved)137
7. Minimum rear yard setback: 75 feet.
8. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
9. Minimum off-street parking spaces*: 5.
10. Maximum coverage by primary structure, driveway and accessory
uses: 12%
*There shall be an adequate area so vehicles may be turned around in the
driveway and exit in a forward direction. Where driveways exceed an 8%
slope, at least two additional off-street parking spaces shall be provided
near the street.
b. For churches, libraries, firehouses, public utilities and historic
museums, the R-40B standards for these uses shall apply.
c. Farms. A property with a minimum lot width and depth of 300 feet.
Maximum building coverage shall be 15%. Maximum building height
shall be 35 feet, except barns shall not exceed 50 feet. Minimum
setbacks shall be 100 feet from the front property line, and 75 feet from
the side and rear property lines.
d. Public and Private Schools. Twenty acres with minimum lot width and
depth of 500 feet. Minimum setbacks shall be 100 feet from all property
lines. Maximum building height shall be 30 feet.
e. (Reserved)
f. (Reserved)
g. (Reserved)
h. Vehicle Storage. Overnight open storage or parking of farm vehicles
and any and all types of farm equipment shall not be permitted within
50 feet of the right-of-way line of any public streets or roads.
i. Greenhouses and other similar structures may be installed on any farm,
provided that they shall conform to a setback requirement of not less
than 100 feet from any front lot line and not less than 75 feet from any
side or rear lot line. Shade houses and lath houses shall also be
permitted on a farm, provided that they conform with the setback
requirements of this section.
§ 30-130.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-130.9
1:775
§ 30-130.9. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 98-11 § 4; Ord. No. 2001-23
§ 2; Ord. No. 2001-17 § 3; Ord. No. 2013-33]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 30-155:
§ 30-131. R-4 RESIDENCE AND AGRICULTURE DISTRICT.
§ 30-131.1. Regulations. [1976 Code § 78-78.2; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 94-25]
Regulations for the R-4 District are as follows.
§ 30-131.2. Purpose. [1976 Code § 78-78.2; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
94-25]
The purpose of the R-4 District is to provide a low density zone for
undeveloped lands in the southern part of the Township. This district seeks
to provide standards that respond to the environmental characteristics of
the rural areas by providing larger lots. This district permits two additional
design alternatives, clustering and lot averaging, that are intended to
provide design flexibility and protection of environmental resources. All
development shall comply with the applicable provisions of Chapter 14,
Affordable Housing.
§ 30-131.3. Uses Allowed by Right. [1976 Code § 78-78.2; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 94-25]
a. Wireless telecommunications antennas and towers.
b. Church or house of worship.
a. Single-family detached dwelling.
b. Churches, public and private schools, libraries, firehouses, and
historical museums and private golf courses. No private golf courses
shall be permitted unless the property constituting the course shall
consist of at least 75 acres of land.
c. Agriculture and farms in general, including truck farms, dairy farms,
horse farms, nurseries and fruit farms.
d. Buildings, structures and premises for use and occupancy by the
Township for any municipal purposes.
137. Editor's Note: Former subsections 30-130.7, Standards for Historical Developments
Served by Public Sewerage Systems and 30-130.8, Standards for Planned Retirement
Communities in the R-2H District, previously codified herein and containing portions of
1976 Code § 78-78.1 and Ordinance Nos. 3-82, 94-25 and 98-30, were repealed in their
entirety by Ordinance No. 2004-36.
§ 30-130.9 HOLMDEL § 30-131.4
1:776
§ 30-131.4. Accessory Uses. [1976 Code § 78-78.2; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 94-25; Ord. No. 97-35 §§ V, VI, VIII; Ord. No.
98-11 § 3; Ord. No. 2001-23 § 1]
§ 30-131.5. Bulk and Design Requirements for Certain Uses. [1976
Code § 78-78.2; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 20-82; Ord. No. 21-83; Ord.
No. 94-25; Ord. No. 97-35 § VIII]
a. Accessory buildings incident to farms such as barns, produce packing,
grading and storage buildings and buildings for the keeping of poultry
and livestock, garage or garages for the keeping of equipment and
trucks used in farm operation.
b. Accessory buildings incident to farms as defined above shall require
application for and issuance of building permits but shall not be
required to obtain site plan approval unless it is intended that the
general public shall be invited to such building or buildings for the
purpose of retail sales of goods or services.
c. Greenhouses, shade houses and lath houses.
d. Garage, toolshed, gazebo, swimming pool and tennis court for
residences.
e. Off-street parking and loading.
f. Retail farm markets.
g. Temporary farm stands.
a. For single-family uses serviced by septic systems, the area and yard
requirements provided in subsection 30-130.5a shall apply.
b. For churches, libraries, firehouses, public utilities and historic
museums, the R-40B standards for these uses shall apply.
c. Farms. A property with a minimum lot width and depth of 300 feet.
Maximum building coverage shall be 15%. Maximum building height
shall be 35 feet, except barns shall not exceed 50 feet. Minimum
setbacks shall be 100 feet from the front property line and 75 feet from
side and rear property lines.
d. (Reserved)
e. (Reserved)
f. (Reserved)
g. Vehicle Storage. Overnight open storage or parking of farm vehicles
and any and all types of farm equipment shall not be permitted within
50 feet of the right-of-way line of any public streets or roads.
h. Greenhouses and other similar structures may be installed on any farm,
provided that they shall conform to a setback requirement of not less
§ 30-131.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-131.5
1:777
§ 30-131.6. Lot Averaging. [1976 Code § 78-78.2; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 94-25; Ord. No. 95-22 § VI]
The purpose of this provision is to permit an alternative development option
which results in more compact development on a tract while maintaining
open spaces and protecting critical resources, while also retaining all lands
in private ownership, other than easements or rights-of-way for pathways,
bikeways, trails along proposed greenways and linkages to other
subdivisions.
than 100 feet from any front lot line and not less than 75 feet from
any side or rear lot line. Shade houses and lath houses shall also be
permitted on a farm, provided that they conform with the setback
requirements of this section.
a. Lot Area Range. Subdivisions utilizing lot averaging may be permitted
by the Planning Board, provided that at least 60% of the lots shall have
a lot area of 2.5 to 3.5 acres. Two lot subdivisions may also utilize the lot
averaging provision, provided that one of the two lots meets the lot area
standard provided above.
b. Site Design. Lot averaging designs should shift the more intensive
development toward those lands which can best support the installation
of the dwelling, well, septic system, and associated site improvements.
Similarly, lot averaging should locate less intensive development in
those areas which exhibit sensitive environmental features (i.e., water
bodies, wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, shallow bedrock, prime
aquifer recharge areas, seasonal high water table, etc.) or which
contain active or prime agricultural lands or mature woodlands. The lot
averaging design may include easements of rights-of-way for pathways,
bikeways, and trails along proposed greenways and linkages to other
subdivisions.
c. Deed Restriction. The deed for any lot over 3.5 acres created by lot
averaging shall contain a covenant for the benefit of the Township, and
the owners of other properties in the subdivision, prohibiting further
subdivision for the purpose of creating an additional lot or lots.
d. Area and yard requirements for lots of 2.5 to 3.5 acres in a lot averaging
subdivision. (Lots of four acres of more shall comply with the area and
yard requirements of subsection 30-130.5a):
1. Maximum density: 0.25 units per acre.
2. Minimum lot area: 2.5 acres.
3. Minimum lot frontage: 140 feet.
4. Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
5. Minimum lot depth: 300 feet.
6. Minimum front yard setback: 75 feet.
§ 30-131.5 HOLMDEL § 30-131.6
1:778
§ 30-131.7. Cluster Development. [1976 Code § 78-78.2; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 94-25]
The purpose of this provision is to permit an alternative development option
which results in more compact development on a tract while maintaining
open spaces and protecting critical resources. With cluster development,
the open spaces shall be owned and maintained by a Homeowners'
Association or the Township, if accepted by the Township Committee.
§ 30-131.8. Design Standards for All Developments in the R-4
District. [1976 Code § 78-78.2; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 94-25]
7. Minimum side yard setback: 40 feet.
8. Minimum rear yard setback: 75 feet.
9. Minimum off-street parking spaces:1385 per unit.
10. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
11. Maximum coverage by primary structure, driveway, and accessory
uses: 15%
a. Maximum Density and Area and Yard Requirements. The maximum
density for the tract and the area and yard requirements for individual
lots shall be as provided in subsection 30-131.6d.
b. Tract Size. The minimum tract size for a clustered development shall be
25 acres.
c. Open Space. The clustered development shall provide a minimum of
30% of the tract as open space. Open space shall be owned and
maintained by a Homeowners' Association or the Township, if accepted
by the Township Committee, in accordance with Section 30-55. Open
space shall not include yards on individual building lots.
d. Development Theme. Any applicant for cluster development shall
present to the Planning Board a theme around which the development
is organized. Examples of acceptable themes are an equestrian
development, organized around a common paddock of at least five
acres with horse training facilities, or a recreational development,
organized around a fitness trail and common recreational facilities.
a. In lieu of sidewalks, each development should be designed with a
system of paths, bikeways, or trails linking interior parts of the
development and linking the development to adjoining open space and
development.
138. There shall be an adequate area so vehicles may be turned around in the driveway and exit
in a forward direction. Where driveways exceed an 8% slope, at least two additional offstreet
parking spaces shall be provided near the street.
§ 30-131.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-131.8
1:779
§ 30-131.9. Bulk Requirements for Accessory Uses. [1976 Code
§ 78-78.2; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 94-25]
Accessory buildings shall conform to principal building setbacks, except
that they shall be set back at least 100 feet from any street line. (See
Section 30-105.)
§ 30-131.10. (Reserved)139
§ 30-131.11. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 98-11 § 4; Ord. No.
2001-23 § 2; Ord. No. 2002-17 § 3; Ord. No. 2013-33]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 30-155:
§ 30-132. (RESERVED)
§ 30-133. RESIDENCE R-11, R-15, R-30, R-30SC AND R-TH SINGLEFAMILY
AND TOWNHOUSE DISTRICTS.
§ 30-133.1. Regulations. [1976 Code § 78-79; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 90-30]
Regulations for R-11, R-15, R-30, R-30SC and R-TH Single-Family and
Townhouse Districts are as follows.
§ 30-133.2. Purposes. [1976 Code § 78-79; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
84-7; Ord. No. 90-30; Ord. No. 97-1 § V]
To provide a variety of housing development opportunities by permitting a
wider choice of lot sizes. These areas are located to be serviceable by water
and sewer facilities and closer to major highway access. Additional options
are included in Section 30-70 for LIRPP parcels to result in the development
of lower income housing units.
b. Within the limits of sound engineering and future maintenance, low
intensity improvements are encouraged. Among the low intensity
improvements that may be acceptable are roadside swales for drainage
and unfinished edges of pavement rather than curbing throughout the
development where the curbing is not needed for drainage, road
integrity, or direction of traffic flow.
a. Wireless telecommunications antennas and towers.
b. Church or house of worship.
139. Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-131.10, Wireless Telecommunications Facility
Standards, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 98-11
and 2001-23 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
§ 30-131.8 HOLMDEL § 30-133.3
1:780
§ 30-133.3. Uses Allowed by Right. [1976 Code § 78-79; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 1-83; Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord. No. 87-12;
Ord. No. 90-30; Ord. No. 2002-17 § 2]
a. Same as R-40A District.
b. LIRPP residential development uses consisting of the following:
1. Nonclustered, one family detached private dwelling with accessory
buildings in the R-TH, R-11, R-15, R-30 and R-30SC Districts.
2. Clustered, one-family detached private dwelling, with accessory
buildings in the R-11, R-15, R-10, R-30SC and R-TH Districts,
provided that the minimum tract size is eight acres and water and
sewer services are available.
3. Townhouses, atrium houses and quadplexes in the R-11, R-30,
R-30SC and R-TH Districts, provided that water and sewer services
are available and site plan approval as required for all units.
4. Garden apartments in the R-11, R-30, R-30SC, and R-TH Districts
when developments incorporate lower income units in accordance
with Section 30-70.
5. All nonresidential uses shall conform to the requirements of the
R-40A District.
6. The construction of senior citizens housing for persons aged 62 and
over, or whatever age limitation is permitted by law, in the R-TH
District subject to the bulk standard set forth hereinafter for such
development in the R-TH zone. Construction of such senior citizen
housing shall have a bonus density to bring the gross density to a
maximum of 12 units per acre and to provide the opportunity to
provide lower income housing in compliance with Section 30-70.
Any projects sponsored by a nonprofit or limited-profit sponsor in
the R-TH District using current State and/or Federal programs and
financed through the New Jersey Housing Finance Agency and/or
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development may be
designed so that the housing type, site design and unit distribution
shall be as approved under State/Federal program guidelines.
7. The construction of senior citizens housing for persons aged 62 and
over shall have a bonus density to bring the gross density to a
maximum of 10 units per acre and to provide the opportunity to
provide lower income housing in compliance with Section 30-70.
Any project sponsored by a nonprofit or limited-profit sponsor in
the R-30SC District using current State and/or Federal programs
and financed through the New Jersey Housing Finance Agency and/
or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development may be
designed so that the housing type, site design and unit distribution
shall be as approved under State/Federal program guidelines.
§ 30-133.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-133.3
1:781
§ 30-133.4. Accessory Uses. [1976 Code § 78-79; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 90-30]
Accessory uses shall be the same as the R-40A District. (See Section
30-105.)
§ 30-133.5. Conditional Uses. [1976 Code § 78-79; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 87-12; Ord. No. 90-30; Ord. No. 98-11 § 4;
Ord. No. 2001-23 § 2; Ord. No. 2002-17 § 3; Ord. No. 2013-33]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 30-155:
§ 30-133.6. Bulk and Design Requirements. [1976 Code § 78-79;
Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 20-82; Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord.
No. 90-30; Ord. No. 97-1 § VI; Ord. No. 2000-19 § I; Ord. No.
2011-18; Ord. No. 2014-18]
8. The construction of rental housing as set forth in subsection
133.3b1, 2, 3 and 4 to provide lower income housing in compliance
with Section 30-70.
a. Public utilities.
b. Wireless telecommunications antennas and towers.
c. Church or house of worship.
a. For nonresidential uses permitted in the R-40A District, the bulk
requirements shall be the same as outlined in the R-40A District.
b. Minimum Off-Street Parking.
1. Two spaces per unit, except that senior citizen housing shall
provide one space for every two units. In detached single-family
homes, at least one space shall be in an enclosed garage.
Townhouse parking, if not within parking lots, shall be provided on
the lot of each dwelling unit. Where townhouse units are closer
than 40 feet to the street line, the on-lot parking for each unit shall
be in the rear yard. Where townhouse parking is provided on each
lot, or where parking spaces are assigned to specific units, there
shall be additional parking spaces in parking lots at the rate of 0.25
space per garaged, on-lot or assigned parking space.
2. Where single-family homes have a front yard setback of less than
40 feet, the 25 feet of the driveway closest to the house shall be at
least 16 feet wide.
3. Where single-family driveways exceed an 8% slope, at least two
additional off-street parking spaces shall be provided near the
street.
c. Nonclustered Design, One Family.
§ 30-133.3 HOLMDEL § 30-133.6
1:782
Type of
Requirement R-11 District R-15 District R-TH District
R-30 and
R-30SC
Districts
Minimum lot
area, square feet
11,000 15,000 15,000 30,000
Minimum lot
frontage, feet
100 100 100 150
Minimum lot
depth, feet
100 150 125 150
Minimum setback
from any street,
feet:140
Principal
building*
30* 40* 40* 40*
Accessory
building
60 60 60 60
Minimum each
side yard, feet:
Principal
building
15 15 15 25
Accessory
building
10 10 10 15
Minimum rear
yard, feet:
Principal
building
25 25 25 25
Accessory
building
10 10 10 10
Maximum height,
feet
30 30 30 35
Maximum lot
coverage,
percent
30 28 20 15
Minimum floor
area
N/A
Maximum
density, units per
acre
3 2.5 2.5 1.2
140. Editor's Note: See Section 30-107, Yards, concerning corner lots.
§ 30-133.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-133.6
1:783
Type of
Requirement R-11 District R-15 District R-TH District
R-30 and
R-30SC
Districts
Maximum gross
floor area ratio,
percent
20 20 20 16
d. Residential Clusters of One Family Dwellings.
Type of
Requirement
R-11 and R-15
Districts R-TH District
R-30 and R-30SC
Districts
Minimum lot area,
square feet
8,000 9,600 20,000 minimum/
100,000 maximum
Minimum lot frontage,
feet
80 80 80
Minimum lot width,
feet
100
Minimum lot depth,
feet
100 120 100
Minimum setback
from any street,
feet141
Principal building 30* 35* 40
Accessory building 60 60 60
Minimum each side
yard, feet
Principal building 10** 10** 15
Accessory building 10 10 10
Minimum rear yard,
feet
Principal building 25 25 25
Accessory building 10 10 10
Maximum height, feet 30 30 35
Maximum cover by
primary structure,
driveway and
accessory use
15% 15% 30%
Minimum floor area N/A
Maximum density,
units per acre
3 in R-11; 2.5 in R-15 2.5 1.2
141. Editor's Note: See Section 30-107, Yards, concerning corner lots.
§ 30-133.6 HOLMDEL § 30-133.6
1:784
§ 30-133.7. Buffer. [1976 Code § 78-79; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
90-30]
The buffer areas shall adhere to the requirements of Sections 30-45 and
30-62.
§ 30-133.8. R-30SC(1) Overlay District. [Ord. No. 96-3 § III; Ord. No.
2003-23 § I]
Pursuant to Pre-Mediation Agreement dated December 18, 1995, and in
order to effectuate the terms of the Pre-Mediation Agreement, Block 52,
Type of
Requirement
R-11 and R-15
Districts R-TH District
R-30 and R-30SC
Districts
Maximum gross floor
area ratio, percent
20 20 20
NOTES:
* The minimum setback of a principal building from any street shall
be based on one and 1.75 feet of setback for each foot of building
height, but in no case shall the required setback be more than 50
feet nor less than the minimum shown for the designated district.
In addition, staggered setbacks shall be provided with at least a
five-foot difference in the setback of the principal buildings from
the setback of the principal building(s) on abutting lot(s).
** The total of both side yards shall be at least 20 feet for 1 story
buildings and 25 feet for 2 story buildings. One side yard may
be smaller than the other in accordance with the appropriate
following conditions. The purpose is to allow some flexibility in
siting a structure as well as allowing smaller distances between
shorter, 1 story buildings and greater distances between 2 story
buildings. In order to qualify as 1 story, the 1 story portion of the
building shall be at least 10 feet wide.
1. One side yard may be reduced to 10 feet, provided that the distance
between houses is at least 20 feet where both the houses are one
story in height.
2. One side yard may be reduced to 10 feet, provided that the
minimum distance between houses shall be at least 25 feet where
one or both houses are two stories in height.
e. (Reserved)
f. Lower income housing in the R-11, R-15, R-30, R-30SC and R-TH
Districts is required on LIRPP property in accordance with Section
30-70.
g. (Reserved)
§ 30-133.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-133.8
1:785
Lots 10, 11, 12 and 13 are zoned in an overlay zone designated the
R-30SC(1) District. Regulations for the R-30SC(1) District are as follows:
a. Uses allowed by right (permitted uses), accessory uses and conditional
uses shall be as provided in subsections 30-133.3, 130-133.4 and
30-133.5 respectively. The development contemplated by the abovereferenced
Agreement shall be a permitted use.
b. The following area, yard and building requirements shall apply to the
market townhouses:
1. Maximum tract density - 4.5 units/acre, provided that no more than
120 market units are developed.
2. Minimum tract size - 2 acres.
3. Minimum tract width - 200 feet.
4. Minimum perimeter setback of buildings - 200 feet.
5. Minimum side yard setback of building - 50 feet.
6. Minimum front yard setback of building - 15 feet.
7. Minimum rear yard setback of building - 20 feet.
8. Maximum lot coverage - 30%.
9. Maximum building height - 35 feet front. 40 feet rear on downhill
side, subject to the standards of Section 30-106c.
10. Minimum parking - 2 spaces/unit.
11. Minimum visitor parking - 0.83 spaces/unit.
12. Minimum required open space - 20%.
13. Front to front building distance minimum - 60 feet.
14. Side to side building distance minimum - 25 feet.
15. Rear to rear building distance minimum - 30 feet.
16. Side to rear buildings distance minimum - 30 feet.
17. Maximum building length - 245 feet.
18. Maximum number of units per building - 10.
19. Minimum number of units per building - 2.
20. Minimum building offset - 4 feet every 2 units.
21. Minimum distance from building to parking - 10 feet.
22. Minimum setback from building to interior road - 20 feet without
sidewalks, 25 feet with sidewalks.
§ 30-133.8 HOLMDEL § 30-133.8
1:786
23. Minimum parking space - 8.5 feet by 18 feet.
c. The following area, yard and building requirements shall apply to the
lower-income rental housing:
1. Minimum lot area - 2.5 acres.
2. Minimum lot frontage - 200 feet.
3. Minimum lot depth - 200 feet.
4. Minimum perimeter setback of building - 50 feet.
5. Minimum perimeter setback of parking - 15 feet.
6. Minimum setback from building to interior road - 10 feet.
7. Minimum setback from building to parking area - 10 feet.
8. Minimum front yard - 50 feet.
9. Minimum side yard - 40 feet.
10. Minimum rear yard - 40 feet.
11. Maximum building height - 35 feet (2.5 stories).
12. Maximum lot coverage - 65%.
13. Maximum density - 18 units/acre, provided that no more than 50
rental units are developed.
14. Minimum parking space size - 8.5 feet by 18 feet.
15. Minimum parking - 2 spaces/unit.
16. Minimum floor area/unit - 375 square feet.
17. Front to front building distance minimum - 25 feet.
18. Side to side building distance minimum - 25 feet.
19. Rear to rear building distance minimum - 25 feet.
20. Side to rear building distance minimum - 25 feet.
d. The standards of subsection 30-133.66 pertaining to minimum off-street
parking for townhouses shall apply, except that the minimum visitor
parking shall be 0.83 spaces/unit, and the n-lot parking for each unit
may be in the front yard.
e. Basement areas may be finished; however, no such area shall be used as
a bedroom.
f. The design standards contained within the Holmdel Development
Design manual shall apply, except as modified below:
§ 30-133.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-133.8
1:787
1. Interval between street entrances on same side of collectors - 325
feet.
2. Minimum straight line course of approaches to collector - 50 feet.
3. Minimum tangents between reverse curves - 50 feet.
4. Minimum radius at inside curb on curves - 75 feet.
5. Minimum parking lot aisle - 35 feet.
6. Vertical side slopes may be provided within the detention basins.
g. The Township's Checklist, and other procedural requirements for the
processing of development applications, shall be modified as follows:
1. A soil removal permit, signed by the Township Engineer, shall not
be required as a completeness item, but rather shall be required as
a condition of final approval.
2. The subdivider's agreement shall not be required as a
completeness item, but rather shall be a condition of final approval.
3. Performance guarantees shall not be required as a completeness
item, but rather shall be required as a condition of final approval.
4. Engineering inspection fees shall not be a completeness item, but
rather shall be a condition of final approval.
5. A signed contract for water and letters of service from utilities shall
not be a completeness item for preliminary approval, but shall be a
condition of preliminary approval or a completeness item for final
approval.
6. Proposed deeds of easement (right-of-way, drainage, sewer, sight,
open space, etc.) shall not be a completeness item, but rather shall
be required as a condition of final approval.
7. Submission of condominium documents and agreements, approved
by the Township Attorney and accepted by the Township
Committee, shall not be a completeness item, but rather shall be a
condition of final approval.
8. Street light locations approved by the Traffic Safety Officer shall
not be a completeness item, but shall be determined during site
plan review once the application is declared complete.
9. Copies of proposed covenants or deed restrictions shall not be a
completeness item, but rather shall be required as a condition of
preliminary approval.
10. Soil Conservation District approval shall not be a completeness
item, but rather shall be a condition of final approval.
§ 30-133.8 HOLMDEL § 30-133.8
1:788
§ 30-133.9. R-TH(1) Overlay District. [Ord. No. 96-13 § II]
Pursuant to a Developers Agreement dated December 18, 1995, and in
order to effectuate the terms of the Developers Agreement, Block 59, Lots
1 and 2 are zoned in an overlay zone designated the R-TH(1) District.
Regulations for the R-TH(1) District are as follows:
11. Application to the Department of Environmental Protection for
projects located within a flood hazard area shall not be a
completeness item, but rather shall be a condition of preliminary
approval.
12. County Planning Board preliminary review and approval shall not
be a completeness item, but rather shall be a condition of
preliminary approval.
13. County Planning Board final review and approval shall not be a
completeness item, but rather shall be a condition of final approval.
14. State ingress and egress approvals shall not be a completeness
item, but rather shall be a condition of final approval.
15. The simultaneous application for both preliminary and final site
plan approvals is specifically permitted.
16. Mylers, microfilm, and aperture cards submissions shall be
required only upon final site plan approval (i.e., when no further
revisions to the plans are required).
17. Upon the developer's request, the Planning Board shall give this
Mt. Laurel development priority in the scheduling of meetings and
hearings.
a. Uses Allowed by Right.
1. Patio homes.
2. Detached single family dwellings.
3. Garden apartments for low- and moderate-income rental units.
b. Permitted accessory uses and permitted conditional uses shall be as
provided in subsections 30-133.4 and 30-133.5 respectively.
c. The following area, yard and building requirements shall apply to the
patio homes:
1. Maximum tract density - 4.4 units/acre provided that no more than
32 market units are developed.
2. Minimum tract size - 2 acres.
3. Minimum tract width - 100 feet.
4. Minimum lot size - 6,000 square feet.
§ 30-133.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-133.9
1:789
§ 30-133.10. (Reserved)142
§ 30-134. RESIDENCE R-MH, MOBILE HOME DISTRICT. [1976
Code § 78-80; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 98-11 §§ 3, 4, 7;
Ord. No. 2001-23 §§ 1 — 3; Ord. No. 2002-17 §§ 1, 3; Ord. No.
2013-33]
5. Minimum lot width - 60 feet.
6. Minimum lot depth - 100 feet.
7. Minimum front yard - 25 feet with sidewalks, 25 feet without
sidewalks.
8. Minimum side yard (one) - 15 feet.
9. Total side yards - 20 feet.
10. Minimum rear yard - 20 feet.
11. Maximum building height - 30 feet.
12. Maximum lot coverage - 40%.
13. Minimum off street parking - 2 spaces per unit.
d. The following area yard and building requirements shall apply to the
low- and moderate-income, rental garden apartments:
1. Maximum tract density - 5.7 units/acre, provided that at least eight
rental units are developed.
2. Minimum tract size - One acre.
3. Minimum tract width - 175 feet.
4. Minimum perimeter setback of buildings - 35 feet.
5. Minimum front yard - 20 feet.
6. Minimum side yard - 20 feet.
7. Minimum rear yard - 25 feet.
8. Maximum building height - 32 feet (2.5 stories).
9. Maximum lot coverage - 22%.
10. Minimum off street parking - 2.5 spaces per unit.
142. Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-133.10, Wireless Telecommunications Facility
Standards, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 98-11
and 2001-23 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
§ 30-133.9 HOLMDEL § 30-134
1:790
§ 30-135. (RESERVED)143
§ 30-136. AH-MU AFFORDABLE HOUSING MIXED USE ZONE
DISTRICT. [Added 12-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-31]
a. Purposes. To zone appropriate sites for mobile home parks recognizing
both the existing uses in the neighborhood as well as providing an
alternate form of housing development.
b. Other Regulations. Mobile home parks shall adhere to the regulations
set forth in Section 30-76 and the applicable provisions of Section
30-70.
c. (Reserved)
d. (Reserved)
e. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted subject
to the provisions of Section 30-155.
1. Wireless telecommunications antennas and towers.
2. Church or house of worship.
a. Purpose. The zone is located off Route 35, adjacent to a shopping center
that could provide future residents with convenient access to everyday
shopping needs. While the primary purpose of the zone is to create an
additional opportunity for the construction of inclusionary affordable
housing in Holmdel, it is also to support mixed-use, compact and
accessible development where adjacent commercial and residential
uses within the zone and adjacent to the zone support one another, and
are reachable for pedestrians and vehicles alike.
b. The following uses are permitted within the AH-MU Zone:
1. Multifamily dwelling unit apartment buildings with a minimum lowand
moderate-income unit set aside of 18% of the total number of
units.
2. Retail sales and service uses conforming to C-1 District regulations.
c. One lot may contain more than one permitted use and more than one
principal building, with each building containing a maximum of one
permitted use.
1. Living space permitted in attic space of residential units.
d. The following accessory uses are permitted within the AH-MU Zone:
143. Editor's Note: Former § 30-135, AH-MF Affordable Housing Multifamily Overlay Zone,
adopted by Ord. No. 2015-14, was repealed 12-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-32. See now
§ 30-137, AH-MF Affordable Housing Multifamily Zone.
§ 30-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-136
1:791
1. Off-street parking and loading, including both surface lots and
below-grade parking garages.
2. Internal circulation roadways.
3. Drainage Basins. Drainage basins and drainage structures may be
located within buffers and/or conservation easements.
4. Fences.
5. Signage, including entry monument signs, directional and building
identification signage according to the following schedule:
(a) Independent signage is permitted for each principally
permitted use within the zone. Signage for residential uses
shall follow the standards in Subsection d5(b) below. Signage
for commercial uses shall follow the standards in Subsection
d5(c) below.
(b) One freestanding, double-sided ground-mounted monument
identification sign for the residential buildings is permitted.
The sign shall be no more than 45 square feet per side, nor
shall it be greater than six feet in height. The sign must be set
back at least 10 feet from the street line.
(c) Signage for commercial development shall comply with
§ 30-96.
e. The following area, yard, and building requirements shall apply. Area
and yard requirements apply to the development tract, which includes
all lots in the zone considered together as a single developable area.
1. Maximum tract density: 15 units/acre.
2. Minimum tract size: 11.5 acres.
3. Minimum tract width: 200 feet.
4. Minimum tract front yard setback: 100 feet.
5. Minimum tract side yard setback: 20 feet.
6. Minimum tract rear yard setback: 80 feet.
7. Minimum building separation:
(a) Side-to-side: 40 feet.
(b) Side-to-rear: 60 feet.
8. Maximum building height:
(a) Residential building: 48 feet (four stories).
(b) Commercial building: 45 feet.
§ 30-136 HOLMDEL § 30-136
1:792
9. Maximum tract coverage: 45%.
10. Maximum tract building coverage: 20%.
11. Maximum building footprint:
(a) Residential building: none.
(b) Commercial building: 20,000 square feet footprint (two stories
permitted).
12. Maximum building length: 450 feet.
13. Maximum building width: 80 feet.
14. Maximum number of units per building: 90 units.
15. Maximum number of total units: 170 units.
16. Minimum number of affordable units: 31 units.
f. The following parking requirements shall apply.
1. The minimum number of parking spaces shall be required as
follows:
(a) A minimum of 1.8 spaces per residential unit.
(b) A minimum of one parking space per 400 gross square feet of
commercial space.
2. Access To and From Lots. One access drive shall be permitted. The
drive shall handle no more than two lanes of traffic, shall be at least
18 feet wide for one-way traffic and twenty-five (24) feet wide for
two-way traffic, shall be at least 100 feet from the right-of-way of
any intersecting street, and shall be at least 20 feet from any
property line. No parking shall be in the entrance/exit drive.
Curbing shall be either depressed at the driveway or have the
curbing rounded at the corners with the access drive connected to
the street in the same manner as another street.
3. Dimensions.
(a) Off-street parking spaces for residential uses shall be a
minimum of 8 1/2 feet wide and 18 feet in length, except that
as per Subsection 30-70.8d, a select number of spaces can be
designed for compact cars.
(b) Off-street parking spaces for retail/commercial establishments
shall be a minimum of nine feet wide and 18 feet in length.
(c) Parallel parking spaces shall be a minimum of 25 feet in length
in all instances.
§ 30-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-136
1:793
(d) In parking lots containing fewer than 20 spaces a minimum of
one space shall be at least 12 feet wide, and for parking lots
with greater than 20 spaces, 2% of all spaces shall be 12 feet
wide, or have an adjacent buffer area that, combined with the
parking stall itself, provides a minimum width of 12 feet. These
wider spaces shall be located in one area and designated as
parking for the handicapped.
(e) For parking spaces eight feet to nine feet wide, oriented
perpendicular to the drive aisle, a minimum aisle width of 24
feet is required for both one- and two-way aisles.
4. Parking Location.
(a) Parking and loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as
the use being served. The edge of any parking space shall be at
least five feet from any building. Interior garage parking does
not require a minimum setback from the building wall.
(b) No individual off-street parking or loading space shall have
direct access from a street. No loading areas shall be in the
front yard.
(c) All off-street parking lots along arterial and collector streets
shall be set back at least 15 feet from the right-of-way. Parking
areas shall be set back at least five feet from all property lines.
Spaces shall be set back a sufficient distance to prevent any
part of a vehicle from overhanging the street right-of-way or
property line.
(d) Parking spaces located to serve residential, commercial and
industrial uses shall be located conveniently to the intended
dwelling unit or entrance door, generally within 300 feet of a
building entrance. Parking is permitted in all yard areas,
subject to the minimum setback requirements from the rightof-
way and property lines.
(e) Parking spaces may be located off major interior circulation
drives.
(f) In multifamily developments, commercial districts and
industrial zones, no parking shall be permitted in fire lanes,
streets, driveways, aisles, sidewalks or turning areas.
(g) Handicapped parking spaces shall be located to be most
accessible and approximate to the building(s) being served and
shall be specified on the site plan. Each handicapped space
shall be identified by the international symbol in paint and with
a sign. The sign shall be placed at the end of each space, facing
the space.
§ 30-136 HOLMDEL § 30-136
1:794
(h) Other Parking Regulations. Provisions of the Holmdel Zoning
Ordinance Subsections 30-80d, f, and g apply.
g. Lighting. The following lighting requirements shall apply in lieu of the
requirements of § 30-69 of the Holmdel Development Regulations:
1. The objective is to provide safety and security on the site and
minimize undesirable off-site effects. While mounting heights may
vary, the intent is to minimize the heights of lights. All area lighting
in places such as parking lots or for security shall provide
translucent fixtures with shields around the light source.
2. The light intensity at ground level shall be an average of 1.0
footcandle. In all instances, no lighting source shall shine or reflect
into windows or onto streets and driveways. No lighting shall be a
beam or a rotating, pulsating or other intermittent frequency.
h. Other Development Regulations.
1. Pedestrian Circulation Requirements. Pedestrians shall have a
means of accessing the shopping center to the east of the Lot 6, so
that it is possible to walk from apartment buildings to the shopping
center without walking along Route 35. To the maximum extent
possible, the location of this access point shall be centered among
all residential buildings. Meeting this requirement may involve the
cooperative negotiation of an access easement with the owners of
Block 59, Lot 8. The purpose of this pedestrian access point is to
mitigate total vehicle trips and provide an additional circulation
option that allows residents convenient access to everyday
consumer goods within walking distance of the property.
2. Sight triangles shall be required to meet AASHTO standards.
3. The buffer requirements of § 30-54 are not applicable.
4. Stormwater facilities may be located within required setback and
buffer areas.
5. An application for development does not require a woodlands
retention and preservation plan.
6. Only the following Resource Management Sections of the Township
Code shall be applicable to the AH-MU Zone:
(a) Subsection 30-116.3b4.
(b) Subsection 30-116.4.
(c) Subsection 30-116.5.
(d) Subsection 30-116.8.
(e) Subsection 30-116.9.
§ 30-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-136
1:795
§ 30-137. AM-MF AFFORDABLE HOUSING MULTIFAMILY ZONE.
[Added 12-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-32]
(f) Subsection 30-116.11.
7. All development shall adhere to flood hazard area, wetlands and
stream corridor buffers set by NJDEP or other similar authority
having jurisdiction.
8. Subsections 30-70.1, 30-70.2, 30-70.3, and 30-70.7, and Subsection
30-70.8 in part, related to the development of lower-income
housing, all apply to the development of multifamily apartments in
this district Subsections 30-70.4, 30-70.5, 30-70.6, and the
minimum parking requirement of two spaces per unit in Subsection
30-70.8d, do not apply.
9. The bedroom distribution for the affordable units shall provide the
bedroom distribution as required by applicable COAH regulations.
10. Standards for Townhomes and Other Multifamily Dwellings.
(a) The building length limits of Subsection 30-106b shall not
apply. However, developers are encouraged to break the plane
of eastern-facing building facades with variation in finishing
elements, colors, or other architectural features so that no
homogeneous wall area extends for a length greater than 200
feet.
(b) Public spaces for tenant use, such as clubhouses or club rooms,
playgrounds, and recreational facilities, shall be permitted.
Inclusion of amenity space and recreational facilities shall not
be deemed to be a requirement.
11. Financing Subdivisions. No variance shall be required for bulk,
design and buffer requirements on a lot developed with uses
permitted in the AH-MU Zone where the need for such variance is
caused solely by a subdivision of such lot into two or more for
financing of such uses. A subdivision created for financing
purposes shall include a subdivision to allow separate ownership of
lots within an AH-MU development, or to allow separate liens on
the subdivided lots even if such lots remain under one owner, all in
order to facilitate coordinated development of a site plan or site
plans which are consistent with an approved development plan.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the AH-MF Zone is to create an opportunity for
the construction of inclusionary affordable housing in Holmdel. The
standards set forth herein shall apply to the AH-MF Zone. Any other
provisions of the Holmdel Development Regulations and Holmdel
Development Design Manual shall only apply when specifically
referenced herein. Where this section establishes specific development
criteria which may be in conflict with existing Township of Holmdel
§ 30-136 HOLMDEL § 30-137
1:796
Development Regulations or Holmdel Development Design Manual
requirements, the requirements herein shall apply.
b. The following uses are permitted within the AH-MF Zone:
1. Multifamily dwelling unit apartment buildings with a minimum lowand
moderate-income unit set aside of 20% of the total number of
units.
(a) Maximum of 48 market-rate units (28 two-bedroom units and
20 one-bedroom units).
(b) Minimum of 12 affordable units (one one-bedroom unit; nine
two-bedroom units and two three-bedroom units).
c. The following accessory uses are permitted within the AH-MF Zone:
1. Off-street parking and loading, including both surface lots and
enclosed parking garages;
2. Internal circulation roadways;
3. Open space;
4. Drainage Basins. Drainage basins and drainage structures may be
located within buffers and/or conservation easements pursuant to
all necessary approvals being obtained from NJDEP;
5. Fences;
6. Signs, including entry monument signs, directional and building
identification signage;
7. Indoor and outdoor multifamily apartment building amenities
including, but not limited to, a community room, fitness center,
meeting room, business center, playground or other recreational
facilities. Inclusion of amenity space and recreational facilities
shall not be deemed a requirement; and
8. Any other accessory use customarily incidental to a multifamily
apartment building.
d. Bulk Requirements.
1. The following area, yard, and building bulk requirements shall
apply:
(a) Maximum tract density: nine units/acre.
(b) Minimum tract size: four acres.
(c) Minimum lot width: 500 feet.
(d) Minimum lot frontage: 500 feet.
(e) Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
§ 30-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-137
1:797
(f) Minimum front yard: 40 feet.
(g) Minimum side yard: 20 feet.
(h) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(i) Maximum building footprint: 40,000 square feet.
(j) Maximum building height: 50 feet (three stories over parking).
(k) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
(l) Maximum number of total units: 60 units.
(m) Minimum number of affordable units: 12 units.
2. The front yard setback shall be specifically defined as the distance
to the front property line. Additional right-of-way by way of county
easement(s) along the street frontage shall not impact the front
yard setback.
e. The following parking requirements shall apply in lieu of the
requirements of Subsections 30-80a, b, c, e, h, and j of the Holmdel
Development Regulations:
1. The minimum number of parking spaces shall be based on the perbedroom
standards established in the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS) as follows:
(a) One-bedroom units shall require 1.8 spaces per unit.
(b) Two-bedroom units shall require two spaces per unit.
(c) Three-bedroom units shall require 2.1 spaces per unit.
2. Access To and From Lots.
(a) One access drive shall be permitted. The drive shall handle no
more than two lanes of traffic, shall be a minimum of 24 feet
wide where there is perpendicular parking. There shall be no
specific dimension of length for access driveways.
(b) The access drive shall either be aligned with or be at least 100
feet from the right-of-way of an intersecting street as measured
from the center line of the access drive to the perpendicular
extension of the intersecting street right-of-way line.
(c) No parking shall be in the entrance/exit drive.
(d) Curbing shall be either depressed at the driveway or have the
curbing rounded at the corners with the access drive
connected to the street in the same manner as another street.
3. Dimensions.
§ 30-137 HOLMDEL § 30-137
1:798
(a) Off-street parking spaces for residential uses shall be a
minimum of 8 1/2 feet wide and 18 feet in length, except that
as per Subsection 30-70.8d, a select number of spaces can be
designed for compact cars.
(b) Parallel parking spaces shall be a minimum of 25 feet in length
in all instances.
(c) In parking lots containing fewer than 20 spaces, a minimum of
one space shall be at least 12 feet wide, and for parking lots
with greater than 20 spaces, 2% of all spaces shall be 12 feet
wide, or have an adjacent buffer area that, combined with the
parking stall itself, provides a minimum width of 12 feet. These
wider spaces shall be designated as parking for the
handicapped.
(d) Drive aisles shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide where there is
perpendicular parking; 22 feet wide without perpendicular
parking.
4. Parking Location.
(a) Parking and loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as
the use being served. No individual off-street parking or
loading space shall have direct access from a street.
(b) The edge of any parking space or drive aisle in an exterior
surface parking lot shall be at least five feet from any building.
Interior garage parking does not require a minimum setback
from the building wall.
(c) In order to allow for sufficient parking spaces, liberty to place
parking in front and side yards shall be permitted. However, no
parking spaces shall be located in any required buffer area as
established in Subsection f below, and all spaces shall be set
back a sufficient distance to prevent any part of a vehicle from
overhanging the street right-of-way or property line.
(d) Parking spaces shall be located within 150 feet of the entrance
of a building.
(e) Parking spaces may be located off major interior circulation
drives.
(f) No parking shall be permitted in fire lanes, driveways, aisles,
sidewalks or turning areas.
(g) Handicapped parking spaces shall be located to be most
accessible and approximate to the building(s) being served and
shall be specified on the site plan. Each handicapped space
shall be identified by the international symbol in paint and with
a sign. The sign shall be placed at the end of each space, facing
the space.
§ 30-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-137
1:799
5. Parking Lot Landscaping and Buffering.
(a) One tree is required for every eight parking spaces that are
located outside of a parking garage. The required trees can be
planted outside of the parking lot in a yard area with proximity
to the parking lot.
(b) A mix of shade trees and ornamental plantings should be
creatively utilized for planting throughout the site and along
the parking perimeter. Shading of paved areas with trees and
buffering against headlights with low hedges should be
considered. No specific dimensioned buffers shall be required
along the perimeter of parking lots, provided that parking
areas do not extend into the required buffers described in
Subsection f below.
6. Loading Requirements. The means and methods of operating the
building should be addressed, however, given the unique
characteristics of this zone, no specific requirement or dimensions
for a loading zone should be required to allow for creativity and
flexibility in managing the site. Where loading or operational areas
are integrated for the building, they should be appropriately and
aesthetically integrated into the site through building elements,
fencing, and/or landscaping. There shall be no specific buffer
planting requirement or dimension around a loading area.
7. Other Parking Regulations. Provisions of the Holmdel Zoning
Ordinance Subsections 30-80d, f, g, and i shall apply.
8. Within the county right-of-way, aisles, curbs, pavement and other
improvements under county jurisdiction shall meet county
specifications.
f. Buffers and Landscaping.
1. The following buffer and landscaping requirements shall apply in
lieu of the requirements of §§ 30-54 and 30-80 of the Holmdel
Development Regulations (except as noted above) and the
requirements of the Holmdel Design Manual under Section
S28.20.B.
2. All development should provide aesthetically pleasing landscaping,
but given the unique characteristics of this zone, no specifically
delineated buffer or buffer easement from property lines in the side
and rear yard should be required. Where development abuts a
developed residential property or community, and there remains no
existing vegetation, then a buffer consisting of a double row of
planted evergreens, a mix of deciduous and evergreen plantings, a
solid fence, or some combination should be provided.
3. A buffer with a minimum width of 15 feet as measured from the
curbline shall be required in the front yard along the street
§ 30-137 HOLMDEL § 30-137
1:800
frontage. Street tree plantings within this buffer area shall be
required as per § 30-93 of the Holmdel Development Regulations.
(a) No structure or accessory uses are permitted in the required
buffer area.
(b) Sidewalks of both a straight and winding path are permitted in
the required buffer area. Sidewalks should be composed of a
bituminous paving material.
(c) This buffer shall be permitted within areas subject to right-ofway
easements along the street frontage.
g. Lighting. The following lighting requirements shall apply in lieu of the
requirements of § 30-69 of the Holmdel Development Regulations:
1. The objective is to provide safety and security on the site and
minimize undesirable off-site effects. While mounting heights may
vary, the intent is to minimize the heights of lights. All area lighting
in places such as parking lots or for security shall provide
translucent fixtures with shields around the light source.
2. The light intensity at ground level shall be an average of 1.0
footcandle. In all instances, no lighting source shall shine or reflect
into windows or onto streets and driveways. No lighting shall be a
beam or a rotating, pulsating or other intermittent frequency.
h. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required along the property frontage
either straight or meandering as per § 30-94.
i. Signage.
1. Section 30-96 of the Holmdel Development Regulations shall apply.
The AH-MF Zone shall be considered a residential district for the
purpose of signage regulations in Subsection 30-96.2.
j. Environmental Requirements.
1. All development shall adhere to flood hazard area, wetlands and
stream corridor buffers set by NJDEP or other similar authority
having jurisdiction. The conservation easement line has been
established and recorded on said property through a prior
approval. This shall serve as the conservation easement line for all
approvals on this property.
2. The following standards shall supercede any conflicting
subsections of § 30-58:
(a) To accommodate the need to improve drainage patterns and
maximize flood prevention, liberty to grade, clear, de-snag or
install utility and drainage structures within any conservation
easements and stream corridor buffers shall be permitted.
Reasonable effort shall be made to limit disturbance within the
§ 30-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-137
1:801
buffer. Such "drainage improvements" including stormwater
pipes, soil stabilization, removal of impeding debris or
vegetation shall not constitute a reduction in the buffer or
require buffer averaging. A drainage easement shall not be
required for drainage facilities located within a conservation
easement.
(b) There shall not be a setback requirement above and beyond
the 100-foot stream corridor buffer required by state law or
any existing conservation easement for principal or accessory
structures, provided that the conservation easement is
monumented and fenced along its boundary, with the fence
placed one foot outside of the easement area. Fencing or
monuments to delineate a conservation easement shall not be
considered a structure. The conservation easement line for this
property has been established and recorded through a prior
approval.
(c) There shall be no monumentation required for the stream
corridor itself. Demarcation is required only for the boundary
of the conservation easement as described above in Subsection
j2(b).
(d) Subsection 30-58d12 and 13 shall not apply in this zone.
(e) No new conservation easement shall be required for any
proposed development in the zone because there is an existing
conservation easement in place.
3. Only the following Resource Management sections of the Township
Code shall be applicable to the AH-MF Zone:
(a) Subsection 30-116.3.
(b) Subsection 30-116.4.
(c) Subsection 30-116.5.
(d) Subsection 30-116.7, as modified below.
(e) Subsection 30-116.8.
(f) Subsection 30-116.9.
(g) Subsection 30-116.11.
4. The following standards shall supercede any conflicting
subsections of Subsection 30-116.7e:
(a) An applicant shall be permitted to match or utilize previously
recorded stream corridor buffers, where such buffer may have
been set, averaged, or reduced in a prior approval.
§ 30-137 HOLMDEL § 30-137
1:802
(b) Where an existing conservation easement or stream corridor
buffer was previously established on a property, an applicant
shall be permitted to match or utilize previously recorded
stream corridor buffers, where such buffer may have been set,
averaged, or reduced in a prior approval.
(c) An applicant shall not be required to buffer contiguous steep
slopes.
(d) No new conservation easement shall be required for any
proposed development in the zone because there is an existing
conservation easement in place.
5. The property owner shall be required to de-snag the portion of the
Mahoras Brook within the property twice a year.
k. Technical Requirements. Given the unique conditions of the zone, the
following technical standards will apply and prevail over any conflicting
standards in the Holmdel Development Regulations or the Holmdel
Development Design Manual:
1. Sight triangles shall be required to meet AASHTO standards.
2. To accommodate the need to improve drainage patterns and
maximize flood prevention, grading, basin and channel side slopes,
and related improvements should be permitted at a maximum slope
of 3:1. Slopes should be stabilized per County Conservation District
standards.
3. To accommodate the need to improve drainage patterns and
maximize flood prevention, grading and utilization of any portion of
the site should be permissible if needed. Therefore, no limits should
or restrictions on disturbance of steeps slopes shall be set.
Unnecessary disturbance of slopes greater than 25% should be
avoided where practical. Slopes should be stabilized per County
Conservation District standards.
4. To accommodate the need to improve drainage patterns and
maximize flood prevention, HDPE piping methods and materials
shall be permitted for roof drain systems.
5. Subsection 30-116.6f4 shall not apply. All proposed slopes must
meet SESC standards for stabilization.
6. Section 28.3 of the Holmdel Design Manual shall not apply.
Retaining walls shall be permitted provided efforts are made to
construct aesthetically pleasing walls and limit heights, where
feasible. Subsections 30-116.6f5 and 30-65.2 shall not apply.
7. The proposed building, individual units, and site as a whole must
accommodate adequate recycling facilities and space, however no
specific minimum area or volume is required and Subsection
30-45a1 shall not apply.
§ 30-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-137
1:803
§ 30-138. (RESERVED)
§ 30-139. M MEDICAL DISTRICT.
§ 30-139.1. Regulations. [1976 Code § 78-81; Ord. No. 3-82]
Regulations for the M Medical District are as follows.
§ 30-139.2. Purpose. [1976 Code § 78-81; Ord. No. 3-82]
The purpose of this district is to identify an emergency area of the Township
for services related to health care and for employment opportunities and
other professional services convenient to a major segment of the
population.
§ 30-139.3. Uses Allowed by Right. [1976 Code § 78-81; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 20-82; Ord. No. 95-22 § VII; Ord. No. 97-35 § IV]
l. Other Regulations.
1. The building length limits of Subsection 30-106b shall not apply.
However, the developer is encouraged to break the plane of
eastern-facing building facades with variation in finishing
elements, colors, or other architectural features so that no
homogeneous wall area extends for a length greater than 200 feet.
2. Subsections 30-70.1, 30-70.2, 30-70.3, and 30-70.7, and 30-70.8 in
part, related to the development of lower income housing, shall
apply to the development of multifamily apartments in this district.
Subsections 30-70.4, 30-70.5, 30-70.6, and the minimum parking
requirement of two spaces per unit in Subsection 30-70.8d, shall
not apply.
3. The bedroom distribution for the affordable units shall provide the
bedroom distribution as required by applicable COAH regulations.
a. Hospitals.
b. One family detached dwellings in accordance with the R-15 District.
c. Office buildings, medical office buildings and medical laboratories.
d. Farms as Outlined in the R40A District. Notwithstanding the provisions
of Section 30-89, the following agricultural uses/purposes shall be
allowed as a second permitted use on the same property with another
permitted use in this zone: growing and harvesting of crops; temporary
farmstand; retail farm market; associated residence for the farmer
(owner/tenant).
e. Child care centers.
f. Retail farm markets.
§ 30-137 HOLMDEL § 30-139.4
1:804
§ 30-139.4. Accessory Uses. [1976 Code § 78-81; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 98-11 § 3; Ord. No. 2001-23 § 1]
§ 30-139.5. Conditional Uses. [1976 Code § 78-81; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 20-82; Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 84-23; Ord. No. 95-22 § VIII;
Ord. No. 97-1 § VII; Ord. No. 98-11 § 4; Ord. No. 2001-23 § 2; Ord.
No. 2002-17 § 3; Ord. No. 2013-33]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 30-155:
§ 30-139.6. Bulk and Design Requirements. [1976 Code § 78-81;
Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 20-82]
a. Off-street parking and loading.
b. Bulk storage and waste disposal facilities per Section 30-87.
c. Devices that convert renewable solar energy into usable energy
sources.
a. Public utilities.
b. Nursing homes.
c. Veterinarian offices.
d. Residential health care facilities or assisted living residences.
e. Wireless telecommunications antennas and towers.
f. Church or house of worship.
a. Hospitals.
1. Minimum lot area: five acres.
2. Minimum lot frontage, width and depth: 300 feet.
3. Maximum coverage by buildings and paving: 60%.
4. Maximum building height: 60 feet.
5. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.2.
6. Minimum off-street parking and loading: 1.5 parking spaces/bed;
one loading space, plus one additional space when 100,000 square
feet of gross floor area is reached.
7. Minimum setbacks: 1.5 times the building height, but not less than
50 feet.
b. Medical Office Buildings.
§ 30-139.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-139.6
1:805
1. Minimum lot area: two acres for one to two stories; five acres for
three or more stories.
2. Lot and Yard Dimensions.
Type of
Requirement Under 5 Acres 5+ Acres
Minimum width and
frontage, feet
200 400
Minimum depth, feet 300 500
Minimum front yard,
feet
150 150
Minimum side yard 20* feet each; combined, 30% of lot width
Minimum rear yard,
feet
50** 50**
Maximum building
height, feet
30 60
Maximum lot
coverage, percent
60 60
Maximum FAR 0.2 0.2
NOTES:
* Buildings erected higher than 2 stories shall have a minimum
side yard setback of 4 times the building height when adjoining
a residential zone and at least 1.5 times the building height
when adjoining a nonresidential zone or 30 feet, whichever is
greater. Buildings on corner lots shall be set back from the side
street at least 50 feet.
** Where the building is erected higher than 2 stories, the rear
yard setback shall be 4 times the building height when
adjoining a residential zone and at least 1.5 times the building
height when adjoining a nonresidential zone or 50 feet,
whichever is greater.
3. Minimum Off-Street Parking and Loading.
(a) One parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area, a
minimum of 10 spaces, for medical office buildings.
(b) One parking space per 250 square feet of gross floor area, a
minimum of five spaces, for nonmedical office buildings.
(c) One loading space for any office building.
§ 30-139.6 HOLMDEL § 30-139.7
1:806
§ 30-139.7. Buffer. [1976 Code § 78-81; Ord. No. 3-82]
The buffer areas shall adhere to the requirements of Sections 30-45 and
30-62.
§ 30-139.8. (Reserved)144
§ 30-140. (RESERVED)
§ 30-141. OFFICE LABORATORY OL-1, OL-2, OL-3 DISTRICTS.
§ 30-141.1. Regulations. [1976 Code § 78-82; Ord. No. 3-82]
Regulations for the OL-1, OL-2 and OL-3 Districts are as follows.
§ 30-141.2. Purpose. [1976 Code § 78-82; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
84-7]
The purpose of these districts is to establish zoning districts for office
development, recognizing highway access, and exiting uses as well as tracts
owned by or already developed for large lot research/office use. It is also
intended, along with other zoning districts, that the provision for assisting
in the development of lower income housing as set forth below and in
subsection 30-70.2f be a required element of designated new development
in this district.
§ 30-141.3. Uses Allowed by Right. [1976 Code § 78-82; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 95-22 § IX; Ord. No. 97-35 § IV]
a. A building or group of buildings in single ownership for the following
purposes:
1. Farms as outlined in the R-40A District.
2. Offices devoted exclusively to professional, executive, engineering,
accounting, scientific research and development, statistical and
financial purposes.
3. Laboratories devoted exclusively to research, product development
and testing, engineering development and sales developments.
4. Conference center.
5. All uses permitted under paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 above shall be
required to participate in the Township's efforts to produce lower
income housing as set forth in subsection 30-70.2f.
b. Child care centers.
144. Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-139.8, Wireless Telecommunications Facility
Standards, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 98-11
and 2001-23, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
§ 30-139.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-141.3
1:807
§ 30-141.4. Accessory Uses. [1976 Code § 78-82; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 98-11 § 3; Ord. No. 2001-23 § 1]
§ 30-141.5. Conditional Uses. [1976 Code § 78-82; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 98-11 § 4; Ord. No. 2001-23 § 2; Ord. No. 2002-17 § 3; Ord.
No. 2013-33]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 30-155:
§ 30-141.6. Bulk and Design Regulations. [1976 Code § 78-82; Ord.
No. 3-82]
Type of
Requirement OL-1 District OL-2 District OL-3 District
Minimum lot area,
acres
100 30 15
Minimum lot
frontage, feet
500 500 500
Minimum building
setback, feet:
From property line 200 200 200
From public street 600 400 200
From any
residential zone
district line
800 600 400
c. Retail farm markets.
a. Uses on the Same Site. Off-street parking and loading facilities;
maintenance and utility facilities; central heating and power plants;
devices that convert renewable solar energy into usable energy
sources; educational facilities for training and study connected with the
principal use; testing, research and experimental equipment;
communication facilities including antenna masts; clinics; cafeterias;
sundry shops for the retail sale of articles to trainees and employees
limited to 1,500 square feet of gross floor area; recreational facilities;
living quarters for custodians or caretakers and guest dormitory
facilities for trainees and visitors; and bulk storage and waste disposal
facilities per Section 30-87.
a. Public utilities.
b. Wireless telecommunications antennas and towers.
c. Church or house of worship.
§ 30-141.3 HOLMDEL § 30-141.6
1:808
Type of
Requirement OL-1 District OL-2 District OL-3 District
Maximum building
height, feet
100
6 stories
60
4 stories
45
3 stories
Maximum building
coverage, percent
5 5 5
Maximum FAR 0.1 0.1 0.1
Maximum lot
coverage, percent
20 20 20
Minimum off-street
parking*, spaces per
square feet GFA
1/250 1/250 1/250
Minimum off-street loading of 1 space. An additional space shall be
required for each 100,000 square feet of gross floor area.
NOTES:
* Off-street parking may be in any yard, providing that it is no closer than
100 feet to a public street or residential zone district line.
§ 30-141.7. Buffer. [1976 Code § 78-82; Ord. No. 3-82]
The buffer areas shall adhere to the requirements of Sections 30-54 and
30-80.
§ 30-141.8. (Reserved)145
§ 30-142. B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD (VILLAGE) BUSINESS DISTRICT.
§ 30-142.1. Regulations. [1976 Code § 78-83; Ord. No. 3-82]
Regulations for the B-1 District are as follows.
§ 30-142.2. Purpose. [1976 Code § 78-83; Ord. No. 3-82]
The purpose of this district is to recognize the small residential and
commercial area around the Village of Holmdel offering neighborhood
convenience services. This district is also intended to require a review
of the architectural features of structures to assure new or rehabilitated
structures will retain the character of the historic village.
§ 30-142.3. Uses Allowed by Right. [1976 Code § 78-83; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 95-22 § X; Ord. No. 96-45 § I; Ord. No. 97-35 § IV;
Ord. No. 2002-19 § 1]
145. Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-141.8, Wireless Telecommunications Facility
Standards, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 98-11
and 2001-23, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
§ 30-141.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-142.3
1:809
§ 30-142.4. Accessory Uses. [1976 Code § 78-83; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 98-11 § 3; Ord. No. 2001-23 § 1]
a. Churches, public and private schools and libraries.
b. Buildings, structures and premises for use and occupancy by the
Township for any municipal purpose.
c. Firehouses and first aid and rescue facilities.
d. Public utility offices.
e. Banks and fiduciary institutions.
f. Professional and business offices including real estate offices.
g. Retail sales establishments, limited to meat markets, seafood markets,
bakeries, specialty food stores and delicatessens (but not including
convenience stores or supermarkets), art galleries and frame shops,
craft stores, antiques stores, jewelry stores, pharmacies and
drugstores, sporting goods stores, gift shops, hobby shops, toy stores,
bookstores, record and tape stores, clothing stores, shoe stores,
hardware stores, packaged liquor stores, fabric and sewing stores,
computer sales, travel agencies, and florists.
h. Retail service establishments, limited to barber and beauty shops
involved in men's and women's hair and nail care, waxing, tanning and
cosmetics, tailoring and dressmaking shops, appliance repair shops,
shoe repair shops, optical services and optical clinics, computer service
shops, antique appraisal shops and interior design shops.
i. Counseling services, both personal and family, operating with a license
issued by the State of New Jersey.
j. Restaurants.
k. Funeral homes.
l. Single family dwellings.
m. Child care centers.
n. Retail farm markets.
a. Off-street parking and loading.
b. Bulk storage and waste disposal facilities per Section 30-87.
c. Video/computer games and pinball machines shall be permitted as an
incidental use in legally existing businesses, provided that there are no
more than two such games or machines in any one place of business.
§ 30-142.3 HOLMDEL § 30-142.5
1:810
§ 30-142.5. Conditional Uses. [1976 Code § 78-83; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 96-45 § II; Ord. No. 98-11 § 4; Ord. No. 2001-23 § 2; Ord.
No. 2002-17 § 3; Ord. No. 2013-33]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 30-155:
§ 30-142.6. Bulk and Design Requirements. [1976 Code § 78-83;
Ord. No. 3-82]
§ 30-142.7. Village Character. [1976 Code § 78-83; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 20-82]
In order to preserve the unique historical and architectural character of
Holmdel Village, the following procedure, in addition to but part of site plan
a. Accessory single-family residential use.
b. Veterinarian offices.
c. Wireless telecommunications antennas and towers.
d. Church or house of worship.
a. Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet.
b. Minimum lot width and frontage: 150 feet.
c. Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
d. Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
e. Minimum rear yard: 25 feet, except at least 50 feet from a public street.
f. Minimum side yard: 20 feet each, except at least 50 feet from a public
street.
g. Maximum building height: 30 feet.
h. Maximum floor area ratio: 0.2.
i. Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
j. Minimum Off-Street Parking and Loading:
1. One parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
2. Two parking spaces per dwelling unit.
3. A minimum of six parking spaces for each use or tenant in a
professional building.
4. One parking space per five seats in church.
5. One loading space for each use or combination of uses on one lot
that exceeds 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
§ 30-142.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-142.7
1:811
approval, shall be followed and approval obtained prior to the issuance of a
building permit for new structure or addition to or alteration of an existing
structure.
§ 30-142.8. Buffer. [1976 Code § 78-83; Ord. No. 3-82]
The buffer areas shall adhere to the requirements of Sections 30-54 and
30-80.
§ 30-142.9. (Reserved)146
§ 30-143. B-2 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT.
§ 30-143.1. Regulations. [1976 Code § 78-84; Ord. No. 3-82]
Regulations for the B-2 District are as follows.
§ 30-143.2. Purpose. [1976 Code § 78-84; Ord. No. 3-82]
The purpose of this district is to recognize small areas of commercial
services offering neighborhood conveniences.
§ 30-143.3. Uses Allowed by Right. [1976 Code § 78-84; Ord. No.
3-82]
§ 30-143.4. Accessory Uses. [1976 Code § 78-84; Ord. No. 3-82]
a. Architectural plans showing existing and proposed buildings on the lot
shall be submitted as part of the site plan, where a site plan is required,
or separately, where a site plan is not required.
b. The approving authority shall include the architectural plans as one of
the matters to be considered and upon which the public hearing is held.
The purpose of the hearing on the architectural design shall be to
determine whether the proposed building or alteration will be
compatible in appearance with the character of Holmdel Village.
c. The approving authority shall be guided in its determination not by
rigid adherence to historic architectural styles, but by judgment of the
appropriateness of the proposed use in its setting. For this purpose, the
approving authority may consult, in addition to its engineer and
planning consultant, recognized authorities in architecture or similar
fields to assist it in its determination.
a. The same as the B-1 District.
a. The same as the B-1 District.
146. Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-142.9, Wireless Telecommunications Facility
Standards, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 98-11
and 2001-23, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
§ 30-142.7 HOLMDEL § 30-143.5
1:812
§ 30-143.5. Conditional Uses. [1976 Code § 78-84; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 2002-17 § 3; Ord. No. 2013-33]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 30-155:
§ 30-143.6. Bulk and Design Requirements. [1976 Code § 78-84;
Ord. No. 3-82]
§ 30-143.7. Buffers. [1976 Code § 78-84; Ord. No. 3-82]
Buffer requirements shall be the same as the B-1 District.
§ 30-143.8. (Reserved)147
§ 30-144. ROUTE 35 HIGHWAY ZONE OVERLAY (RT35H OVERLAY).
§ 30-144.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2013-32]
The Route 35 Highway Overlay Zone is to assist in providing more
streamlined and efficient zoning along the US Highway Route 35 Corridor.
The area, along the Route 35 corridor, contains several commercial and
residential zones, with varying standards. An overlay zone will aid in
unifying a standard across the corridor.
§ 30-144.2. Uses Allowed by Right. [Ord. No. 2013-32; Ord. No.
2014-20]
The following are proposed use and bulk standard requirements for the
proposed RT35H Overlay:
a. The same as the B-1 District.
b. Automobile service stations.
c. Church or house of worship.
a. The same as the B-1 District, except subsection 30-142.6 shall not
apply, and except further that service stations shall have minimum lots
of 43,000 square feet with lot frontage of 200 feet with all other
requirements of the B-1 District applying. Off-street parking for service
stations shall be four spaces per service bay, plus one for each service
vehicle.
a. Limited industrial uses, including the manufacture, fabrication,
treatment and conversion of products.
b. Scientific and research laboratories.
147. Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-143.8, Wireless Telecommunications Facility
Standards, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 98-11
and 2001-23, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
§ 30-143.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-144.2
1:813
§ 30-144.3. Accessory Uses. [Ord. No. 2013-32]
Accessory uses customary incidental and subordinate to the above uses.
§ 30-144.4. Bulk Requirements. [Ord. No. 2013-32]
c. Office buildings for business, professional, executive and administrative
purposes.
d. Medical office, facility and support services.
e. Warehouses and wholesale distribution centers.
f. Shopping centers, retail sales and service uses conforming to C-1
District regulations.
g. Restaurants.
h. Public utility uses.
i. Hospitals or veterinarian offices without outside kennels and boarding
facilities.
j. Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, including but not limited to
skating rinks, racquet clubs, health clubs, miniature golf, driving
ranges and instructional arts and crafts and gymnastics and physical
conditioning facilities.
k. Banks and fiduciary institutions.
l. Garden centers and nurseries.
m. Child care centers.
n. Convenience food store, with or without petroleum filling station.
o. Scientific research laboratories devoted exclusively to research,
product development and testing, engineering development, and sales
development.
p. Limited light industrial uses, including the manufacture, fabrication,
treatment and conversion of products, provided that any business
having a Standard Industrial Classification number of 22-39 inclusive,
46-49 inclusive, 51 or 76 as designated in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual is prohibited.
q. Overnight stays associated with medical procedures for veterinarian
offices.
a. Minimum Lot Area (acres) - two.
b. Maximum Floor Area Ratio - 0.2.
c. Maximum Lot Coverage (%) - 60.
§ 30-144.2 HOLMDEL § 30-144.4
1:814
§ 30-144.5. Buffers. [Ord. No. 2013-32; Ord. No. 2014-20]
Buffers shall be required in accordance with Section 30-54.
§ 30-144.6. Off-Street Parking and Loading. [Ord. No. 2013-32; Ord.
No. 2014-20]
Off-street parking and loading shall be required in accordance with the
following:
Loading
Type of Use
Required
Parking Spaces
Required for
GFA First Space
(square feet)
Required for
GFA for Each
Additional
Space (square
feet)
Industrial Uses 1/400 square feet 5,000 40,000
Laboratories 1/400 square feet 5,000 40,000
Offices:
Medical 1/150 square feet 10,000 100,000
Nonmedical 1/250 square feet 10,000 100,000
Warehousing 1/800 square feet 5,000 40,000
Retail sales 4/1,000 square
feet
10,000 20,000
Veterinarian 5/examination
room
10,000 N/A
Hospitals 1.5/bed 10,000 100,000
Banks and
fiduciary
institutions
1/250 square feet 10,000 100,000
d. Minimum Lot Width (feet) - 300.
e. Minimum Lot Frontage (feet) - 300.
f. Minimum Lot Depth (feet) - 400.
g. Maximum Building Height (feet) - 45.
h. Maximum Building Coverage (%) - 20.
i. Minimum Building Setback Residential Zone District Line (feet) - 200.
j. Minimum Front Yard (feet) - 100.
k. Minimum Rear Yard (feet) - 100.
l. Minimum Side Yard (feet) - 50.
§ 30-144.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-144.6
1:815
Loading
Type of Use
Required
Parking Spaces
Required for
GFA First Space
(square feet)
Required for
GFA for Each
Additional
Space (square
feet)
Restaurant 1/3 seats 10,000 25,000
Child-Care
Centers
3.5/1,000 square
feet
10,000 25,000
Shopping
Centers
5/1,000 square
feet
5,000 40,000
Garden Centers
& Nurseries
5/1,000 square
feet
10,000 25,000
Convenience
Store
3.5/1,000 square
feet
10,000 25,000
Public Utility 1/1,000 square
feet
10,000 25,000
Indoor
Recreational
Facilities
5/1,000 square
feet
10,000 25,000
Fields 5/1,000 square
feet
10,000 25,000
Recreational
Training
1.5/1,000 square
feet
10,000 25,000
Tennis Courts 3/court 10,000 25,000
§ 30-144.7. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 2014-20]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the following
provisions:
§ 30-145. C-1 SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT.
a. Gas Stations:
1. Shall have frontage on Route 35;
2. Minimum setback of 500 feet from any local street;
3. Minimum setback of 500 feet from any residential use or
residential zone;
4. Shall adhere to the existing bulk requirements in subsection
30-144.4. If there is a conflict, the conditions herein shall take
precedence.
§ 30-144.6 HOLMDEL § 30-145.1
1:816
§ 30-145.1. Regulations. [1976 Code § 78-85; Ord. No. 3-82]
Regulations for the C-1 District are as follows.
§ 30-145.2. Purpose. [1976 Code § 78-85; Ord. No. 3-82]
The purpose of this district is to provide areas for large-lot, community
or regional retail shopping with controlled access from an arterial street,
designed as a shopping center with one overall plan and shared off-street
parking.
§ 30-145.3. Uses Allowed by Right. [1976 Code § 78-85; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 97-35 § IV; Ord. No. 2007-25 § I]
All uses shall be in a shopping center design containing at least six separate
businesses.
§ 30-145.4. Accessory Uses. [1976 Code § 78-85; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 98-11 § 3; Ord. No. 2001-23 § 1]
§ 30-145.5. Conditional Uses. [1976 Code § 78-85; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 98-11 § 4; Ord. No. 2001-23 § 2; Ord. No. 2002-17 § 3; Ord.
No. 2013-33]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 30-155:
a. The retail sale of consumable products, wearing apparel,
pharmaceuticals, hardware, appliances, household goods, confections
and general merchandise.
b. The sale of personal services, such as appliance and shoe repair shops,
cleaners, tailors, barbershops and beauty salons.
c. Offices and financial institutions.
d. Theaters, gymnasiums, restaurants and nightclubs.
e. Farms as outlined in the R-40A District.
f. Retail farm markets.
g. Indoor recreational facilities, limited to skating rinks, racquet clubs,
health clubs, miniature golf and instructional arts and crafts and
gymnastics and physical conditioning facilities.
a. Off-street parking and loading.
b. Bulk storage and waste disposal facilities per Section 30-87.
a. Fast-food restaurants.
b. Wireless telecommunications antennas and towers.
§ 30-145.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-145.5
1:817
§ 30-145.6. Bulk and Design Requirements. [1976 Code § 78-85;
Ord. No. 3-82]
Any site proposed for development shall be submitted with an overall plan
for the entire property with at least 50,000 square feet of gross floor area
(GFA). Segments of the plan may be erected in stages, but each stage
shall be completed in accordance with the plan for the total property in
accordance with the purpose of this district.
c. Church or house of worship.
a. Minimum lot area: 15 acres.
b. Minimum lot width and frontage: 500 feet.
c. Minimum lot depth: 800 feet.
d. Minimum building setback:
1. From a public street: 200 feet. (NOTE: Automobile service station
buildings may be located within 60 feet of a street right-of-way and
100 feet of a property line, with pumps and service islands located
25 feet from any street right-of-way and 50 feet from any other
property line.)
2. From other property line: 200 feet. (NOTE: Automobile service
station buildings may be located within 60 feet of a street right-ofway
and 100 feet of a property line, with pumps and service islands
located 25 feet from any street right-of-way and 50 feet from any
other property line.)
3. From any residential zone district line: 400 feet.
e. Maximum building height: 30 feet.
f. Maximum building coverage: 20%.
g. Maximum floor area ratio: 0.2.
h. Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
i. Minimum off-street parking: 5.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
floor area. (NOTE: A maximum of 20% of the gross floor area can be
office use without additional parking for the office use. Office use above
20% shall require parking at one space per 300 square feet; theaters
located on the periphery of the site require no additional parking other
than the spaces generated by being included in the total gross floor
area of the shopping center (if within the shopping center, theaters
shall provide an additional one space per eight seats); fast-food
restaurants shall provide one space per 40 square feet of gross floor
area of nonseating area in addition to the spaces generated by being
included in the total gross floor area of the shopping center; and a
service station shall have four spaces per service bay, plus one space
§ 30-145.5 HOLMDEL § 30-145.6
1:818
§ 30-145.7. Buffer. [1976 Code § 78-85; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
2007-25 § II]
The buffer areas shall adhere to the requirements of Sections 30-54 and
30-80. In addition, the approving authority shall have the power to increase
any of the buffer requirements if it determines increased buffer is needed in
areas that contain less than the required widths.
§ 30-145.8. (Reserved)148
§ 30-146. CI COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
§ 30-146.1. Regulations. [1976 Code § 78-86; Ord. No. 3-82]
Regulations for the CI District are as follows.
§ 30-146.2. Purpose. [1976 Code § 78-86; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
84-7]
The purpose of this district is to provide an area for either commercial or
industrial development in an area with major highway access, water and
sewer service, and an existing regional industrial/commercial development
characteristic. It is also intended, along with other zoning districts, that the
provision for assisting in the development of lower income housing as set
forth below and in subsection 30-70.2f be a required element of designated
new development in this district.
§ 30-146.3. Uses Allowed by Right. [1976 Code § 78-86; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 84-7; Ord. No. 95-22 § XI; Ord. No. 97-35 § IV; Ord.
No. 2007-14 § I]
per service vehicle in addition to the requirements of the shopping
center.)
j. Minimum off-street loading: first space required at 10,000 square feet
gross floor area; for each additional 40,000 square feet, an additional
space shall be provided.
a. Limited industrial uses, including the manufacture, fabrication,
treatment and conversion of products.
b. Scientific and research laboratories.
c. Office buildings for business, professional, executive and administrative
purposes.
d. Warehouses and wholesale distribution centers.
148. Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-145.8, Wireless Telecommunications Facility
Standards, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 98-11
and 2001-23, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
§ 30-145.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-146.3
1:819
§ 30-146.4. Accessory Uses. [1976 Code § 78-86; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 98-11 § 3; Ord. No. 2001-23 § 1]
§ 30-146.5. Conditional Uses. [1976 Code § 78-86; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 98-11 § 4; Ord. No. 2001-23 § 2; Ord. No. 2002-17 § 3; Ord.
No. 2013-33]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 30-155:
§ 30-146.6. Bulk and Design Requirements. [1976 Code § 78-86;
Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 13-84; Ord. No. 95-22 § XII]
e. Retail sales and service uses conforming to C-1 District regulations.
f. Farms as outlined in the R-40A District.
g. Accessory uses customary incidental and subordinate to the above uses.
h. Public utility uses.
i. Hospitals or veterinarian offices without outside kennels and boarding
facilities.
j. New car dealers.
k. Indoor recreational facilities, limited to skating rinks, racquet clubs,
health clubs, miniature golf and instructional arts and crafts and
gymnastics and physical conditioning facilities.
l. All uses permitted under paragraphs a, b, c, d, e and j above, as well as
subsection 30-146.4b below, shall be required to participate in the
Township's efforts to produce lower income housing as set forth in
subsection 30-70.2f.
m. Child care centers.
n. Retail farm markets.
a. Off-street parking and loading.
b. Devices that convert renewable solar energy into usable energy
sources.
c. Bulk storage and waste disposal facilities per Section 30-87.
a. Automobile service stations.
b. Motels and conference centers.
c. Wireless telecommunications antennas and towers.
d. Church or house of worship.
a. Minimum lot area: five acres.
§ 30-146.3 HOLMDEL § 30-146.6
1:820
b. Minimum lot width and frontage: 400 feet.
c. Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
d. Minimum building setbacks:
1. From a public street: 100 feet.
2. From other property line: 1.5 times the building height.
3. From any residential zone district line: 100 feet.
e. Maximum building height: 45 feet.
f. Maximum building coverage: 15%.
g. Maximum floor area ratio: 15%.
h. Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
i. Minimum Off-Street Parking and Loading:
Loading
Type of Use
Required Parking
Spaces
Required GFA for
First Space (square
feet)
Required GFA for
Each Additional
Space (square feet)
Industrial Uses 1/400 square feet 5,000 40,000
Laboratories 1/400 square feet 5,000 40,000
Offices:
Medical 1/150 square feet 10,000 100,000
Nonmedical 1/250 square feet 10,000 100,000
Warehousing 1/800 square feet 5,000 40,000
Retail sales 5/1,000 square feet 10,000 20,000
Veterinarian 5/examination room 10,000 N/A
Hospitals 1.5/bed 10,000 100,000
Motel 1.1/unit 10,000 100,000
Restaurant 1/3 seats 10,000 25,000
New Car Dealer* 1/300 square feet
showroom area and
sales office, plus 4/bay
and work area
10,000 40,000
* These are in addition to areas used for display and storage of new
vehicles.
j. Regulations for Industrial and Office Park Development.
§ 30-146.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-146.6
1:821
§ 30-146.7. Buffer. [1976 Code § 78-86; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
2007-14 § II]
The buffer areas shall adhere to the requirements of Sections 30-54 and
30-80. In addition, the approving authority shall have the power to increase
any of the buffer requirements if it determines increased buffer is needed in
areas that contain less than the required widths.
§ 30-146.8. (Reserved)149
§ 30-147. (RESERVED)
1. The purpose of these requirements is to provide additional
flexibility in designing and marketing property for smaller
employment uses in accordance with the definition of "Industrial or
office park" and in locations near transportation routes, convenient
to population centers and convenient to other industrial
development.
2. Tracts of 25 acres or larger may be developed as office/industrial
parks in accordance with the following standards. Tracts shall be
developed with interior streets to prevent frontage on arterial and
collector streets.
(a) The average lot size in the park shall not be less than five
acres.
(b) The minimum lot size shall be one acre.
(c) No lots of less than five acres may be created by subdivision
until a sufficient number of lots in excess of five acres have
been subdivided to maintain the minimum average lot size of
five acres, except that in any event, no more than 1/2 the total
number of resulting lots may be less than five acres. (For
purposes of this chapter in determining building setbacks and
other site requirements, a leased area that is not a subdivided
lot shall nevertheless use the boundaries of the leased area in
the same manner as if the boundaries were the subdivided lot
lines.)
(d) The minimum lot width and depth for parcels less than five
acres shall be 200 feet, with minimum building setbacks of 65
feet from all property lines, except a minimum setback of 100
feet from any residential zone line.
(e) All other requirements shall be the same as set forth in
subsection 30-146.6 paragraphs d2, e, f, g, h and i.
(f) Where an applicant can control the use of parking spaces, such
as employee parking areas, separate parking areas may be
approved for small cars as set forth in Section 30-80.
§ 30-146.6 HOLMDEL § 30-148
1:822
§ 30-148. LIH LOW IMPACT HIGHWAY DISTRICT.
§ 30-148.1. Regulations. [1976 Code § 78-86.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord.
No. 94-5]
Regulations for the LIH District are as follows.
§ 30-148.2. Purpose. [1976 Code § 78-86.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
94-5]
The purpose of this district is to provide an area for light or moderate
intensity office, laboratory, light industrial, and community service
development or retirement housing with major highway access and water
and sewer service. All development shall comply with the applicable
provisions of Chapter 14. Affordable Housing and this chapter with regard
to lower income housing.
§ 30-148.3. Uses Allowed by Right. [1976 Code § 78-86.1; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 94-5; Ord. 95-22 § XIII; Ord. No. 97-35 § IV]
a. Offices devoted exclusively to professional, executive, engineering,
accounting, scientific research and development, statistical and
financial purposes.
b. Scientific research laboratories devoted exclusively to research,
product development and testing, engineering development, and sales
development.
c. Limited light industrial uses, including the manufacture, fabrication,
treatment and conversion of products, provided that any business
having a Standard Industrial Classification number of 22-39 inclusive,
46-49 inclusive, 51 or 76 as designated in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual is prohibited.
d. Conference center without overnight lodging.
e. Farms as outlined in the R-40A District.
f. Indoor recreation facilities limited to skating rinks, racquet clubs,
health clubs, and miniature golf.
g. Restaurants, excluding fast-food restaurants and cafeterias.
h. Banks.
i. Planned Retirement Communities. (See subsection 30-148.8.)
j. Buildings, structures and premises for use and occupancy by the
Township for any municipal purpose.
149. Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-146.8, Wireless Telecommunications Facility
Standards, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 98-11
and 2001-23, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
§ 30-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-148.3
1:823
§ 30-148.4. Accessory Uses. [1976 Code § 78-86.1; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 94-5; Ord. No. 97-35 § VI; Ord. No. 98-11 § 3; Ord. No.
2001-23 § 1]
§ 30-148.5. Conditional Uses. [1976 Code § 78-86.1; Ord. No. 3-82;
Ord. No. 94-5; Ord. No. 95-22 § XIV; Ord. No. 98-11 § 4; Ord. No.
2001-23 § 2; Ord. No. 2002-17 § 3; Ord. No. 2013-33]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 30-155:
§ 30-148.6. Bulk and Design Requirements. [1976 Code § 78-86.1;
Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 94-5]
Type of Requirement LIH District
Minimum lot area, acres 5
Minimum lot frontage and width, feet 350
Minimum lot depth, feet 400
Minimum building setback, feet:
From property line 65
From public street 100
From any residential zone district line 100
Maximum building height, feet 45 (3 stories)
Maximum building coverage, percent 15
Maximum FAR 0.15
Maximum lot coverage, percent 35
Maximum off-street parking*
k. Child care centers.
l. Retail farm markets.
a. Off-street parking and loading/unloading.
b. Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to the uses
allowed by right.
c. Temporary farm stands.
a. Office or industrial park development.
b. Wireless telecommunications antennas and towers.
c. Church or house of worship.
§ 30-148.3 HOLMDEL § 30-148.6
1:824
Type of Requirement LIH District
1 space per 250 square feet GFA for all uses except for limited light
industry and scientific research laboratories, which shall have 1 space per
400 square feet GFA.
Minimum off-street loading of 1 space. An additional space shall be
required for each 100,000 square feet of gross floor area.
NOTES:
* Off-street parking may be in any yard, provided that it is no closer than
100 feet to a public street or residential zone district line.
§ 30-148.7. Buffer. [1976 Code § 78-86.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
94-5]
In addition to the buffer, landscaping and design standards found in
Sections 30-54 and 30-80, the following supplemental design standards
shall apply in the LIH District:
§ 30-148.8. Standards for Planned Retirement Community
Development in the LIH District. [1976 Code § 78-86.1; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 94-5; Ord. No. 2001-10 § I]
Regulations for a PRC development in the LIH District are as follows:
a. All parking areas for offices, scientific research laboratories, limited
light industrial development and similar uses shall be located on the
side or rear of the building.
b. Off-street parking areas shall be separated from the road right-of-way
by a landscape area of a minimum width of 25 feet, planted in
accordance with the standards of Section 30-54d.
a. Uses Allowed by Right.
1. Single-family detached dwellings (See Schedule D).150
2. Duplexes (See Schedule D).
3. Quadraplexes (See Schedule D).
4. Assisted living residences (See Schedules E and F).
5. Model homes and/or sales office.
b. Accessory Uses.
1. Retirement community center, as part of a Planned Retirement
Community (PRC) development.
150. Editor's Note: The schedules referred to herein may be found at the end of this section.
§ 30-148.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-148.8
1:825
2. Recreational facilities and uses, including buildings for
recreational activities, biking paths, walking paths, tennis courts,
shuffleboard courts, swimming pools, and similar recreational
improvements related to the PRC.
3. Administration buildings related to the PRC.
4. Building emergency services, such as garages and offices for first
aid equipment and personnel, as part of a PRC development.
5. On-site medical and personal services for the use of the on-site
population only, as part of a PRC development.
6. Bus stops to service the retirement community center as part of a
PRC development.
c. Tract Requirements.
1. The tract shall be under one ownership or control by the applicant
for purposes of obtaining all required development approvals and
committing the tract to the regulations of the Planned Retirement
Community.
2. Area and Yard Requirements for Tract.
Minimum tract size 40 acres
Minimum tract frontage 300 feet on a collector or
arterial roadway
Maximum density 4 dwelling units per acre
Minimum building setback from
any tract boundary
75 feet
Minimum perimeter landscaped
buffer
50 feet
Maximum building coverage 20%
Maximum impervious coverage 35%
3. Deed Restrictions. Approval of a Planned Retirement Community
development consisting of age-restricted housing in the Township
shall be conditioned upon the placement of restrictive covenants on
the deeds to any and all portions of a tract so developed, to insure
that:
(a) Occupancy will be limited to persons 55 years of age or older
with no children under 19 in permanent residence, and that
(b) No further development of the parcel will be permitted.
Exterior walls or structures as shown on an approved site plan
shall not be expanded, and further development of remaining
lands shall be prohibited.
§ 30-148.8 HOLMDEL § 30-148.8
1:826
4. Management of roadways, recreation facilities, security, internal
transportation, and open space. Open undeveloped portions of an
age-restricted development and all proposed roadways, recreation
facilities, security facilities, and internal transportation facilities
shall be owned and maintained by a Homeowners' Association
consisting of all residents. Notification of this provision is to be
included in the contract of sale deed for each unit.
d. Assisted Living Residence. Assisted living residences, which are
required to be licensed by the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:2H-1 et seq., shall be permitted to develop at a ratio of three beds
equaling one unit of permitted density, provided that no more than 100
beds, or 20% of the total units of permitted density, whichever is less,
are provided in an assisted living residence. (See Schedules E and F for
design standards and area and yard requirements.)151
e. Open Space and Recreation Areas.
1. At least 40% of the tract shall be reserved for open space and
recreation uses.
2. Open space and recreation areas shall be located in appropriate
locations and arranged in such a manner so as to further and foster
the purposes of the Planned Retirement Community.
3. All open space and recreation areas shall be dedicated for active or
passive recreation or open space. Such areas shall be owned in
common by residents of the Planned Retirement Community and
managed by a Homeowners' Association.
4. The open space and recreation area shall have a minimum
contiguous area of not less than five acres and no portion thereof
shall be less than 50 feet in width. Where appropriate, open space
and recreation areas should be arranged to provide contiguity of
open spaces between Planned Retirement Communities.
5. A comprehensive recreation plan shall be prepared to include all
proposed passive and active recreation elements such as walking
trails, picnic areas, outdoor and indoor tennis courts, shuffleboard
courts, swimming pools, and seating areas.
6. Each Planned Retirement Community Development shall have a
retirement community center. The following standards shall apply:
(a) The retirement community center shall be centrally located
and easily accessible to all units. A comprehensive circulation
plan shall be prepared to coordinate the road network,
sidewalk layout, and bikeways for the entire development with
emphasis on access to the center.
151. Editor's Note: The schedules referred to herein may be found at the end of this section.
§ 30-148.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-148.8
1:827
(b) The retirement community center may include but not be
limited to cafeteria facilities, homeowners' association
management offices, recreation and social activities rooms and
offices, and a multi-purpose room designed for social activities.
(c) The retirement community center shall be no more than 1 1/2
stories and no more than 25 feet in height.
(d) A bus stop shall be provided at an accessible location for those
using the center's facilities. An enclosure shall be located at
the bus stop to afford protection from adverse weather
conditions, and the bus stop shall include benches and shall be
fully accessible to the handicapped.
7. All open space and recreation areas shall be protected by legal
arrangements, satisfactory to the Planning Board Attorney,
sufficient to assure their maintenance and preservation for their
intended purpose. Covenants or other legal arrangements,
including homeowners' associations, shall specify ownership of the
area; method of maintenance; responsibility for maintenance;
maintenance taxes and insurance; compulsory membership and
compulsory assessment provisions; guarantees that any association
formed to own and maintain the area will not be dissolved without
the consent of the Planning Board; and any other specifications
deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
8. Homeowners' Association.
(a) Within the Planned Retirement Community, the applicant shall
establish a Homeowners' Association.
(b) The Homeowners' Association shall own and be responsible for
the maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of all buildings
and lands owned by the residents of the community in common
with one another. Such lands shall include at a minimum all
recreational areas, open space, and drainage facilities required
by the reviewing board for the community.
f. Additional Facilities.
1. Each PRC development shall provide facilities for emergency
services such as first aid.
2. Each PRC development shall provide an internal transportation
system, for transport within and without the PRC, which may
include such facilities as a shuttle bus.
3. Each PRC shall provide appropriate measures, which may include
gatehouses, security patrols and/or secured entries to the PRC.
§ 30-148.8 HOLMDEL § 30-148.8
1:828
SCHEDULE D(1) (2) [1976 Code § 78-86.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No. 94-5; Ord. No. 95-22
§ XV]
Detached Dwelling Two Family
Dwelling Units
Quadraplex (Four
Family) Dwelling
Units
Principal Building
Minimum
Lot area (square feet) 5,000 feet 8,000 feet 12,000 feet
Lot frontage 40 feet 75 feet 100 feet
Lot width 50 feet 75 feet 100 feet
Lot depth 80 feet 100 feet 100 feet
Side yard:
One 5 feet 15 feet 20 feet
Both: 12 feet
Front yard 20 feet 25 feet 25 feet
Rear yard 15 feet 30 feet
Height (Maximum) 2 1/2 story or 35 feet 2 1/2 story or 35 feet 1 1/2 story or 25 feet
Accessory Building
Minimum
Distance to side line 5 feet 10 feet 10 feet
Distance to rear line 5 feet 10 feet 10 feet
Distance to other
building
10 feet 10 feet 10 feet
(1) Detached, 2 family and quadraplex units may be developed
without the subdivision of individual lots for each building,
provided such development conforms to an approved site plan
and further provided that each building meets the following
minimum requirements:
Setback from any lot line or street line 25 feet
Setback from any other building 30 feet
Setback from any parking area (except
driveways serving individual units)
15 feet
(2) The density for the tract shall not exceed 4 dwelling units per
acre.
§ 30-148.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-148.8
1:829
SCHEDULE E [1976 Code § 78-86.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
94-5]
1. The maximum number of attached units in one structure shall
be 12.
2. The minimum distance between buildings shall be as follows:
a. Windowless wall to windowless wall: 30 feet.
b. Window wall to windowless wall: 40 feet.
c. Window wall to window wall.
(1) Front to front: 60 feet.
(2) Rear to rear: 50 feet.
(3) End to End: 30 feet.
(4) Any building face to internal road or right-of-way: 15 feet
except 12 feet at a garage.
(5) Any building face to common parking area: 12 feet.
3. The maximum height shall be 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet. Any
structure having more than one story shall provide elevators.
4. The minimum off-street parking requirement shall be no less
than 1.5 off-street parking spaces per unit with at least two
handicapped spaces per structure. All common off-street parking
shall be located within 150 feet of the dwelling unit served.
5. Each off-street parking area shall have a designated bus stop
located within each parking area.
6. Each apartment unit shall have a private porch or private
balcony.
7. The density for the tract shall not exceed four dwelling units
per acre.
SCHEDULE F
Schedule of Area, Yard, and Parking Requirements for
Assisted Living Residences as part of a Planned Retirement
Community1 [1976 Code § 78-86.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
94-5]
Assisted Living Residences
Principal building - minimum
Lot area 3 acres
Lot frontage (feet) 300
Lot width (feet) 300
Lot depth (feet) 500
Side yard, each (feet) 100
§ 30-148.8 HOLMDEL § 30-148.8
1:830
§ 30-148.9. (Reserved)152
§ 30-149. RO-3 RETAIL OFFICE DISTRICT.
§ 30-149.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 95-24 § III]
The purpose of this district is to provide a convenient location for the
development of moderately sized retail and office uses. The district is
intended to provide shopping and employment opportunities oriented to
retail sales and service and office developments. The district is designed
to respond to the favorable location along Route 35, and to provide an
alternative development opportunity to the community scale shopping
which currently exists on Route 35.
§ 30-149.2. Uses Allowed by Right. [Ord. No. 95-24 § III; Ord. No.
97-35 § IV; Ord. No. 99-2, § II]
SCHEDULE F
Schedule of Area, Yard, and Parking Requirements for
Assisted Living Residences as part of a Planned Retirement
Community1 [1976 Code § 78-86.1; Ord. No. 3-82; Ord. No.
94-5]
Front yard (feet) 100
Rear yard (feet) 100
Accessory buildings - minimum
Distance to side line (feet) 100
Distance to rear line (feet) 100
Distance to other buildings (feet) 100
Maximum
Building coverage of principal
building
20%
Building coverage of accessory
building(s)
5%
Off-street parking spaces 0.75 spaces/bed
NOTE:
1 The density for the tract shall not exceed 4 dwelling units per
acre.
a. Retail sales establishments, limited to meat markets, seafood markets,
bakeries, specialty food stores, art galleries, antique stores, jewelry
152. Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-148.9, Wireless Telecommunications Facility
Standards, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 98-11
and 2001-23, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
§ 30-148.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-149.2
1:831
§ 30-149.3. Accessory Uses. [Ord. No. 95-24 § III; Ord. No. 97-35
§ VI; Ord. No. 98-11 § 3; Ord. No. 2001-23 § I]
§ 30-149.4. Bulk Requirements. [Ord. No. 95-24 § III; Ord. No. 99-2
§ III]
stores, drug stores, home furnishing stores, sporting good stores, gift
shops, hobby shops, book stores, record and tape stores, art supply
stores, clothing stores, shoe stores, hardware stores, packaged liquor
stores, office supply stores, fabric stores, paint and wall covering
stores, electronic equipment stores, appliance equipment stores and
florists, department stores, general merchandise stores, home
improvement centers which may have outdoor areas for display and
sale of garden and landscaping materials and other home products for
which outdoor storage is appropriate (e.g., winter de-icers, bags of sand
and plants).
b. Retail service establishments, limited to barber and beauty shops,
tailoring and dressmaking shops, dry cleaning and laundering
operations, appliance repair shops, shoe repair shops, optical services
and optical clinics and upholsterers.
c. Professional and business offices.
d. Banks and fiduciary institutions.
e. Garden centers and nurseries.
f. Indoor recreational facilities, limited to skating rinks, racquet clubs,
health clubs, miniature golf and instructional arts and crafts and
gymnastics and physical conditioning facilities.
g. Farms as regulated in the R-40A District.
h. Restaurants, excluding fast food restaurants and cafeterias.
i. Buildings, structures and premises for use and occupancy by the
Township for any purpose.
j. Child care centers.
k. Retail farm markets.
a. Off-street parking and loading/unloading areas.
b. Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to the uses
allowed by right.
c. Temporary farm stands.
a. Minimum lot area Three acres.
b. Maximum floor area ratio: 15%.
§ 30-149.2 HOLMDEL § 30-149.4
1:832
§ 30-149.5. Requirements for Landscaped Buffers/Screens and
Berming. [Ord. No. 95-24 § III]
c. Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
d. Minimum lot width: 300 feet.
e. Minimum lot frontage: 300 feet.
f. Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
g. Minimum front yard: 100 feet.
h. Minimum rear yard: 100 feet.
i. Minimum side yard: 50 feet each side.
j. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
k. Minimum parking setbacks:
1. From building: 12 feet.
2. From streets: 50 feet.
3. From all property lines: 25 feet.
4. From residential zone: 75 feet.
5. From residential building: 125.
a. The minimum width of the landscaped buffer/screen shall be as follows:
1. Front yard: 50 feet.
2. Nonresidential use to residential zone in rear or side: 75 feet.
3. Nonresidential use to nonresidential use in rear or side: 25 feet.
b. The front yard landscaped buffer shall consist of the following minimum
mix of canopy trees and shrubs for every 1,500 square feet of buffer
area: Two canopy trees (large deciduous trees); and, 10 shrubs
(evergreen and/or deciduous) with a mature height that obscures
vehicle head lights but does not obscure the view of buildings.
c. The landscaped buffer/screen between a nonresidential use and a
residential zone shall consist of the following minimum mix of canopy
trees, understory trees and shrubs for every 1,500 square feet of buffer
area: Two canopy trees (large deciduous trees); four understory trees
(deciduous and/or evergreen trees that do not generally reach the
mature height of the canopy trees); and 15 shrubs (evergreen and/or
deciduous).
d. The landscaped buffer/screen between nonresidential uses shall consist
of the following minimum mix of canopy trees and understory trees for
§ 30-149.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-149.5
1:833
§ 30-149.6. Minimum Parking Requirements. [Ord. No. 95-24 § III]
§ 30-149.7. General Requirements. [Ord. No. 95-24 § III; Ord. No.
99-2 § IV]
§ 30-149.8. (Reserved)153
every 1,500 square feet of buffer area: Two canopy trees (large
deciduous trees); and three understory trees (deciduous or evergreen
trees that do not generally reach the mature height of the canopy
trees).
e. All portions of the landscaped buffer/screen not planted in canopy
trees, understory trees, or shrubs shall be maintained in lawn area or
ground cover.
f. Where a nonresidential use abuts a residential zone to the rear or side,
a berm shall also be provided. The berm shall be a minimum of six feet
in height, with a maximum side slope of 4:1 and a minimum top width of
four feet.
a. Four point five spaces per 1,000 square feet of building floor area for
offices and banks.
b. Five spaces per 1,000 square feet of building floor area for retail sales
and service establishments, garden centers, indoor recreational
facilities and restaurants.
c. For mixed use developments (office and commercial) in two story
buildings, a shared parking approach is permitted, provided that a
minimum of four spaces per 1,000 square feet of building floor area are
provided.
a. Buildings may contain up to 165,000 square feet of floor area and the
lot may include more than one building.
b. Multiple buildings on a lot shall provide staggered front and side
setbacks with a minimum offset of 10 feet. The minimum distance
between buildings shall be at least 20 feet.
c. Common driveways between lots shall be provided where feasible.
d. Parking areas shall be designed to provide interconnections with
parking areas on adjoining lots.
e. The finish treatment of walls shall be the same on all sides.
f. Walls shall be extended to the highest point of rooftop mechanicals so
as to shield rooftop mechanicals from all sides. The walls shall
incorporate sound-proofing materials so as to mitigate the noise
generated by any rooftop mechanicals.
§ 30-149.5 HOLMDEL § 30-149.9
1:834
§ 30-149.9. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 98-11 § 4; Ord. No. 2001-23
§ 2; Ord. No. 2002-17 § 3; Ord. No. 2013-33]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 30-155:
§ 30-150. TMHO-3 TRANSITIONAL MIXED HIGHWAY ORIENTED
DISTRICT.
§ 30-150.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2001-31 § 30-150.1]
The purpose of this district is to provide for a mix of uses as well as a scale
of development that is compatible with adjacent residential neighborhoods
and limits traffic generation. The district is designed to provide greater
flexibility for less intensive highway oriented uses along the Route 35
corridor and to provide appropriate transitions between retail, office and
other uses.
§ 30-150.2. Uses Allowed by Right. [Ord. No. 2001-31 § 30-150.2;
Ord. No. 2003-14 § I]
a. Wireless telecommunications antennas and towers.
b. Church or house of worship.
a. Retail sales establishments, limited to meat markets, seafood markets,
bakeries, specialty food stores, art galleries, antique stores, jewelry
stores, drug stores, home furnishing stores, sporting good stores, gift
shops, hobby shops, book stores, music stores, art supply stores,
clothing stores, shoe stores, hardware stores, packaged liquor stores,
office supply stores, fabric stores, paint and wall covering stores,
electronic equipment stores, appliance equipment stores, florists, video
stores, specialty food services stores, camera stores, medical supply
stores, toy and pet stores, coffee and ice cream cafes, health care/
nutrition stores, frame shops, craft stores and travel agencies.
b. Retail service establishments, limited to barber and beauty shops,
tailoring and dressmaking shops, dry cleaning and laundering
operations, appliance repair shops, shoe repair shops, optical services
and optical clinics, upholsterers, computer service shops, antique
appraisal shops, interior design shops, nail care shops, tanning and
cosmetics shops, and tutoring centers.
c. Professional and business offices.
d. Banks and fiduciary institutions.
e. Garden centers and nurseries.
153. Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-149.8, Wireless Telecommunications Facility
Standards, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 98-11
and 2001-23, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
§ 30-149.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-150.2
1:835
§ 30-150.3. Accessory Uses. [Ord. No. 2001-31 § 30-150.3]
§ 30-150.4. Bulk Requirements. [Ord. No. 2001-31 § 30-150.4; Ord.
No. 2003-14 § I]
f. Indoor recreational facilities, limited to skating rinks, racquet clubs,
health clubs, swimming pools, and miniature/virtual golf/batting
facilities, rock-climbing, dance studios, martial arts schools and
children event facilities.
g. Farms as regulated in R-40A District.
h. Restaurants, excluding fast food restaurants and cafeterias.
i. Buildings, structures and premises for use and occupancy by the
Township for any purpose.
j. Childcare centers and adult day-care centers.
k. Retail farm market.
l. Assisted living residences (limited to between 75 and 150 rooms). This
use shall provide multi-unit housing for independent to semiindependent
older persons in which there is at least one hot meal
served per day and some housekeeping services. Living units include at
least a living/bedroom, bathroom and kitchenette. Personal care
services and transportation may also be available by arrangement.
m. Third Generation Self-Storage Facilities. (100% of total storage units
must be environmentally controlled units and only accessible from the
interior of the building. All storage units shall have at least one
automatic fire sprinkler. Operating procedures shall allow for
inspection of all units at least once per year.)
n. Planned shopping villages option. (See subsection 30-150.9)
a. Off-street parking and loading/unloading areas.
b. Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to the uses
allowed by right.
a. Minimum lot area - 3.0 acres.
b. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) - 15%.
c. Maximum lot coverage - 50%.
d. Minimum lot width - 300 feet.
e. Minimum lot frontage - 300 feet.
f. Minimum lot depth - 400 feet.
g. Minimum front yard - 100 feet.
§ 30-150.2 HOLMDEL § 30-150.4
1:836
§ 30-150.5. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 2001-31 § 30-150.5; Ord.
No. 2002-17 § 3; Ord. No. 2003-14 § I; Ord. No. 2013-33]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 30-155:
§ 30-150.6. Increased FAR for Provisions of Open Space, Multi-Level
Parking and Public Amenities. [Ord. No. 2001-31 § 30-150.6]
h. Minimum side yard - 50 feet each side.
i. Minimum rear yard - 100 feet.
j. Maximum building height - 35 feet.
k. Minimum parking setbacks:
1. From building - 12 feet.
2. From streets - 50 feet.
3. From all property lines - 25 feet.
4. From residential zone - 100 feet.
5. From residential building - 150 feet.
a. 1. Specialty vehicle sales establishments.
2. No repair or car servicing on premises.
3. Height of building shall be limited to one story and shall have a
maximum height of 15 feet.
b. Church or house of worship.
a. The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) may be increased by up to five
percentage points to a maximum FAR of 20% for a project approved by
the approving body if the applicant enters into a developer's agreement
with the Township in which the applicant agrees to provide one or more
of the following:
1. Preserve a minimum of 25% of the tract in question adjacent to
residential uses as permanent, open space deeded to the Township;
or as conservation easement or a landscape easement as
recommended by the approving body.
2. Preserve a minimum of 20% of the tract in question inclusive of
upland contiguous forest areas and other natural resource areas
permanently deeded to the Township or as a conservation
easement or as a landscape easement as recommended by the
approving body. The area should not include detention basins,
wetlands, wetland buffers or stream corridor buffers for
percentage calculation purposes.
§ 30-150.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-150.6
1:837
§ 30-150.7. Requirements for Landscaped Buffers/Screens and
Berming. [Ord. No. 2001-31 § 30-150.7]
3. Provide at a minimum a two-level parking structure for 90% of the
total parking requirement for an application. For every two
percentage points of impervious coverage that are reduced on site,
a one percentage point increase in FAR will be considered by the
approving body, up to a maximum FAR of 20%.
4. Provide appropriate area on-site for one of the following public
facilities or amenities:
(a) Public library branch building.
(b) Community recreation facility building.
(c) Nursery and/or day-care facility.
(d) Community park dedication.
(e) Community bike/pedestrian trail system (exclusive of sidewalk
requirements)
(f) Community theater/amphitheater.
(g) Conservation area/nature preserve.
(h) Other public amenities.
b. The above section and related incentives shall be considered
independently and evaluated based upon its positive impact on the
community. The increase in FAR may be greater with some incentives
than others depending on the proposed application and is at the
discretion of the approving body.
a. The minimum width of the landscaped buffer/screen shall be as follows:
1. Front yard: 50 feet.
2. Nonresidential use to residential zone in rear or side: 100 feet.
3. Nonresidential use to nonresidential zone in rear or side: 20 feet.
b. The front yard landscaped buffer shall consist of the following minimum
mix of canopy trees and shrubs for every 1,500 square feet of buffer
area: Two canopy trees (large deciduous trees three inch minimum
caliper); and 10 shrubs (evergreen and/or deciduous three foot to four
foot in height) with a mature height that obscures vehicle headlights
but does not obscure the view of buildings.
c. The landscape buffer/screen between a nonresidential use and a
residential zone shall consist of the following mix of canopy trees,
understory trees and shrubs for every 1,500 square feet of buffer area:
Two canopy trees (large deciduous trees three inch minimum caliper);
§ 30-150.6 HOLMDEL § 30-150.7
1:838
§ 30-150.8. Minimum Parking Requirements. [Ord. No. 2001-31
§ 30-150.8]
six understory trees (deciduous and/or evergreen trees that do not
generally reach the mature height of the canopy trees, a minimum of
three varieties shall be provided - two six foot to seven foot in height;
two eight foot to nine foot in height and two ten foot to twelve foot in
height; and 15 shrubs (evergreen and/or deciduous three foot to four
foot in height).
d. The landscaped buffer/screen between nonresidential uses shall consist
of the following minimum mix of canopy trees and understory trees for
every 1,500 square feet of buffer area: Two canopy trees (large
deciduous trees three inch minimum caliper); and six understory trees
(deciduous and/or evergreen trees) that do not generally reach the
mature height of the canopy trees, a minimum of three varieties shall be
provided - two six foot to seven foot in height; two eight foot to nine foot
in height and two ten foot to twelve foot in height.
e. All portions of the landscaped buffer/screen not planted in canopy
trees, understory trees, or shrubs shall be maintained in lawn area or
ground cover.
f. Where a nonresidential use abuts a residential zone to the rear or side,
a berm shall also be provided. The berm's height shall be variable with
a minimum of four feet to eight feet in height, with a maximum side
slope of 4:1 and a minimum top width of four feet. The berms shall have
a natural undulating appearance, blend with the surrounding grading
and placement of berms shall be on the nonresidential side of the
landscape buffer.
g. Existing trees and shrubs shall be saved and included in the buffer/
screen area at the discretion of the approving body.
h. If because of individual circumstances relating to different properties,
an applicant cannot meet the above buffer requirements, then the
applicant may make an argument to the approving body to offer
alternative design standards that will fulfill the intent and purpose of
this section. Based upon the approving body's discretion the applicant's
alternative proposal may be accepted or rejected.
a. Four point five spaces per 1,000 square feet of building floor area for
offices and banks.
b. Five spaces per 1,000 square feet of building floor area for retail sales
and service establishments, garden centers, indoor recreational
facilities/restaurants.
c. For mixed use developments (office and commercial and planned
shopping villages) in two story buildings, a shared parking approach is
permitted, provided that a minimum of four spaces per 1,000 square
feet of building floor area are provided.
§ 30-150.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-150.8
1:839
§ 30-150.9. Planned Shopping Village Option. [Ord. No. 2001-31
§ 30-150.9; Ord. No. 2003-14 § I]
d. Three-fourths of a space per bed for assisted living residence uses.
For the above parking requirements, up to 10% of the total parking
required on a project may be "banked" parking at the discretion of the
approving body. If the applicant can demonstrate that less parking is
required than above, the approving body at its discretion may waive
or reduce the parking requirements to promote the goal of minimizing
impervious coverage whenever possible.
a. Planning Principles. The Planned shopping village shall be designed to
create a cohesive environment integrating the developed and
undeveloped portions of the TMHO-3 District, with a strong visual
identity, physically linked by pedestrian connections, plazas or other
amenities, and related by a single design theme. Accordingly, the
design shall adhere to the following standards:
1. The architectural style of the planned shopping village shall be
designed to avoid a traditional commercial center appearance
through facade ornamentation, building offsets and entry
treatments and upgraded building material and colors.
2. Buildings shall be sited to form a progression of pedestrian
oriented open spaces with visual as well as pedestrian connections
between such spaces.
3. Open air or enclosed pedestrian spaces shall act as connectors of
buildings and shall contain such amenities as changes in level,
benches, water features, opportunities for entertainment and
seating areas to provide a sense of place and orientation for its
users.
4. One or more entertainment or outdoor facilities constituting a
design focus of the planned shopping village and acceptable to the
approving body shall be provided; for example, a town square,
public plaza or water fountain.
5. At least 15% of the village acreage shall be devoted to pedestrian
spaces, including but not limited to sidewalks in front of stores,
sidewalk cafes or outdoor eating areas and associated landscaping
and water features, including but not limited to fountains, plazas,
any lawn or landscaped areas.
6. Access for service and deliveries shall not obstruct overall traffic
patterns. All service areas shall be isolated from main public
circulation drives and screened from public view.
b. Minimum size area: 10 acres.
c. Minimum Yards:
§ 30-150.8 HOLMDEL § 30-150.9
1:840
1. Front yard: 60 feet.
2. Rear yard: 75 feet.
3. Side yard: There shall be two side yards with a minimum of 50 feet
each.
4. Buffer requirements: To be in accordance with subsection
30-150.7.
d. Maximum FAR: The maximum permitted FAR shall be 17.5%. (See
subsection 30-150.6 for potential increases in FAR calculations.)
At the discretion of the approving body under the conditions described
in subsection 30-150.6 the FAR may be increased by up to five
percentage points to a maximum FAR of 22.5%.
e. Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
f. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories but not to exceed 35 feet.
g. Additional Standards for Planned Shopping Village.
1. The planned shopping village shall be designed according to a
comprehensive master site development plan. Additionally, the
applicant shall establish internal site landscaping, building design
which shall allow for a measure of flexibility in partitioning stores
and common area maintenance control standards.
2. Individual stores, establishments or offices shall have a minimum
floor area of 800 square feet and a maximum floor area not to
exceed 40,000 square feet. At a minimum, 10% of all leasable store
spaces shall be the minimum 800 square feet. The calculation shall
be provided to the nearest whole number.
3. The distance, at the closest point, between any two buildings shall
not be less than 20 feet. In the case of two or more buildings being
connected through the use of a breezeway or similar feature, the
minimum distance between buildings may be reduced, but shall not
be less than 10 feet.
4. Off-street parking areas servicing professional offices shall be
interspersed in convenient locations intended to accommodate a
small grouping of office structures. The minimum distance between
the edge of a parking lot or driveway and any building shall be 15
feet.
5. There shall be a landscape berm along all public streets. The berm
may be included in the required yard setbacks and shall be
designed in conformance with subsection 30-150.7.
6. A comprehensive signage plan shall be provided, which covers
overall project identification, individual building/tenant
identification, traffic regulations, pedestrian crossings, street
§ 30-150.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-150.9
1:841
§ 30-150.10. General Requirements. [Ord. No. 2001-31 § 30-150.10;
Ord. No. 2003-14 § I]
identification and parking and directional instructions. All signage
must be consistent with a small-scale village character. A signage
hierarchy shall be established governing the above signage
categories. There shall be only one identification sign permitted
for each building within the planned shopping village. Individual
tenant signage shall be incorporated within the permitted building
identification sign. In addition, all signage must be consistent with
signage under subsection 30-150.10 below.
7. All buildings shall be designed to convey a small-scale village
character. Buildings included in the planned shopping village
should contain the following design elements:
(a) Provide the greatest amount of floor area on the first floor of
two-story buildings.
(b) Provide shed or pitched roofs, dormers on the second floor and
other similar design features.
(c) Provide consistency in the architectural treatment of building
facades and diversity in the horizontal length of buildings
through introduction of offsets at irregular intervals along the
facade of a building.
(d) Provide a variety of building sizes and heights to create the
village appearance. In order to achieve this variation 30% of all
structures may have nonfunctional roof peaks that do not
exceed 30% of the height limits of this section. This modifies
the requirements of Section 30-126.
8. Exterior freestanding lighting fixtures shall not exceed the height
of proposed structures and in no case shall be greater than 15 feet
in height. The source of illumination shall be recessed, down
directed and shielded within the fixture itself and shall be
consistent in character with the design of the planned shopping
village.
9. An internal pathway system shall be created to provide access to all
buildings, open space areas and parking areas to be located within
a planned shopping village center. The pathway system shall
connect to adjacent residential and commercial uses to facilitate
pedestrian connectivity. Easements will be obtained by the
applicant, if necessary, and reviewed by the approving body.
a. 1. For all uses except planned shopping villages and assisted living
residences the largest building on a site may contain up to 40,000
square feet of floor area. If additional floor area can be provided
under subsection 30-150.6 and as approved at the discretion of the
approving body then a maximum size for the largest building may
§ 30-150.9 HOLMDEL § 30-150.10
1:842
not exceed 50,000 square feet. On a multiple building site plan, no
other building shall exceed 20,000 square feet of floor area.
2. For assisted living residences the maximum building size is 85,000
square feet of floor area.
3. For planned shopping villages see subsection 30-150.9g2 for
building size limitations.
b. Multiple buildings on a lot shall provide staggered front and side
setbacks with a minimum offset of 10 feet. The minimum distance
between buildings shall be at least 20 feet. For planned shopping
villages see Section 30-150.9g3 for separation requirements.
c. Parking areas shall be designed to provide interconnections with
parking areas on adjoining lots.
d. The finish treatment of exterior walls shall be the same on all sides.
e. No outside retail services (display, sales or advertising), excepting the
sale for consumption of food in an outdoor cafe setting, shall be
allowed.
f. Any storage or staging of materials outside the building is prohibited.
g. Loading docks, truck parking, utility metering, HVAC equipment, trash
compaction and collection shall be incorporated in the building design
and landscaping so that visual and acoustic impact of these functions
are fully contained out of view of adjacent properties and public streets.
h. No deliveries, loading, trash removal or compaction shall be allowed
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
i. Lighting in parking areas and exterior building lighting shall be no
more than 1/2 of the normal intensity after the last retailer served by
that parking lot closes for business. In no case shall this exceed 11:00
p.m. A plan for reducing parking and exterior building lighting shall be
submitted.
j. Facades greater than 100 feet in length, measured horizontally, shall
incorporate projections and recesses of a depth of at least 3% for the
length of the facade that extend for at least 20% of the total length.
k. Facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral or earth tone.
The use of high intensity, metallic, or fluorescent colors is prohibited.
l. Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors, but neon
tubing to accent these areas as well as any signage is prohibited.
m. Sidewalks along the facade of retail stores shall be a minimum of eight
feet in width. These walkways shall be distinguished from other
surfaces by the use of pavers, bricks, or scored concrete. In all areas of
building facades that are not covered by a canopy, the sidewalk or
§ 30-150.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-150.10
1:843
roadway should be at least six feet from the building to allow for
plantings and landscaping along the foundation.
n. Signage. In addition to the signage requirements in subsection
30-150.10, the required comprehensive signage plan shall demonstrate
how the signage will promote and be consistent with the theme and
building scale for the planned shopping village.
1. Schedule of Sign Use.
Sign Function Type of Sign
Size of Sign
(Square feet)
Maximum Number
of Signs
Business sign Ground, hanging, wall 32 for ground signs, 6
for hanging signs, 12
for wall signs
1 ground sign per
development tract or
project and either
hanging or wall sign
per occupant on tract
Directory sign Ground, wall 2 per occupant not to
exceed 12
1 type of sign per
separate external
street frontage
Identification sign Ground, wall, integral 4 1 type of sign per
occupant
Instructional sign Ground, wall 2 Number determined
by safety
considerations
Nameplate sign Ground, hanging, wall,
integral
4 1 type of sign per lot
2. Sign Illumination. Any sign may be illuminated. However,
illuminated signs which are not shielded to prevent beams or rays
from being directed at any window or door of any adjacent dwelling
unit or portion of a roadway and are of such intensity or brilliance
to cause glare or impair the vision of a pedestrian or motorist are
prohibited.
3. Additional Standards. All developments shall submit a
comprehensive signage plan indicating specific criteria for signage
within the planned development. The comprehensive signage plan
shall, at a minimum, indicate the type, size, style of lettering,
colors, construction material, type of pole or standard and
illumination. Included in the comprehensive signage plan shall be
all illuminated interior signs, which shall be consistent throughout
the development and which shall not detract from the aesthetic
impression created by the remainder of the signage plan.
Signage standards of subsection 30-150.10a shall apply to all
developments. Relief from these standards shall be considered
by the approving body only where the applicant sufficiently
§ 30-150.10 HOLMDEL § 30-150.10
1:844
§ 30-151. P PUBLIC LAND DISTRICT.
§ 30-151.1. Purpose. [1976 Code § 78-88; Ord. No. 3-82]
To identify lands owned by the Federal, State, County and Township
agencies as well as land used for school purposes.
§ 30-151.2. (Reserved)154
§ 30-151.3. Permitted Uses. [Ord. No. 98-11 § 3; Ord. No. 2001-23
§ 1]
(Reserved)
§ 30-151.4. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 98-11 § 4; Ord. No. 2001-23
§ 2; Ord. No. 2002-17 § 3; Ord. No. 2013-33]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 30-155:
§ 30-152. RL-40 RESEARCH LABORATORY DISTRICT.
§ 30-152.1. Uses Allowed by Right. [1976 Code § 78-89; Ord. No.
3-82; Ord. No. 24-82; Ord. No. 84-7]
documents the reasons for requiring relief from the signage
standards. In considering the grant of such waiver requests, the
approving body shall consider such factors as the degree of
proposed sign visibility from a major frontage road as well as the
internal parking area of a development; the distance between a
sign and a major roadway providing access to a development; the
size and scale with respect to lettering heights, font styles and
number of colors, both when the sign is illuminated and when the
sign is not illuminated, in relation to other signs proposed as part
of a total signage program for a development.
a. Wireless telecommunications antennas and towers.
b. Church or house of worship.
a. Buildings, structures and premises for use and occupancy by the
Township for municipal purposes.
b. Laboratories devoted to research, design or experimentation and
fabrication incidental thereto, and such other buildings as may be
needed for protection and operation of the premises.
154. Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-151.2, Wireless Telecommunications Facility
Standards, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 98-11
and 2001-23, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
§ 30-150.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-152.1
1:845
§ 30-152.2. (Reserved)155
§ 30-152.3. Bulk Requirements for Laboratory Structures.
§ 30-152.4. (Reserved)156
§ 30-152.5. Accessory Uses. [Ord. No. 98-11 § 3; Ord. No. 2001-23
§ 1]
(Reserved)
§ 30-152.6. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 98-11 § 4; Ord. No. 2001-23
§ 2; Ord. No. 2001-17 § 3; Ord. No. 2013-33]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 30-155:
§ 30-153. O-30 OFFICE DISTRICT.
§ 30-153.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 95-22 § XVII; Ord. No. 2005-12 § I]
The purpose of this district is to recognize the changing character and
impact of traffic improvements at the southeast corner of Route 35 and
Laurel Avenue. In addition to continuing to permit the existing residential
c. All uses permitted under paragraph b above shall be required to
participate in the Township's efforts to produce lower income housing
as set forth in subsection 30-70.2f.
d. Child care center.
a. Any building erected or to be erected in this district shall not exceed
100 feet in height. This shall not exclude or prevent the erection of
towers or other structures required in connection with the occupancy
and/or use of the premises.
b. No permanent building intended for laboratory use shall be erected
within 500 feet of any street lot line or within 100 feet of any adjoining
property line.
c. No accessory building shall be erected within 50 feet of any street lot
line or within 50 feet of any adjoining property line.
a. Wireless telecommunications antennas and towers.
b. Church or house of worship.
155. Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-152.2, Uses Allowed by Special Permit, According to
Section 30-44, previously codified herein and containing portions of 1976 Code § 78-89
and Ordinance Nos. 3-82 and 24-82 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
156. Editor's Note: Former subsection 30-152.4, Wireless Telecommunications Facility
Standards, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 98-11
and 2001-23, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-17.
§ 30-152.1 HOLMDEL § 30-153.1
1:846
uses, this district permits low-intensity office uses in response to the
reduced desirability of residential uses at this heavily used intersection.
The O-3 District further provides for banks and financial institutions in
appropriate locations with adequate means of access.
§ 30-153.2. Uses Allowed By Right. [Ord. No. 95-22 § XVII; Ord. No.
97-35 § IV; Ord. No. 2005-12 § II]
§ 30-153.3. Accessory Uses. [Ord. No. 95-22 § XVII; Ord. No. 98-11
§ 3; Ord. No. 2001-23 § 1]
§ 30-153.4. Bulk Requirements. [Ord. No. 95-22 § XVII]
a. Single-family residential dwellings.
b. Professional and business offices.
c. Buildings, structures and premises for use and occupancy by the
Township for any municipal purpose.
d. Farms as regulated in the R-40A District.
e. Child care centers.
f. Retail farm markets.
g. Banks and financial institutions subject to the requirements of
subsection 30-153.8.
a. Off-street parking and loading/unloading areas.
b. Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to the uses
allowed by right.
a. Minimum lot area - 30,000 square feet.
b. Maximum floor area ratio - 15%.
c. Maximum lot coverage - 45%.
d. Minimum lot width - 150 feet.
e. Minimum lot frontage - 150 feet.
f. Minimum lot depth - 200 feet.
g. Minimum front yard - 50 feet.
h. Minimum rear yard - 25 feet.
i. Minimum side yard - 20 feet each side.
j. Maximum building height - 30 feet.
k. Minimum parking setbacks:
§ 30-153.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-153.4
1:847
§ 30-153.5. Requirements for Landscaped Buffers/Screens. [Ord.
No. 95-22 § XVII]
§ 30-153.6. Minimum Parking Requirements. [Ord. No. 95-22
§ XVII]
§ 30-153.7. General Requirements. [Ord. No. 95-22 § XVII]
§ 30-153.8. Requirements for Banks and Financial Institutions.
[Ord. No. 2005-12 § III]
From building - 12 feet.
From all property lines - 15 feet.
a. The minimum width of the landscaped buffer/screen shall be 15 feet to
all property lines.
b. The landscape screen shall comply with the standards of subsection
30-149.5.
a. Four point five spaces per 1,000 square feet of building floor area for
offices.
b. Two parking spaces per dwelling unit.
a. Multiple office uses within a building are permitted, provided that the
minimum floor area for any use is 1,250 square feet.
b. Common driveways between lots shall be provided where feasible.
c. Parking areas shall be designed to provide interconnections with
parking areas on adjoining lots where feasible.
a. Banks and financial institutions shall be permitted only where the point
of access to the bank or financial institution is from an arterial or
collector roadway and is controlled with a traffic signal.
b. Banks and financial institutions shall not be permitted on any zone lot
situated more than 500 feet from the centerline of an arterial roadway.
The closest point of the lot to the centerline of the arterial roadway
shall be used to determine distance.
c. The following requirements shall apply to drive-up lanes.
1. The maximum number of drive-up lanes shall be four.
2. Sufficient stacking space shall be provided on site to accommodate
four vehicles for each drive-up lane including vehicles at drive-up
kiosks.
3. Internal circulation shall be arranged such that stacked vehicles for
the drive-up kiosks shall not interfere with general vehicular
§ 30-153.4 HOLMDEL § 30-153.8
1:848
§ 30-153.9. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 98-11 § 4; Ord. No. 2001-23
§ 2; Ord. No. 2002-17 § 3; Ord. No. 2013-33]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 30-155:
§ 30-154. LIH PUD REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
§ 30-154.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 98-4 § II]
The purpose of this district is to encourage beneficial redevelopment of
property that has fallen into obsolescence, through opportunities for
planned development permitting a mix of complimentary uses. Planned
retirement communities, senior assisted living, offices and commercial uses,
such as retail sales and services combine to provide for limited traffic
impacts on the State highway.
§ 30-154.2. Uses Allowed by Right. [Ord. No. 98-4 § II; Ord. No.
98-30 § IV]
circulation. A lane shall be provided adjacent to the outermost
stacking or queuing lane to allow vehicles to bypass the drive-up
lanes.
a. Wireless telecommunications antennas and towers.
b. Church or house of worship.
a. Offices devoted to medical and other professional, executive,
engineering, accounting, scientific research and development,
statistical and financial purposes, sales offices, general corporate
offices and out-patient surgery facilities, known as surgicenters.
b. Scientific research laboratories devoted exclusively to research,
product development and testing, engineering development, and sales
development.
c. Indoor recreation facilities limited to skating rinks, racquet clubs,
health clubs, miniature golf, and movie theaters.
d. Full service restaurants, cafes and coffee shops.
e. Banks, with or without drive through facilities.
f. Planned retirement communities subject to the requirements as set
forth in subsection 30-154.7.
g. Child care centers.
h. Retail sales establishments, including but not limited to, in combination
or alone, meat markets, seafood markets, bakeries, supermarkets, art
galleries, antique stores, jewelry stores, drug stores, home furnishing
stores, sporting goods stores, gift shops, hobby shops, book stores,
§ 30-153.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-154.2
1:849
§ 30-154.3. Accessory Uses. [Ord. No. 98-4 § II; Ord. No. 98-11 § 3;
Ord. No. 2001-23 § 1]
§ 30-154.4. Overall Tract Standards for PUD. [Ord. No. 98-4 § II]
§ 30-154.5. Bulk and Design Requirements for Uses Permitted in
Subsection 30-154.2a and b. [Ord. No. 98-4 § II; Ord. No. 98-30 § V]
Type of Requirement
Minimum lot area, acres 5
Minimum lot frontage and width, feet 350
Minimum lot depth, feet 300
record and tape stores, art supply stores, clothing stores, shoe stores,
hardware stores, packaged liquor stores, office supply stores, fabric
stores, paint and wall covering stores, electronic equipment stores,
appliance equipment stores, florists, household goods and general
merchandise, subject to the requirements as set forth in subsection
30-154.8.
i. Retail service establishments, limited to barber and beauty shops,
involved in men's and women's hair and nail care, waxing, tanning and
cosmetics, tailoring and dressmaking shops, appliance repair shops,
shoe repair shops, optical services and optical clinics, computer service
shops, antique appraisal shops, and interior design shops, subject to the
requirements as set forth in subsection 30-154.8.
j. Garden centers and nurseries, subject to the requirements as set forth
in subsection 30-154.8.
a. Off-street parking and loading/unloading areas.
b. Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to the uses
allowed by right.
a. Mix of Uses. Planned Unit Development (PUD) shall be permitted on a
tract of at least 100 acres and the overall tract acreage within the LIH
PUD Redevelopment District shall be limited to a maximum of 33%
retail (235,000 square feet maximum), 30% office and a minimum of
40% senior citizen housing (160 single family units maximum), which
may include assisted living facilities.
b. Architectural Review. The Planning Board shall review architectural
elevations for all buildings in the PUD to assure harmony and
compatibility within and between each section of the Planned
Development. Architecture should provide a coherent design theme
throughout the development, using rooflines, building materials,
entrance locations and massing of buildings to provide a compatible
visual relationship between the various uses.
§ 30-154.2 HOLMDEL § 30-154.5
1:850
Type of Requirement
Minimum building setback, feet:
From property line 65
From public street 100
From any residential zone district line 100
Maximum building height, feet 35
(2 1/2 stories)
Maximum building coverage, percent 15
Maximum FAR 0.20
Maximum lot coverage, percent 50
Minimum off-street parking*
One space per 250 square feet GFA for all uses except for scientific
research laboratories, which shall have one space per 400 square feet GFA.
Minimum off-street loading of one space. An additional space shall be
required for each 100,000 square feet of gross floor area.
* Off-street parking may be in any yard, provided that it is no closer than
50 feet to a public street or residential district line.
§ 30-154.6. Buffer. [Ord. No. 98-4 § II; Ord. No. 98-30 § VI]
The following buffer, landscaping and design standards shall apply in the
LIH PUD Redevelopment District. In the event of any conflict with other
subsections of this section, these regulations as enumerated below shall
supersede and control:
a. Buffers shall be provided to protect existing and proposed residential
uses from other land use types. Buffers shall be provided between
existing and proposed major roadways, railroads, and between
proposed residential and nonresidential uses as follows:
Between Residential Use And:
Minimum Width
(feet)
1. Railroad 150 feet
2. Laurel Avenue 75 feet
3. Proposed Collector Road 50 feet
4. Nonresidential Use 100 feet
5. State Route 35 150 feet
b. Requirements for plantings in the buffer areas shall conform to
regulations as set forth in Section 30-54d and subsection 30-154.9.
§ 30-154.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-154.6
1:851
§ 30-154.7. Standards for Planned Retirement Community
Development in the LIH-PUD Redevelopment District. [Ord. No.
98-4 § II; Ord. No. 98-30 § VII; Ord. No. 2006-24 § I]
Regulations for a PRC development in the LIH-PUD Redevelopment District
are as follows:
c. The buffer requirements between residential and nonresidential uses
set forth in subsection 30-154.6a and b shall not apply between
nonresidential uses and assisted living facilities or nursing homes and,
accordingly, for purposes of subsection 30-154.6 such uses shall be
treated as nonresidential uses.
a. Uses Allowed by Right.
1. Single family detached dwellings (See Schedule 1).
2. Assisted living residences (See Schedule 2 and 3).
3. Model homes and/or sales office.
b. Accessory Uses.
1. Retirement community center, as part of a Planned Retirement
Community (PRC) development.
2. Recreational facilities and uses, including buildings for
recreational activities, biking paths, walking paths, tennis courts,
shuffleboard courts, swimming pools, and similar recreational
improvements related to the PRC.
3. Administration buildings related to the PRC.
4. Building emergency services, such as garages and offices for first
aid equipment and personnel, as part of the PRC development.
5. On-site medical and personal services for the use of the on-site
population only, as part of the PRC development.
6. Bus stops to service the retirement community center as part of the
PRC development as described in paragraph e6(d) of this
subsection.
c. Tract Requirements.
1. The tract shall be under one ownership or control by the applicant
for purposes of obtaining all required development approvals and
committing the tract to the regulations of the Planned Retirement
Community.
2. Area and Yard Requirements for Tract.
§ 30-154.6 HOLMDEL § 30-154.7
1:852
Minimum tract size 40 acres
Minimum tract frontage 300 feet on a collector or
arterial roadway
Maximum density 3 dwelling units per acre, and
not to exceed 160 dwelling units
Minimum building setback from
any tract boundary
75 feet
Minimum perimeter landscaped
buffer
See Section 30-154.6
Maximum building coverage 20%
Maximum impervious coverage 35%
3. Covenants, Restrictions, and Architectural Controls. Approval of a
Planned Retirement Community development consisting of agerestricted
housing in the LIH PUD Redevelopment District shall be
conditioned upon the placement of restrictive covenants on the
deeds to any and all portions of a tract so developed, to insure that
occupancy will be limited to persons 55 years of age or older with
no children under 19 in permanent residence. In addition,
restrictions as to the following shall be included:
(a) No house shall have the same facade as the house on either
side of it or directly across the street.
(b) Where side windows are not offset between adjacent houses by
at least three and 3.5 feet (measured frame to frame, as
projected directly across to the adjacent house), adequate
landscaping will be provided in order to promote privacy.
(c) A minimum of five different models shall be offered with each
model having at least three different elevations, and with at
least five different elevations being constructed.
(d) The restrictions set forth below as to cantilevered windows,
patios, and decks shall be incorporated.
(e) No sheds or other ancillary structures shall be allowed.
4. Decks and Patios.
(a) Decks and patios shall be no higher than the first floor
elevation of the subject home and shall not extend beyond the
side walls, shall be limited in width to 12 feet and shall be set
back at least six feet from the property lines. Additionally, the
minimum distance between the closest points of any two decks
shall be 18 feet.
(b) Retractable awnings on patios shall be one of four preselected
fabrics/colors and shall be purchased and installed from a
company selected by RFPs and bids. Colors will be controlled
§ 30-154.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-154.7
1:853
by the Association. Awning shall be installed on the back of the
house only and retractable by motor with controls inside the
house. The installation of awnings shall be optional.
5. Windows. Cantilevered bay windows shall be permitted to extend
two feet into a required front yard or rear yard. The maximum
width of a bay window shall be eight feet. Cantilevered windows
shall be offset so that they are not directly opposite each other.
6. Management of Roadways, Recreation Facilities, Security, Internal
Transportation, and Open Space. Open undeveloped portions of
any age-restricted development and all proposed roadways,
recreation facilities, security facilities, and internal transportation
facilities shall be owned and maintained by a Homeowners'
Association consisting of all residents. Notification of this provision
is to be included in the contract of sale deed for each unit.
d. Assisted Living Residence. Assisted living residences, which are hereby
defined to include assisted living facilities, nursing or convalescent
homes and skilled or intermediate care nursing facilities, which are
required to be licensed by the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:2H-1 et seq., shall be permitted to develop at a ratio of 20 units per
acre. A unit shall be defined as a room used for occupancy in an assisted
living residence which contains either one or two, but not more than
two beds. Notwithstanding that a unit may contain two beds, there may
be no more than 24 beds per acre, nor more than a total of 250 beds in
an assisted living residence. (See Schedules 2 and 3 for design
standards and area and yard requirements.)157
e. Open Space and Recreation Areas.
1. At least 40% of the tract shall be reserved for open space and
recreation uses.
2. Open space and recreation areas shall be located in appropriate
locations and arranged in such a manner so as to further and foster
the purposes of the Planned Retirement Community.
3. All open space and recreation areas shall be dedicated for active or
passive recreation or open space. Such areas shall be owned in
common by residents of the Planned Retirement Community and
managed by a Homeowners' Association.
4. The open space and recreation area shall have a minimum
contiguous area of not less than four acres and no portion thereof
shall be less than 50 feet in width. Where appropriate, open space
and recreation areas should be arranged to provide contiguity of
open spaces between Planned Retirement Communities.
157. Editor's Note: The schedules referred to herein may be found at the end of this section.
§ 30-154.7 HOLMDEL § 30-154.7
1:854
5. A comprehensive recreation plan shall be prepared to include all
proposed passive and active recreation elements such as walking
trails, picnic areas, outdoor and indoor tennis courts, shuffleboard
courts, swimming pools, and seating areas.
6. Each Planned Retirement Community Development shall have a
retirement community center. The following standards shall apply:
(a) The retirement community center shall be centrally located
and easily accessible to all units. A comprehensive circulation
plan shall be prepared to coordinate the road network,
sidewalk layout and bikeways for the entire development with
emphasis on access to the center.
(b) The retirement community center may include but not be
limited to cafeteria facilities, homeowners' association
management offices, recreation and social activity rooms and
offices, and a multi-purpose room designed for social activities.
(c) The retirement community center shall be no more than 1 1/2
stories and no more than 25 feet in height.
(d) A bus stop shall be provided at one or more accessible
locations for those using the center's facilities as determined
by the Planning Board. An enclosure shall be located at the bus
stop to afford protection from adverse weather conditions, and
the bus stop shall include benches and shall be fully accessible
to the handicapped. Each assisted living facility shall have
provisions for bus pick up directly in front of the entrance.
7. All open space and recreation areas shall be protected by legal
arrangements, satisfactory to the Planning Board Attorney,
sufficient to assure their maintenance and preservation for their
intended purpose. Covenants or other legal arrangements,
including homeowners' associations, shall specify ownership of the
area; method of maintenance; responsibility for maintenance;
maintenance taxes and insurance; compulsory membership and
compulsory assessment provisions; guarantees that any association
formed to own and maintain the area will not be dissolved without
the consent of the Planning Board; and any other specifications
deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
8. Homeowners' Association.
(a) Within the Planned Retirement Community, the applicant shall
establish a Homeowners' Association.
(b) The Homeowners' Association shall own and be responsible for
the maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of all buildings
and lands owned by the residents of the community in common
with one another. Such lands shall include at a minimum all
§ 30-154.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-154.7
1:855
recreational areas, open space, and drainage facilities required
by the reviewing board for the community.
f. Additional Facilities.
1. Each PRC development may provide an internal transportation
system, for transport within and without the PRC, which may
include such facilities as a shuttle bus.
2. Each PRC shall provide appropriate security measures, which may
included gatehouses, security patrols, and/or secured entries to the
PRC.
3. Each assisted living facility and PRC shall be required to maintain
an agreement for private ambulance service.
SCHEDULE 1
PRC STANDARDS
Principal Building Minimum Detached Dwelling
Lot area (square feet) 5,000 feet
Lot frontage 40 feet
Lot width 50 feet
Lot depth 80 feet
Side yard:
One 5 feet
Both 12 feet
Front yard 20 feet
Rear yard 15 feet
Height (Maximum) 2 1/2 story or 35 feet
Accessory Building Minimum
Distance to side line 5 feet
Distance to rear line 5 feet
Distance to other building 10 feet
NOTES:
Decks and patios shall be subject to the provisions of subsection
30-154.7c4 herein
Windows shall be subject to the provisions of subsection
30-154.7c5 herein.
§ 30-154.7 HOLMDEL § 30-154.7
1:856
SCHEDULE 2
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES (ALF)
1. The minimum distance between building shall be as follows:
(a) Windowless wall to windowless wall: 30 feet.
(b) Window wall to windowless wall: 40 feet.
(c) Window wall to window wall:
(1) Front to front: 60 feet.
(2) Rear to rear: 50 feet.
(3) End to end: 30 feet.
(4) Any building face to internal road or right-of-way: 15 feet
except 12 feet at a garage.
(5) Any building face to common parking area: 12 feet.
2. The maximum height shall be three stories or 45 feet. Any
structure having more than one story shall provide elevators.
3. No wall shall extend longer than 75 feet along any plane
before offset at least 8 feet.
SCHEDULE 3
SCHEDULE OF AREA, YARD AND PARKING
REQUIREMENTS FOR ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCES AS
PART OF A PLANNED RETIREMENT COMMUNITY
Assisted Living
Residences
Principal Building Minimum
Lot area (square feet) 3 acres
Lot frontage 200 feet
Lot width 200 feet
Lot depth 300 feet
Side yard, each 50 feet
Front yard 75 feet
Rear yard 75 feet
Accessory Building Minimum
Distance to side line 50 feet
Distance to rear line 50 feet
Distance to other building 50 feet
Maximum
Building coverage of principal building 20%
§ 30-154.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-154.7
1:857
§ 30-154.8. Bulk Requirement Standards for Retail Sales and
Service Development as Permitted in Subsection 30-154.2c to e and
g to j. [Ord. No. 98-4 § II; Ord. No. 98-30 § VIII]
Standard Requirement
Minimum lot area 5 acres
Maximum floor area ratio 0.15
Maximum lot coverage 60%
Minimum lot width 300 feet
Minimum lot frontage 300 feet
Minimum lot depth 400 feet
Minimum front yard 100 feet
Minimum rear yard 100 feet
Minimum side yard 50 feet each side
Maximum building height 38 feet
Minimum parking setbacks:
From building 12 feet
From streets 25 feet
From all property lines 25 feet
From residential zone 75 feet
From residential building 125 feet
Maximum building coverage 20%
Maximum size of building(s) located
within:
200 feet of State Route 35 14,000 square feet
Maximum size of any non-supermarket
retail use
70,000 square feet
SCHEDULE 3
SCHEDULE OF AREA, YARD AND PARKING
REQUIREMENTS FOR ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCES AS
PART OF A PLANNED RETIREMENT COMMUNITY
Assisted Living
Residences
Building coverage of accessory
building(s)
5%
Off-street parking spaces 0.75 spaces/bed
§ 30-154.7 HOLMDEL § 30-154.8
1:858
In no event shall the total retail space exceed 235,000 square feet Second
story mezzanine space not used for retail sales and which is not accessible
to customers for retail purposes shall not be included as retail floor area in
the calculation of FAR.
§ 30-154.9. Requirements for Landscaped Buffers/Screens and
Berming for Retail Sales and Service Development in the LIH PUD
Redevelopment District. [Ord. No. 98-4 § II]
§ 30-154.10. Minimum Parking Requirements for Retail Sales and
Service Development in the LIH PUD Redevelopment District. [Ord.
No. 95-24 § III; Ord. No. 98-4 § II]
a. The minimum width of the landscaped buffer/screen shall be as follows:
1. Front yard: 50 feet.
2. Nonresidential use to residential zone in rear or side yard: 50 feet.
3. Nonresidential use to nonresidential use in rear or side yard: 25
feet.
b. The front yard landscaped buffer shall consist of the following minimum
mix of canopy trees and shrubs for every 1,500 square feet of buffer
area: Two canopy trees (large deciduous trees); and 10 (evergreen and/
or deciduous shrubs) with a natural height that obscures vehicle head
lights but does not obscure the view of buildings.
c. The landscaped buffer/screen between a nonresidential use and
residential use shall consist of the following minimum mix of canopy
trees, understory trees and shrubs for every 1,500 square feet of buffer
area: Two canopy trees (large deciduous trees); four understory trees
(deciduous and/or evergreen trees that do not generally reach the
mature height of the canopy trees); and 15 evergreen trees and/or
shrubs.
d. The landscaped buffer/screen between nonresidential uses shall consist
of the following minimum mix of canopy trees and understory trees for
every 1,500 feet of buffer area: Two canopy trees (large deciduous
trees); and three understory trees (deciduous or evergreen trees that
do riot generally reach the mature height of the canopy trees).
e. All portions of the landscaped buffer/screen not planted in canopy
trees, understory trees, or shrubs shall be maintained in lawn area or
ground cover.
f. Where a nonresidential use abuts a residential zone to the rear or side,
a berm shall also be provided. The berm shall be a minimum of six feet
in height, with a maximum side slope of 4:1 and a minimum top width of
four feet.
§ 30-154.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-154.10
1:859
§ 30-154.11. General Requirements for Retail Sales and Service
Development in the LIH PUD Redevelopment District. [Ord. No.
98-4 § II]
§ 30-154.12. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 98-11 § 4; Ord. No.
2001-23 § 2; Ord. No. 2002-17 § 3; Ord. No. 2013-33]
The following conditional uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 30-155:
a. Four spaces per 1,000 square feet of building floor area for offices and
banks.
b. Five spaces per 1,000 square feet of building floor area for retail sales
and service establishments, garden centers, indoor recreational
facilities and restaurants.
c. For mixed use developments (office and commercial), a shared parking
approach is permitted, provided that a minimum of four spaces per
1,000 square feet of building floor area are provided.
a. Multiple uses within a building are permitted.
b. Multiple buildings on a lot shall provide staggered front setbacks with a
minimum off-set of 20 feet.
c. Common driveways between lots shall be provided where feasible.
d. Parking area shall be designed to provide interconnections with parking
areas on adjoining lots.
e. The finish treatment of rear and side walls shall be compatible with the
overall retail and service development and shall not include painted or
unpainted block walls.
f. Walls shall be extended to the highest point of rooftop mechanicals so
as to shield rooftop mechanicals from all sides, the walls shall
incorporate sound-proofing materials so as to mitigate the noise
generated by any rooftop mechanicals.
g. A centrally located enclosed garbage compacting unit shall be required.
h. Trailer storage shall not be permitted, and all trailers must be removed
within 12 hours of unloading.
i. Refrigeration trucks shall be located only in an area specifically
designed to minimize noise impacts. The use of walls, grade differences
and structural solutions shall be used as required to achieve this
objective.
a. Wireless telecommunications antennas and towers.
b. Church or house of worship.
§ 30-154.10 HOLMDEL § 30-154.13
1:860
§ 30-154.13. Financing Subdivisions. [Ord. No. 98-30 § IX]
No variance shall be required for bulk, design and buffer requirements
on a lot developed with uses permitted under subsection 30-154.2, where
the need for such variance is caused solely by a subdivision of such lot
into two or more for financing of such uses. A subdivision created for
financing purposes shall include a subdivision to allow separate ownership
of lots within an LIH-PUD development, or to allow separate liens on the
subdivided lots even if such lots remain under one owner, all in order to
facilitate coordinated development of a site plan or site plans which are
consistent with an approved General Development Plan.
§ 30-155. CONDITIONAL USE REQUIREMENTS.
§ 30-155.1. Approval by Planning Board. [1976 Code § 78-9; Ord.
No. 3-82; Ord. No. 85-12; Ord. No. 2002-17 § 4]
Before any permit shall be issued for a conditional use, application shall be
made to the Planning Board as the approving authority who shall grant or
deny the application after public hearing within 95 days of submission of
a complete application to the administrative officer or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant. Notice of the hearing shall
include reference to all matters being heard, including site plan and/or
subdivision or site plan simultaneously with the conditional use application.
Failure of the approving authority to act within the required time period
shall constitute approval of the application.
§ 30-155.2. Standards for Approval. [Ord. No. 2002-17 § 4; Ord. No.
2010-12 § I; Ord. No. 2013-33]
A conditional use is a permitted use only as specified by this chapter and
may be granted in accordance with the standards and specifications of this
section. No permit shall be issued for a conditional use unless an application
is submitted to and approved by the Planning Board.
The standards and specifications of this section have been designed with
the following guiding principles in mind: maintenance of the character
and quality of established neighborhoods and zones throughout Holmdel
Township: conservation of property values within the surrounding area;
protection of the health and safety of residents or employees on adjacent
properties; discouragement of roadway congestion and/or potential traffic
hazards; and consistency with the goals and objectives of Holmdel Township
Master Plan.
The standards and conditions set forth below are required to be met in
order to receive Planning Board approval for specific conditional uses.
In the event that any standard or condition conflicts with any other
requirements of the Township of Holmdel Development Regulations
Ordinance, the referenced standard shall be dispositive in determining
compliance with a particular conditional use standard. A violation of any
other requirement of the Holmdel Township Development Regulations
§ 30-154.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-155.2
1:861
Ordinance applicable to a conditional use which is not referenced in this
section shall not be considered to be a violation of a conditional use
standard, but shall instead be considered a violation of a bulk standard and
shall be reviewed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c).
a. Public Utilities.
1. Public utility structures that provide direct utility services, but
excluding offices, repair garages and similar commercial/industrial
related uses of utility companies, shall be permitted in the R-40A,
R-40B, R-11, R-15, R-30, R-30SC, R-TH, M, RL-40, OL-1, OL-2 and
OL-3 Districts.
2. In the M District, public utility offices shall be permitted provided
they comply with the bulk and design regulations for medical office
buildings.
3. In the OL-1, OL-2 and OL-3 Districts, public utility offices shall be
permitted provided they comply with the C1 District bulk and
design regulations. Repair garages and other industrially-related
uses of utility companies shall also be permitted within the OL-1,
OL-2 and OL-3 Districts, provided they comply with the OL-3
District bulk and design regulations.
4. Site plans, specifications and a statement setting forth the need
and purpose of the installation shall be filed with the Planning
Board.
5. Proof shall be furnished that the proposed installation in a specific
location is necessary and convenient for the efficiency of the public
or private utility system or the satisfactory and convenient
provision of service by the utility to the neighborhood or area in
which the particular use is located.
6. The design of any structures within 200 feet of residential zones or
uses shall be residential in character and shall emulate the style of
adjacent residential areas in scale, height of buildings, facade
materials and general structural treatment.
b. Wireless Telecommunications Antennas and Towers.
1. Applicants proposing to construct wireless telecommunications
antennas shall present documentary evidence regarding the need
for wireless antennas within the Township of Holmdel. This
information shall identify the wireless network layout and coverage
areas to demonstrate the need for such equipment within the
Township.
2. Applicants proposing to construct wireless telecommunications
antennas shall document the locations of all existing
communications towers within Holmdel Township and surrounding
area with coverage in the Township and shall provide competent
§ 30-155.2 HOLMDEL § 30-155.2
1:862
testimony by a radio frequency engineer regarding the suitability
of such tower locations in light of the design of the wireless
telecommunications network. Wireless telecommunications
antennas shall be located and approved in accordance with the
following prioritized locations:
(a) The first priority shall be existing wireless communications
towers, including those owned by Holmdel Township, within
any nonresidential district in the municipality.
(b) The second priority shall be any other wireless communication
towers located in Holmdel Township.
(c) The third priority shall be an existing building or structure
located within a nonresidential district in Holmdel Township.
(d) The fourth priority shall be a new tower located within a
nonresidential district in Holmdel Township.
3. An applicant proposing to erect a new wireless telecommunications
tower shall provide documentary evidence that a legitimate
attempt has been made to locate the antennas on existing buildings
or structures. Such evidence shall include a radio frequency
engineering analysis of the potential suitability of existing
buildings or structures in the search for such antennas. Efforts to
secure such locations shall be documented through
correspondence between the wireless telecommunications
provider and the property owner of any suitable existing buildings
or structures. The Township reserves the right to engage such
professionals as it may be required at the applicant's expense.
4. Wireless telecommunications antennas may be erected on existing
towers, buildings or structures in accordance with the
requirements established herein and an equipment compound may
be constructed in support of such antennas consistent with the
following requirements:
(a) Antenna arrays may be mounted on existing buildings or
structures but shall not extend beyond the overall height of any
such building or structure by more than 10 feet.
(b) An equipment compound consisting of no more than 4,000
square feet in area may be erected in support of such antenna
arrays provided it is:
(1) Situated behind existing structures, buildings or terrain
features which will shield the compound from public view
on any side; or
(2) When a location out of public view is not possible, a year
round visual barrier landscape buffer shall be provided on
all sides of the compound open to public view, where
§ 30-155.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-155.2
1:863
practical. Landscaping shall include native evergreen
trees at least eight feet high at the time of planting and
planted in staggered double rows at 15 feet on center, or
equivalent and shall be reviewed by the Planning Board
engineer and approved by the Shade Tree Committee.
(c) The equipment compound shall be situated within a fence at
least seven feet high as approved by the Township Engineer
which shall not be of chain link and shall include a locking
security gate. Where existing conditions present the functional
equivalent of this requirement, the Township Engineer may
allow for reasonable deviation therefrom.
(d) Antennas shall be suitably finished and/or painted only when
necessary to be consistent with the color scheme of the
building or structure on which they are mounted.
5. When an applicant to construct a wireless telecommunications
tower demonstrates to the satisfaction of the reviewing agency that
suitable locations on existing towers, buildings or structures either
do not exist or are not available, the applicant may erect a new
communications towers, according to the following requirements:
(a) Minimum lot size - As required by the zone, but not less than
three acres.
(b) Minimum setback of tower and equipment compound from any
property line - 200 feet or two times the height of the tower,
whichever is greater.
(c) Maximum tower height; Three or more vendors — 140 feet.
Two vendors — 120 feet.
(d) No wireless telecommunications towers shall be erected within
1,000 feet of any residential building unless intervening
topography or vegetation permanently restricted from removal
results in the tower being virtually obscured from sight from
the residential building.
(e) Wireless telecommunications towers shall not be erected
within 2,500 feet of any historic district or any historic site as
designated or eligible for listing on the National and/or State
Register of Historic Places.
(f) Wireless telecommunications towers may be permitted on
municipal land or buildings upon approval by the Township
Committee.
(g) Site plan details for wireless telecommunications towers shall
include the site boundaries, tower location; existing and
proposed structures, including accessory structures; existing
and proposed ground-mounted equipment; vehicular parking
§ 30-155.2 HOLMDEL § 30-155.2
1:864
and access; and uses, structures, and land use designations on
the site and abutting parcels.
(h) A landscape plan shall be submitted which is drawn to scale
generally showing proposed landscaping, including species
type, spacing, other landscape features, and existing
vegetation to be retained, removed or replaced.
(i) A Phase I Environmental report shall be submitted. In the
event the Phase I report recommends a Phase II report, that
report shall be submitted.
(j) A report from a qualified expert shall be submitted which
contains the following:
(1) A description of the tower and the technical and other
reasons for the tower design and height.
(2) Documentation to establish that the tower has sufficient
structural integrity for the proposed uses at the proposed
location and meets the minimum safety requirements and
margins according to FCC requirements in their current
adopted revision.
(3) The general capacity of the tower in terms of the number
and type of antenna it is designed to accommodate.
(k) A letter of commitment by the applicant to lease excess space
on the tower to other potential users at the prevailing rates
and standard terms shall be submitted. The letter of
commitment shall be recorded prior to issuance of a building
permit. The letter shall commit the tower owner and
successors in interest.
(l) Elevations of the proposed tower and accessory building shall
be submitted which generally depicts all proposed antennas,
platforms, finish materials, and all other accessory equipment.
6. (Reserved)
7. Removal. Wireless telecommunications towers which are not in use
for wireless telecommunications purposes for six months shall be
removed by the facility owner at its cost. This removal shall occur
within 90 days of the end of such six-month period. Upon removal,
the site shall be cleaned, restored and revegetated to blend with
the existing surrounding vegetation at time of abandonment. The
facility owner shall post a bond prior to final approval to cover the
costs of tower removal and site restoration. The size of the bond
shall be calculated to account for cost escalations.
8. Collocation Required. Authorization for the construction for a new
wireless telecommunications tower shall be conditioned on
agreement with the tower owner that other wireless service
§ 30-155.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-155.2
1:865
providers will be permitted to collocate on the proposed tower
within the limits of structural and radio frequency engineering
requirements and at prevailing rates and standard terms which
reflect the fair market price for such service within Monmouth
County. As part of the application for tower approval, the applicant
shall document the extent to which additional equipment could be
mounted on the tower and the types of equipment which could be
accommodated.
c. Nursing Homes.
1. Minimum lot area: five acres.
2. Lot and Yard Dimensions.
(a) Minimum lot width - 300 feet.
(b) Minimum lot depth - 300 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard - 150 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard - 100 feet.
(e) Minimum rear yard - 100 feet.
(f) Maximum building height - 30 feet.
(g) Maximum building coverage - 15%.
(h) Maximum lot coverage - 60%.
(i) Maximum FAR - 0.2.
3. Minimum Off-Street Parking and Loading:
(a) One parking space for every two beds, with a minimum of 20
spaces.
(b) One loading space.
4. All parking areas shall be located at least 50 feet from a street or
residential zone or use, and 25 feet from any other property line.
5. The exterior walls of all buildings shall be accessible for fire
protection purposes.
6. A buffer with a minimum width of 50 feet shall be provided where
the property abuts a residential zone.
d. Veterinarian Offices.
1. In the M District, veterinarian offices shall not have any outside
kennels and boarding facilities and shall comply with the following
requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area - three acres.
§ 30-155.2 HOLMDEL § 30-155.2
1:866
(b) Minimum lot width - 300 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth - 400 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard - 100 feet.
(e) Minimum side yard - 50 feet.
(f) Minimum rear yard - 50 feet.
(g) Maximum building height - 30 feet.
(h) Maximum FAR - 0.2.
2. In the B-1 and B-2 Districts, veterinarian offices shall be outpatient
facilities without overnight retention of animals and without
outside animal holding facilities and shall comply with the following
requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area - 43,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width - 150 feet.
(c) Minimum lot frontage and depth - 200 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard - 50 feet.
(e) Minimum rear yard - 25 feet, except at least 50 feet from a
public street.
(f) Minimum side yard - 20 feet each, except at least 50 feet from a
public street.
(g) Maximum building height - 30 feet.
(h) Maximum FAR - 0.2.
3. Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
4. Minimum off-street parking and loading:
(a) Five parking spaces per examination room.
(b) One loading space.
e. Residential Health Care Facility/Assisted Living Residence.
1. Maximum density: 15 units per acre.
2. Minimum lot size: 10 acres.
3. Minimum building setback from any property line: 100 feet.
4. Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
5. Maximum building height: 35 feet/2 1/2 stories.
§ 30-155.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-155.2
1:867
6. Minimum off-street parking and loading.
(a) Seventy-five one-hundredths parking space per dwelling unit.
(b) One loading space.
7. Access shall be from other than Bethany Road or Holmdel Road.
8. Accessory services as a group dining area and a convenience store
for residents offering personal items such as stationery, drugs and
personal hygiene items shall be permitted.
9. A buffer with a minimum width of 50 feet shall be provided where
the property abuts a residential zone.
f. Accessory Single-Family Residential Use.
1. A single-family residential use may occupy the same building as any
of those uses allowed by right on the B-1 and B-2 Zones.
2. In one-story structures, the residential use shall not constitute
more than 40% of the gross floor area of the structure.
3. In two-story structures, the residential use shall be located on the
second floor and may constitute up to 100% of the gross floor area
of the second floor.
4. Separate building entrances shall be provided for the residential
and commercial uses.
g. Automobile Service Stations.
1. All storage areas, trash facilities, pits, lifts and working areas shall
be within a building. All lubrication, repair or similar activities shall
be performed in an enclosed building, and no dismantled parts,
junk cars or unregistered cars shall be placed outside. No body
work shall be permitted on the premises.
2. All gasoline pumps, air pumps and the islands upon which pumps
are normally located shall be set back from the street right-of-way
line at least 25 feet; from a residential zone or use at least 75 feet;
and from any other property line at least 50 feet.
3. Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: four spaces per bay.
4. All storage tanks shall be installed below ground level.
5. A maximum of two towing vehicles used for purposes incidental to
the operation may be maintained on the premises and shall be
garaged when not in use.
6. No service station shall operate a car, truck or trailer rental service
or store such rental vehicles on the premises.
§ 30-155.2 HOLMDEL § 30-155.2
1:868
7. The sale of automobiles or other vehicles shall be prohibited on the
premises.
8. No part of any service station shall be used for residence or
sleeping purposes.
h. Fast Food Restaurants.
1. In the C-1 District, a fast food restaurant shall be permitted as part
of a shopping center site with a minimum area of 15 acres.
2. The fast food restaurant shall be constructed as an integral part of
the main building or complex of buildings and shall not be
freestanding.
3. Vehicular access and parking areas shall be integrally related to
the interior circulation and parking plans for the entire shopping
center, and the fast food restaurant shall not have separate access
to an abutting public street(s).
i. Motels and Conference Centers.
1. The minimum lot area shall be five acres.
2. Side and rear yard setbacks: 1.5 times the building height, but not
less than 50 feet.
3. All parking areas shall be located at least 25 feet from a street or
property line.
4. The exterior walls of all buildings shall be accessible for fire
protection purposes.
5. Minimum motel off-street parking and loading shall be provided in
accordance with subsection 30-146.6i.
6. Minimum conference center off-street parking and loading:
(a) One parking space per 400 square feet of public meeting area.
(b) One loading space for the first 10,000 square feet of public
meeting area, with one additional loading space for each
additional 50,000 square feet of public meeting area.
7. No motel shall be permitted that has less than 100 rooms.
8. Motels and conference centers shall only be permitted on sites that
have frontage on a State highway.
j. Office and Industrial Park Developments.
1. The minimum tract size shall be 20 acres.
2. Tracts shall be developed with interior streets to prevent frontage
on arterial and collector streets.
§ 30-155.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-155.2
1:869
3. The average lot size in the park shall be not less than five acres.
4. The minimum lot size shall be 2.5 acres.
5. No lots of less than five acres may be created by subdivision until a
sufficient number of lots in excess of five acres have been
subdivided to maintain the minimum average lot size of five acres,
except that in any event, no more than 1/2 the total number of
resulting lots may be less than five acres.
6. The minimum lot frontage, width and depth for parcels less than
five acres shall be 250 feet, with minimum building setbacks of 65
feet from all property lines, except a minimum setback of 100 feet
from any residential zone line.
7. Maximum building height, maximum building coverage, maximum
floor area ratio (FAR), maximum lot coverage and minimum offstreet
parking and loading shall conform to the requirements for
same that have been established for the LIH District.
k. Specialty Vehicles Sales Establishments.
1. Only indoor sales shall be permitted.
2. All vehicles shall be stored or displayed inside the building.
3. Site lighting shall be shut down by 10:00 p.m.
4. Building height shall be limited to one story and shall have a
maximum height of 15 feet.
l. Church or House of Worship. A conditional use permit shall be granted
provided that the following standards and specifications are met which
apply in all zoning districts unless specified below:
1. The minimum lot area shall be four acres and the minimum
frontage shall be 150 feet within a fifty-foot front yard setback,
fifty-foot side yard setback and fifty-foot rear yard setback; the
minimum width shall be 150 feet.
2. All minimum required lot depth and building heights shall conform
to those established in the underlying zoning district for the
property. Church spires, belfries, or other architectural features
shall not be considered when calculating building height.
3. Maximum lot coverage shall be 28% in all residential zones.
4. No accessory building and/or structure, including parking lots shall
be located within the front, rear and side yard areas.
5. The site shall have direct access to an arterial or collector roadway
as defined in the Master Plan Background Studies.
§ 30-155.2 HOLMDEL § 30-155.2
1:870
6. Driveways shall cross the sidewalk at right angles; driveways shall
be at least 10 feet from any side lot lines. Not more than two
driveways shall be permitted for each 150 feet of street frontage.
7. Parking for all houses of worship shall be: one parking space for
each three eats, or one parking space for each 72 inches of seating
space when benches rather than seats are used. If there is another
use onsite other than that required for religious purposes, the
parking requirement for the additional use will be added to the
total required number of parking spaces. Where no pews or seats
are provided in a house of worship, the parking requirement shall
be one parking space for every 24 square feet of floor area.
8. Buffers shall be provided in accordance with Section 30-54.
9. Signs are regulated as per Section 30-96.
10. All zoning requirements in the underlying zone of the property not
specifically amended by this section shall be applicable to this
conditional use.
11. It is the intent of this section, when incorporating the
requirements/standards of the underlying zone, to establish that
any deviation would require a variance under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(d).
§ 30-155.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-155.2
1:871

ARTICLE VI
Environmental Regulations
§ 30-156. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.
§ 30-156.1. Yard Waste Collection. [Ord. No. 2005-44 § I; Ord. No.
2010-01 § I]
a. Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Shall mean the placement of yard waste in a trash
can, bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste
from spilling or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with
stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing State, County, or
municipal roadway, and includes the land between the street lines,
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement,
shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas
within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean leaves and brush.
b. Yard Waste Collection. Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing
yard waste that is not containerized at the curb or along the street shall
only be completed in accordance with the provisions of the Township
Brush and Leaf Collection Program, as set forth in Subsection 2-34.2.
Any action inconsistent with the terms of this section and/or Subsection
2-34.2 shall be a violation of this chapter and may result in an
assessment and/or penalty as described in Subsections d and e below. If
such placement of yard waste occurs, the person responsible for
placement of the yard waste must remove the yard waste from the
street or said person shall be deemed in violation of this subsection.
[Amended 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-16]
c. Enforcement. The provisions of this subsection shall be enforced by the
Code Enforcement Officer of the Township of Holmdel.
d. Assessment. In the event that the placement restrictions set out in
paragraph b above are violated, the Code Enforcement Office may
assess a payment of $25 for a first offense in any calendar year, or $50
§ 30-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-156.1
1:873
§ 30-156.2. Illicit Connection. [Ord. No. 2005-44 § I]
for a second and subsequent offense in any calendar year. The
assessment shall be levied against the owner of the property in front
of which the yard waste had been placed, as such owner is shown on
the official tax records of the Township ("Tax Records"). The assessment
shall be levied by written notice sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested to the owner at the address shown on the tax records. In the
event more than one owner is set forth in the tax records, the Code
Enforcement Officer may issue the assessment as to any such owner.
Failure of the owner to pay such assessment may result in penalties set
out in paragraph e below, charging a violation of this paragraph d and/
or a violation of paragraph b.
e. Violations and Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this subsection shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in Chapter 30, Section 30-29, of this Code.
a. Definitions. The following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this
subsection clearly demonstrates a different meaning. The word "shall"
is always mandatory and not merely discretionary. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Shall mean waste and wastewater from
humans or household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Shall mean any physical or nonphysical
connection that discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling
water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than
stormwater) to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Township of Holmdel, unless that discharge is authorized under a
NJPDES permit other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General
Permit (NJPDES Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections
may include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the
municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean nondomestic waste, including, but
not limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or
(c) of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
Township of Holmdel or other public body, and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey
§ 30-156.1 HOLMDEL § 30-156.2
1:874
§ 30-156.3. Improper Disposal of Waste. [Ord. No. 2005-44 § I]
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Shall mean water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other than
heat) or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may, however,
contain algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as
heat exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Shall mean any water which, during
manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results
from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product,
finished product, by-product, or waste product. Process wastewater
includes, but is not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than
non-contact cooling water.
STORMWATER SHALL — Mean water resulting from precipitation
(including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted
to the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other
sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal
equipment.
b. Prohibited Conduct. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged through an illicit connection to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by the Township of Holmdel any domestic
sewage, non-contact cooling water, process wastewater, or other
industrial waste (other than stormwater).
c. Enforcement. This subsection shall be enforced by the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Township of Holmdel.
d. Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions
of this subsection shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter
30, Section 30-29, of this Code.
a. Definitions. The following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this
subsection clearly demonstrates a different meaning. The word "shall'
is always mandatory and not merely discretionary.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
Township of Holmdel or other public body, and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying stormwater.
§ 30-156.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-156.3
1:875
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation
(including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted
to the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other
sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal
equipment.
b. Prohibited Conduct. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system
operated by the township of Holmdel is prohibited. The spilling,
dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater in such a
manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
c. Exceptions to Prohibition.
1. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
2. Uncontaminated ground water (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground
waters).
3. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact
cooling water).
4. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
5. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted steam flows.
6. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
7. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
8. Flows from the fire fighting activities.
9. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(a) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing
materials immediately following salt and de-icing material
applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt
and de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and
vehicles to the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning
methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials
are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded.
(b) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is limited
to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not
apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 30-156.3 HOLMDEL § 30-156.3
1:876
§ 30-156.4. Litter Control. [Ord. No. 2005-44 § I]
10. Vehicle and equipment wash water from municipal operations
pursuant to Part I, Section F8e of Holmdel Township's Tier A
General Stormwater Permit.
d. Enforcement. This subsection shall be enforced by the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Township of Holmdel.
e. Penalties. Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the
provisions of this subsection, after being duly notified, shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in Chapter 30, Section 30-29 of this Code.
a. Definitions. The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this
subsection clearly demonstrates a different meaning. The word "shall"
is always mandatory and not merely discretionary.
LITTER — Shall mean any used or unconsumed substance or waste
material which has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass,
plastic, rubber, paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any
combination thereof, including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or
can, or any top, cap or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any
unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material
or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other
lawn or garden waste, newspapers, magazines, glass, metal, plastic
or paper containers or other packaging or construction material, but
does not include the waste of the primary processes of mining or other
extraction processes, logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — Shall mean a container suitable for the
depositing of litter.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
b. Prohibited Acts and Regulated Activities.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or
otherwise place any litter of any nature upon public or private
property other than in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to
allow such litter to remain.
2. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this subsection, the operator or
owner, or both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to
have violated this subsection.
c. Enforcement. A summons alleging a violation of this subsection may be
issued by the Holmdel Township Code Enforcement Officer or by the
Holmdel Township Police Department. Alternatively, any individual may
file a complaint with the Holmdel Township Municipal Court, which
§ 30-156.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-156.4
1:877
§ 30-156.5. Pet Waste. [Ord. No. 2005-44 § I]
shall issue a summons in accordance with the New Jersey Rules of
Court.
d. Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 30,
Section 30-29 of this Code.
a. Definitions. The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this
subsection clearly demonstrates a different meaning. The word "shall"
is always mandatory and not merely discretionary.
IMMEDIATE — Shall mean removal of pet solid waste at once, without
delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Shall mean any person who shall possess,
maintain, house or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet,
whether or not the owner of such pet.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
PET — Shall mean any animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for any period of time at any residence located within Holmdel
Township.
PET SOLID WASTE — Shall mean waste matter expelled from the
bowels of the pet; excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Shall mean placement in a designated waste
receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse
container which is regularly emptied by the municipality or some other
refuse collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey domestic
sewage for proper treatment and disposal.
b. Requirements for Disposal. All pet owners and keepers are required to
immediately and properly dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited
on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by that
person.
c. Exemptions. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability
assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection
while such animal is being used for that purpose.
d. Enforcement. A summons alleging a violation of this subsection may be
issued by the Holmdel Township Code Enforcement Officer or by the
Holmdel Township Police Department. Alternatively, any individual may
file a complaint with the Holmdel Township Municipal Court, which
shall issue a summons in accordance with the New Jersey Rules of
Court.
§ 30-156.4 HOLMDEL § 30-156.5
1:878
§ 30-156.6. Wildlife Feeding. [Ord. No. 2005-44 § I]
§ 30-157. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL.
§ 30-157.1. Title. [Ord. No. 2006-06 § 3]
This section shall be known as and may be cited as the "Stormwater
Management Ordinance of the Township of Holmdel."
§ 30-157.2. Scope and Purpose. [Ord. No. 2006-03 § 3]
e. Violations and Penalty. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this subsection shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in Chapter 30, Section 30-29 of this Code.
a. Definitions. The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this
subsection clearly demonstrates a different meaning. The word "shall"
is always mandatory and not merely discretionary.
DOMESTICATED — Shall mean animals that are housed in or at a
residence located within or beyond the Township of Holmdel.
FEED — Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter
any edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing
wildlife. Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking offish and/
or game.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — Shall mean all animals that are not domesticated.
b. Prohibited Conduct. No person shall feed, in any public park or on any
other property owned or operated by the Township of Holmdel, any
wildlife, excluding confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in
zoos, stables, parks or rehabilitation centers, or unconfined wildlife at
environmental education centers).
c. Enforcement. A summons alleging a violation of this subsection may be
issued by the Holmdel Township Code Enforcement Officer or by the
Holmdel Township Police Department. Alternatively, any individual may
file a complaint with the Holmdel Township Municipal Court, which
shall issue a summons in accordance with the New Jersey Rules of
Court.
d. Violations and Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this subsection shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in Chapter 30, Section 30-29, of this Code.
a. Policy Statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be
§ 30-156.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-157.2
1:879
§ 30-157.3. General Standards. [Ord. No. 2006-06 § 3]
explored before relying on structural Best Management Practices
(BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management measures and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural measures include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site. Source control plans should be developed based upon physical
site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated loading of
potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be
necessary to achieve the established performance standards for water
quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge.
b. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for development.
c. Applicability. This section shall be applicable to all development which:
1. Requires a development permit as defined in Chapter 30 of the
Code of the Township of Holmdel; and
2. Requires site plan or subdivision approval as defined in Chapter 30
of the Code of the Township of Holmdel; and
3. Constitutes a major development as defined by N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2 et
seq.
d. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
Development approvals issued pursuant to this section are to be
considered an integral part of development approvals under the
development permit, subdivision and site plan review process and do
not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits
or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this section shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This section
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
a. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management
Measures.
1. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in subsection 30-157.4. To the maximum extent
practicable, these standards shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the design.
§ 30-157.2 HOLMDEL § 30-157.3
1:880
§ 30-157.4. General Stormwater Management Requirements for
Major Development. [Ord. No. 2006-06 § 3]
If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet
these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
2. The standards in this section apply only to development exceeding
the Stormwater Management Threshold outlined in subsection
30-157.2c and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater
runoff on water quality and water quantity in receiving water
bodies and maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not
apply to new development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
a. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with subsection 30-157.10.
b. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
c. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of subsections 30-157.4f and 30-157.4g:
1. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an above-ground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk,
walkways or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that
the access is made of permeable material.
d. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of subsections 30-157.4f and 30-157.4g may be obtained
for the enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
§ 30-157.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-157.4
1:881
2. The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of subsections 30-157.4f and
30-157.4g to the maximum extent practicable;
3. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of subsections 30-157.4f and 30-157.4g, existing structures
currently in use, such as homes and buildings, would need to be
condemned; and
4. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under subsection 30-157.4d3 above
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that
would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of subsections 30-157.4f and 30-157.4g that were not
achievable on-site.
e. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.
1. To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in subsections
30-157.4f and 30-157.4g shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies set forth at
subsection 30-157.4e into the design. The applicant shall identify
the nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the
project. If the applicant contends that it is not feasible for
engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate any
nonstructural stormwater management measures identified in
paragraph 2 below into the design of a particular project, the
applicant shall identify the strategy considered and provide a basis
for the contention.
2. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from
preconstruction to post construction. "Time of concentration"
is defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
§ 30-157.4 HOLMDEL § 30-157.4
1:882
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
(1) Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy subsection 30-157.4e3 below;
(2) Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
(3) Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
(4) When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
3. Site design features identified under subsection 30-157.4e2(i)(2)
above shall comply with the following standard to control passage
of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For
purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means
sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see subsection
30-157.4e3(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is
no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
§ 30-157.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-157.4
1:883
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or be no greater than
2.0 inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
(2) Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in subsection 30-157.4g1 are conveyed through
any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in subsection 30-157.4g1; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
4. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in subsections
30-157.4f and 30-157.4g shall be dedicated to a government
agency, subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the
appropriate County Clerk's office, or subject to an approved
§ 30-157.4 HOLMDEL § 30-157.4
1:884
equivalent restriction that ensures that measure or an equivalent
stormwater management measure approved by the reviewing
agency is maintained in perpetuity.
5. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices (BMP) Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from
the address identified in subsection 30-157.7, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org.
f. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity
Standards.
1. This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
(1) The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at subsection 30-157.5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to post-construction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
(2) This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the "urban redevelopment area," or to
projects subject to subsection 30-157.4f1(b)(3) below.
(3) The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
§ 30-157.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-157.4
1:885
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
(4) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
down gradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at subsection 30-157.5,
complete one of the following:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and 100-year storm
events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and 100-year
storm events and that the increased volume or change in
timing of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damage
§ 30-157.4 HOLMDEL § 30-157.4
1:886
at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall include
the analysis of impacts of existing land uses and projected
land uses assuming full development under existing zoning
and land use ordinances in the drainage area;
(3) Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
100-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
(4) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with paragraphs (1), (2) and (3)
above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
2. Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development in subsection 30-157.2 shall be
submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review
and approval in accordance with the requirements of this
subsection and any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines
for stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. For the
purposes of this subsection, "agricultural development" means land
uses normally associated with the production of food, fiber and
livestock for sale. Such uses do not include the development of land
for the processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of
agriculturally related products.
g. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
1. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
§ 30-157.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-157.4
1:887
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
2. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in subsection 30-157.7, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual
and other sources of technical guidance are listed in subsection
30-157.7. Total Suspended Solids (TSS) reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
3. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
§ 30-157.4 HOLMDEL § 30-157.4
1:888
R = A + B – (A x B)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment
Device
See subsection 30-157.6c.
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
4. If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converge on site in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
5. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in subsections 30-157.4f and
30-157.4g.
6. Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in subsection 30-157.7.
7. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
§ 30-157.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-157.4
1:889
8. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
(1) A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the centerline of the waterway where the
bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural succession is
provided.
(2) Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under subsection
30-157.4g8(a)(1) above shall only be allowed where
previous development or disturbance has occurred (for
example, active agricultural use, parking area or
maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall only be
allowed where applicant demonstrates that the functional
value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable. In no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the
waterway or centerline of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subparagraph shall be subject to review and approval by
the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
§ 30-157.4 HOLMDEL § 30-157.4
1:890
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
(1) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
(2) Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
subsection shall achieve a 95% TSS post-construction
removal rate;
(3) Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
(4) The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
(5) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
(6) All encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to subsection 30-157.4g8 has been approved
by the Department of Environmental Protection, then the
provisions of the plan shall be the applicable special water
resource protection area requirements for that waterway. A
stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to
subsection 30-157.4g8 shall maintain or enhance the current
functional value and overall condition of the special water
resource protection area as defined in subsection
30-157.4g8(a)(1) above. In no case shall a stream corridor
protection plan allow the reduction of the Special Water
Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the waterway subject to this subsection.
(e) Paragraph 30-157.4g8 does not apply to the construction of
one individual single family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
§ 30-157.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-157.4
1:891
§ 30-157.5. Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater
Recharge. [Ord. No. 2006-06 § 3]
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
a. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
1. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
2. For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at subsection 30-157.5a1(a) and the
Rational and Modified Rational Methods at subsection
30-157.5a1(b). A runoff coefficient or a groundwater recharge land
cover for an existing condition may be used on all or a portion of
the site if the design engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition
has existed on the site or portion of the site for at least five years
without interruption prior to the time of application. If more than
one land cover have existed on the site during the five years
immediately prior to the time of application, the land cover with the
lowest runoff potential shall be used for the computations. In
addition, there is the presumption that the site is in good
hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park),
with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good
hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land use
type is cultivation).
3. In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
4. In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
§ 30-157.4 HOLMDEL § 30-157.5
1:892
§ 30-157.6. Standards for Structural Stormwater Management
Measures. [Ord. No. 2006-06 § 3]
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
5. If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
b. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
1. The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427 Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
a. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
1. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
2. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of subsection 30-157.8d.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
§ 30-157.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-157.6
1:893
§ 30-157.7. Sources for Technical Guidance. [Ord. No. 2006-06 § 3]
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
4. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
5. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
subsection 30-157.8.
b. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by
subsection 30-157.4 of this chapter.
c. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of subsection 30-157.4 of this chapter, provided the pollutant removal
rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced
Technology and certified by the Department.
a. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at paragraphs 1 and 2 below, which are
available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; Telephone (609) 777-1038.
1. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
2. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
b. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
1. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
§ 30-157.6 HOLMDEL § 30-157.7
1:894
§ 30-157.8. Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins.
[Ord. No. 2006-06 § 3]
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
2. The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
3. The Freehold Soil Conservation Districts, 4000 Kozlowski Road,
Freehold New Jersey, 07728, (732) 683-8500.
a. This subsection sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This subsection applies to any new stormwater management basin.
b. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions.
1. A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six
inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
2. An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
§ 30-157.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-157.8
1:895
3. For purposes of this paragraph, escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
subsection 30-157.8c, a freestanding outlet structure may be
exempted from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
See subsection 30-157.8d for an illustration of safety ledges in
a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to 1 vertical.
c. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards.
1. A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, County or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
d. Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin.
§ 30-157.8 HOLMDEL § 30-157.9
1:896
§ 30-157.9. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan.
[Ord. No. 2006-06 § 3]
a. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan.
1. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this section, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan at subsection 30-157.9c below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this section.
3. The applicant shall submit the number of copies listed on the
Development Plan Checklist (Section 30-8) of the materials listed in
the checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance
with subsection 30-157.9c of this section.
b. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision, site
plan, or development application review process by the Planning Board,
Zoning Board of Adjustment or official from which municipal approval is
sought. The Board and/or Zoning Officer shall consult the Township
Engineer, Planning Board Engineer, Zoning Board Engineer or other
such engineer (as appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets
the standards set forth in this section.
c. Checklist Requirements. The following information shall be required:
1. Topographic Base Map.
(a) The reviewing engineer may require upstream tributary
drainage system information as necessary. It is recommended
that the topographic base map of the site be submitted which
extends a minimum of 200) feet beyond the limits of the
proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or
greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils,
perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream
of the Category One waters, wetlands and flood plains along
with their appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and other
wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces, existing man-made
structures, roads, bearing and distances of property lines, and
significant natural and man-made features not otherwise
shown.
2. Environmental Site Analysis.
§ 30-157.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-157.9
1:897
(a) A written and graphic description of the natural and man-made
features of the site and its environs. This description should
include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes, wetlands,
waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular attention
should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
3. Project Description and Site Plan(s).
(a) A map (or maps) at the scale of the topographical base map
indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings,
roads, parking areas, utilities, structural facilities for
stormwater management' and sediment control, and other
permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas
where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan
and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may
also be provided.
4. Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan.
(a) This plan shall provide a demonstration of how the goals and
standards of subsections 30-157.3 through 30-157.6 are being
met. The focus of this plan shall be to describe how the site is
being developed to meet the objective of controlling
groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and stormwater
quantity problems at the source by land management and
source controls whenever possible.
5. Stormwater Management Facilities Map.
(a) The following information, illustrated on a map of the same
scale as the topographic base map, shall be included:
(1) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon,
and details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(2) Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different
levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions with
maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
6. Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and post-development conditions for
§ 30-157.9 HOLMDEL § 30-157.9
1:898
§ 30-157.10. Maintenance and Repair. [Ord. No. 2006-06 § 3]
the design storms specified in subsection 30-157.4 of this
section.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
7. Maintenance and Repair Plan.
(a) The design and planning of the stormwater management
facility shall meet the maintenance requirements of subsection
30-157.10.
8. Waiver from Submission Requirements.
(a) The municipal official or board reviewing an application under
this section may, in consultation with the Municipal Engineer,
waive submission of any of the requirements in subsections
30-157.9c1 through 30-157.9c5 of this section when it can be
demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to
obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant to obtain
and its absence will not materially affect the review process.
a. Applicability.
1. Projects subject to review as in subsection 30-157.2c of this section
shall comply with the requirements of subsections 30-157.10b and
30-157.10c.
b. General Maintenance.
1. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
2. The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
§ 30-157.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-157.10
1:899
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
3. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
4. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 30-157.10b above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on subsection
30-157.10b7 below shall be recorded upon the deed of record for
each property on which the maintenance described in the
maintenance plan must be undertaken.
5. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of non-vegetated linings.
6. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 30-157.10b2 above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
7. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 30-157.10b2 above shall evaluate the effectiveness of
the maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and
the deed as needed.
8. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 30-157.10b2 above shall retain and make available,
upon request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by subsections 30-157.10b6
and 30-157.10b7 above.
9. The requirements of subsections 30-157.10b3 and 30-157.10b4 do
not apply to stormwater management facilities that are dedicated
to and accepted by the municipality or another governmental
agency.
10. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
§ 30-157.10 HOLMDEL § 30-157.10
1:900
§ 30-157.11. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-06 § 3]
§ 30-158. RIPARIAN ZONE ORDINANCE.
§ 30-158.1. Purpose and Authority. [Ord. No. 2010-22 § III]
The purpose of this section is to designate riparian zones, and to provide
for land use regulation therein in order to protect streams, lakes, and
other surface water bodies of the Township of Holmdel and to comply with
N.J.A.C. 7:15-5.25(g)3, which requires municipalities to adopt an ordinance
that prevents new disturbance for projects or activities in riparian zones
as described herein. Compliance with the riparian zone requirements of
this section does not constitute compliance with the riparian zone or buffer
requirements imposed upon any other Federal, State or local statute,
regulation or ordinance.
In addition to the foregoing, the Code Enforcement Officer is hereby
authorized to issue one or more summonses for any violations of this
section. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be liable for the
penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the Township may immediately
proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible
person.
c. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
a. Any person who violates any provision of this subsection shall, upon
conviction thereof in Municipal Court, be punishable by imposition of
the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Section 1-5 et seq.
b. Each instance of engaging in a separate regulated activity, in violation
of this section shall be deemed a separate offense.
c. In addition, the Township may institute civil action for injunctive or
other relief to enforce the provision of this subsection.
§ 30-157.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-158.1
1:901